Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  I am going to call on Simon Potter to begin the Desk report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of statements where Mr. Fischer makes a motion, the Chair thanks him, and then proceeds with the meeting without any objection.


Passage number 2.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. Actually, it is more of a comment than a question.  On figure 5, it is true that the inflation compensation and oil prices have moved surprisingly together.  But I think it is also worth noting that, at least to my eyes, the timing of the turndown in inflation compensation is not aligned precisely, as far as I can tell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is making a comment and sharing his observation about the alignment of inflation compensation and oil prices. He acknowledges that it may not be aligned precisely, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 3.
 MR. POTTER. In the past week, that is true. The TIPS breakeven inflation went down the first two days of the week.  Most of the action in oil prices was toward the end of the week, when there was an announcement of record production in the United States in February. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions for Simon. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the movement of TIPS breakeven inflation and oil prices throughout the week.


Passage number 4.
 MR. EVANS. In table 4, exhibit 1, you have expectations for inflation at liftoff, and it looks like more people in the markets are thinking that we will lift off when the two-year-ahead inflation outlook is under 1¾ percent.  It is a little out of order, but I was looking at the SEP tables, and I noticed that there is an appendix to table 2 that shows our responses on the timing of our liftoff and the economic conditions in the quarter that we do that.  And I was a little surprised by the very low core PCE inflation numbers that everybody has in there.  I see 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 percent.  Simon, do you think that the market participants would find this piece of information to be particularly noteworthy when contrasted with what they have priced in, or how they are thinking about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 5.
 MR. POTTER. If the Committee released details on what individual participants thought economic conditions will be at liftoff, it would be noteworthy for a number of reasons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a statement stating the potential significance of releasing details about individual participants' thoughts on economic conditions at liftoff.


Passage number 6.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes.  In terms of the informational content.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Evans agrees with something without providing further information or details.


Passage number 7.
 MR. POTTER.  I do think that the core inflation numbers you quoted to me sounded like they were a little bit below the lower quartile of 1.3 percent that we got from our responses.  So I would imagine that, as the inflation data came along, the information would have some effect on expectations of the timing of liftoff. If you did not see firmer core inflation data but saw data that is about the same as what we are currently receiving, people might view that as suggesting that liftoff would still be quite likely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and discussing how inflation data could affect expectations.


Passage number 8.
 MR. EVANS. Another question I had in looking at your table is whether there is any way for you to get additional information on what the survey respondents are probably thinking about our attitudes toward hitting our inflation objective of 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individual is simply asking if there is any available additional information on what the survey respondents are thinking about attitudes toward meeting the inflation objective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 9.
 MR. POTTER.  Market participants freely give you a lot of viewpoints on how the Federal Reserve is doing.  And some of them do express some skepticism about the 2 percent inflation goal, if that answers your question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that market participants have differing viewpoints on the Federal Reserve's performance and expresses skepticism about the 2 percent inflation goal, indicating disagreement or contention among them.


Passage number 10.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, I guess I am wondering about the combination of these two pieces of information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is questioning and seeking clarification.


Passage number 11.
 MR. POTTER. When we just ask them for the point estimate, for most of the responses, the median response is 2 percent.  You see a difference between the sell side, the dealers, who are firmer in that belief than the buy side. A lot of what you have seen over the past few months is people on the buy side who are skeptical about how the 2 percent inflation goal might affect   liftoff.  And you saw that reflected last time in the responses from the buy side to the distribution question.  The dealers did catch up with it this time.  I was actually surprised with the data, as I thought those probabilities were most likely to have gone down, in response to the inflation data we saw over the intermeeting period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the different beliefs and responses of the sell side and buy side regarding the 2 percent inflation goal.


Passage number 12.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions for Simon.  [No response]  Okay.  I’m going to turn to Lorie to continue the briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply indicates that there is no response from the mentioned person and the conversation is transitioning to someone else.


Passage number 13.
 MR. LACKER.  I just have a comment.  I have argued against testing term RRPs.  I was outvoted at the previous meeting, and we are testing at the end of March.  It is not the end of March.  We haven’t done those tests.  Presumably, tests are designed to provide information to be useful in future decisions.  I am wondering why we are deciding this now rather than waiting until after the March meeting.  We would have as much lead time until the June quarter-end as we provided when we decided in January to test at the end of March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is simply stating his opinion that testing term RRPs should not be done at the end of March and questioning the timing of the decision.


Passage number 14.
 MS. LOGAN. Doing it now in advance versus April, which would be more in line with the approach we have been using, allows it to be viewed as a technical adjustment and removes it from market discussions about the timing of liftoff.  It has some technical benefits. It lines up with the overnight RRP authorization that we already have and still provides us flexibility to decide whether we are going to use it or not.  I think those are the benefits of doing it now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement discussing the potential benefits of making a certain decision.


Passage number 15.
 MR. LACKER. So you are appealing to some technical considerations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that someone is appealing to technical considerations.


Passage number 16.
 MS. LOGAN.  For it to be perceived as a technical adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something is being perceived as a technical adjustment.


Passage number 17.
 MR. LACKER. No one thinks we are going to raise rates in April.  So, doing it in April with the same language we used in January wouldn’t be some tipping of our hands.  We didn’t tip our hands in January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact and explaining that raising rates in April with the same language as January would not imply any additional information being revealed.


Passage number 18.
 MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we went with $200 billion in January.  This one has $300 billion, so that would be a small change.  I agree with you completely.  We have been running testing operations for a long time now, and no one has taken any signal from those.  You could argue the reason they haven’t taken a signal is because forward guidance has been in place. We are now going to enter a period, it appears, in which we won’t have such forward guidance in place.  So, just from the “do no harm” viewpoint, if you view this as technical, we thought it would be nice to get it out of the way now. I do notice that I think there is a slight difference between what’s in the exhibit and the ordering of the options that you have in front of you.  If you just flip them in your head—option 1 is option 2, and option 2 is option 1—that will simplify life for you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with President Lacker and suggesting a potential solution to simplify decision-making.


Passage number 19.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m having trouble keeping up with your technical factors here. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. "Mr. Lacker" is expressing his difficulty in understanding something and "Chair Yellen" is acknowledging and addressing his concern.


Passage number 20.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I am going to change the topic, if that is okay.  First I have a comment, then a question.  The comment is that it’s a little ironic that the gates and fees on money market funds had the probably unintended consequence, from the SEC’s perspective, of encouraging some of the fund families to eliminate the prime money market fund relative to the Treasuries, a development that actually should help financial stability.  So it is somewhat ironic that that is the way some of the funds are actually reading that proposal. The question is, to the extent that the Treasury-only money market funds are becoming more important—and that is going to be phased in over this period, so it is not an immediate change, for example, at Fidelity—what do we think the money market fund behavior will be if they think that we might raise rates in June.  What does that imply for money market funds using overnight RRPs rather than holding longer-term Treasury securities. As we move into periods in which we don’t know whether we will be raising rates—say, in June and September—would we expect the money market funds to substantially increase their use of overnight RRPs just because they don’t want to be caught with a potential capital loss if they were holding longer term. What does that mean for use of the overnight RRP facility.  Are we surveying the Treasury-only money market funds on a regular basis to get a sense of the behavioral changes that might be  expected.  And, to the extent that management has changed for some of these, it becomes probably more important to sample a little more deeply than we might have in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a comment and asking a question but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 21.
 MS. LOGAN. The staff is talking with the money funds on a regular basis, almost daily, related to what they are doing in the operations that day or what they are planning to do over the next several weeks.  We haven’t heard from the money funds any discussion that the anticipation of raising rates is moving their expectations for usage of the overnight RRP.  Most of the commentary we hear from the money funds is that they are trying to maintain their relationships with private counterparties, given the constraints that they are seeing from some of those private counterparties, and that they are only coming to the overnight RRP when they are losing that balance sheet.  And they are even willing to give up a couple of basis points to maintain those counterparty relationships.  So we haven’t heard that as being front and center in the discussions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Logan is simply stating the current communication and feedback received from the money funds regarding their usage of the overnight RRP and their focus on maintaining relationships with private counterparties.


Passage number 22.
 MR. POTTER.  You saw a quite large move in short rates over the intermeeting period, and we didn’t see any change in behavior of the overnight RRP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely recounting an observation about the movement of short rates and the lack of change in the behavior of overnight RRP.


Passage number 23.
 MS. LOGAN. As long as those private-sector rates are still available for them and are above the overnight RRP or close to it—even slightly below—I think they would stay with the private-sector counterparties.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by MS. Logan expressing her opinion on the behavior of individuals in financial markets.


Passage number 24.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Just a quick follow-up.  We’re not into the three-month window yet for the end of June, but I would think the behavior might change as we get closer to a date at which, potentially, you’re going to be trading off the uncertainty regardng what we’re going to be doing with whether you should shorten up the maturity that could possibly result in a big increase at the end of June with whatever the reverse repo rate would be. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further comments or questions.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 25.
   MR. POWELL.  I think I would favor authorizing quarter-end use of repos now for the whole year, but I guess the question is, if later on we decide to lift the overnight repo cap at quarter-end or for a period after liftoff, then that would play into the decision—do you see what I mean. We won’t need both if we lift the cap because, in all likelihood, we’re going to be lifting off right before quarter-end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their preference and discussing a possible scenario.


Passage number 26.
 MS. LOGAN.  I tried to outline that authorizing doesn’t obligate you to actually conduct the operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MS. LOGAN simply states a fact without presenting any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 27.
 MR. POWELL.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes the statement "Right" by Mr. Powell, which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 28.
 MS. LOGAN.  And I think you would, after you lift off, see what the conditions are to determine whether to actually conduct the term, and what the size should be, based on what you’re seeing in market rates and behavior. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Logan is suggesting an approach and Chair Yellen acknowledges it without opposing or contradicting it.


Passage number 29.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.  I’ll follow up on Governor Powell’s comment.  At least for my own thinking about this, it might be useful to defer this decision until after we’ve had the discussion on normalization tools and getting a perspective on what we want to do with the cap. CHAIR YELLEN. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply suggesting that it might be useful to delay a decision until after a discussion on normalization tools.


Passage number 30.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it is actually even a little bit more complex than that because you could have no cap for a short period and then go to a cap, and you’d still want term RRP to be supplementary to that cap.  I think it’s fairly nuanced. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is an explanation and a viewpoint expressed by the speaker.


Passage number 31.
  MS. BRAINARD.  I do think these two conversations are completely interrelated, and it seems a little strange to be considering the term RRPs absent the broader views about the overnight RRP. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  There’s no reason we can’t come back to this at the end of that discussion.  I guess there’s no explicit question that’s been posed about that, but maybe some of you will refer to it in your own discussions.  And we can certainly come back and vote on this at the end of that discussion.  Other questions or comments.  [No response]  Okay.  I do need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations. Is there a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are simply discussing the relationship between two conversations and how they could potentially be addressed later.


Passage number 32.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Without objection.  Thanks.  We’re going to move along now to our discussion of normalization tools, and Jane Ihrig is going to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the discussion will move on to the topic of normalization tools and Jane Ihrig will be the one to start the discussion.


Passage number 33.
 MS. IHRIG.3 Thank you, Madam Chair.  Let me start by noting that at your previous meeting, most participants agreed that it would be useful at coming meetings to discuss and communicate additional information about some operational details of your policy implementation plans.  With this in mind, the staff memo titled “More Steps toward Finalizing the FOMC’s Operational Preparations for Liftoff” provided some possible language in bullet point form to include in the March minutes; these bullets were revised in light of your earlier comments.  At the end of the go-round that will follow our briefing, the Chair will ask whether you agree to augment the Committee’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans by providing these additional operational details in the minutes for this meeting; for reference, the bullet points are attached at the end of this handout. Two other issues that were covered in the memos related to the capacity of the ON RRP facility. I will spend some time discussing options for setting the initial aggregate capacity of the ON RRP facility, and then Antoine will review options for reducing capacity during the normalization process.  Let me say up front that the appropriate amount of capacity needed at liftoff is uncertain for a couple of reasons.  First, your calculation of initial capacity needs to account for expected take-up around liftoff and also allow for additional headroom, both of which are hard to gauge.  In addition, although we have some sense of these amounts from the test operations that we have been conducting for some time, there is no guarantee that our testing 3 The materials used by Ms. Ihrig and Mr. Martin are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).experience provides an accurate reading on potential ON RRP usage once you move the policy rate above the zero lower bound.   Having said this, the top-left panel of your exhibit presents the two options from the staff memo for setting the initial aggregate capacity of the ON RRP facility for your consideration.  The first option is to set a temporarily elevated initial cap.  Your preferred setting of this cap might depend on your willingness to use term RRPs at quarter-ends.  The staff suggested, for illustrative purposes, an ON RRP cap of $800 billion.  This would be equivalent to double the take-up of both term and ON RRPs that we saw at year-end 2014.  It would also be more than 3½ times the largest non-quarter-end take-up that we’ve had to date.  By picking this much larger cap than we’ve had in testing and making clear that this initial setting is intended to be temporary, you would send a message that you are committed to a successful liftoff, and, at the same time, by limiting the facility’s size, you would say you’re also sensitive to the financial stability and footprint concerns that you have noted in previous discussions. Of course, there is always a chance that $800 billion, or another nominal amount chosen, could turn out to be insufficient for interest rate control.  Indeed, although as Lorie mentioned, the majority of respondents to the Desk’s surveys expect moderate ON RRP take-up immediately after liftoff, a few market participants surveyed did anticipate that demand will be greater than $800 billion.  If that were the case and federal funds traded at rates persistently below the target range, or other money market rates did not firm as much as the Committee desired at liftoff because the cap was regularly being hit or market participants perceived insufficient headroom at the facility, you could subsequently increase the cap size. For policymakers that are concerned about liftoff proceeding smoothly, however, right from the start, this scenario might be unsettling, and they might prefer option 2.  Under this option, the FOMC would suspend the aggregate cap for a short period but announce that it would establish a cap at the end of that initial brief period; the cap would be one that reflected the observed effects and take-up of ON RRPs after liftoff.  Assuming you would retain a per-counterparty bid limit, a temporary suspension of the aggregate cap would not amount to offering ON RRPs at full allotment, but would nonetheless provide substantial ON RRP capacity to start. As noted to the right, you have many choices for how to move forward with communicating about your initial setting of capacity.  The bullets for inclusion in the minutes of this meeting start this process by reporting that ON RRP capacity at liftoff will be “temporarily elevated.”  Over time, you could decide on and announce the actual amount of initial capacity you intend to provide, either ahead of liftoff or at liftoff.  Early communication could provide market participants with further clarity about your liftoff strategy, mitigating any remaining uncertainty about how much RRP capacity will exist around the time of liftoff.  However, deferring a decision until liftoff would enable you to continue to evaluate financial market developments as they evolve in the meantime.  Antoine will now continue our presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and options for discussion.


Passage number 34.
 MR. POWELL.  For Antoine.  We talk about $50 billion a month in Treasury sales.  Can you talk about the derivation of that. Really, if the concern is that is as much capacity as the market has to accept supply, I guess the point would be that rates would be going up, which is our intention.  How do you think about why that is a hard limit, or could it be substantially higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of questions and statements seeking information and exploring different perspectives.


Passage number 35.
 MS. IHRIG.  I guess I could say one thing.  If you look at the amount of securities we have on our portfolio that’s three years or less, as Antoine said, it’s about $800 billion.  And if you’re trying to sell it over the time frame that’s in this projection, the projection represents some smoothing of how much you could do per month.  In some sense you are limited by what is in your portfolio at the time. With the maturity extension program, you sold a lot of your short-dated securities, and then purchases in the last LSAP were on the long end.  You don’t actually  have a lot of short-dated securities. Of course, the later you wait to sell, maturities of securities are getting shorter, and shorter-dated securities come into the window.  As you can see, that’s in part why there’s a kink here in this projection, because you kind of start running out of securities to sell.  But that’s just in terms of what we have.  I guess Lorie can talk about the market conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and describing the limitations of selling securities in their portfolio.


Passage number 36.
 MR. POWELL.  What I’m saying is, if the exercise is to have rate control and put a floor under rates, we’ll always be making more short-term securities as time passes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Powell outlining a potential outcome or strategy.


Passage number 37.
 MR. MARTIN.  I think it’s undoubtedly right that selling these short-term assets will help lift rates.  I think the concern, if you start selling higher amounts, is the risk of a misperception of the Committee’s intention and the possibility that the sales could raise more than short-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin expresses his opinion about the potential impact of selling short-term assets on lifting rates, as well as his concern about potential misperceptions and unintended consequences. There is no evident disagreement or opposing viewpoints presented in this passage.


Passage number 38.
 MS. LOGAN.  I don’t think, operationally, we would have any limitation to sell more— we sold about $40 billion during the MEP, and that did put some upward pressure on rates.  And in this context, there is a demand for those securities.  That’s why we have high overnight RRP usage. So, you would think there would be demand to sell them.  But all we are doing is just speeding up the redemptions.  The securities are going to redeem very shortly, and we’re just speeding that up by selling them.  I think the other consequence you have to think about is for the Treasury.  It will be refinancing as we let these securities run off, and so we’d be putting more pressure on them to account not only for the securities that are rolling off, but also for the securities that we’re selling.  The Treasury would then have to raise those funds, and that may not be as smooth a process as it would prefer.  That would be just one other factor that you have to consider when you think about the pace of sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation:
The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing the potential consequences and considerations related to selling securities. While there may be different perspectives on these consequences and considerations, the speaker does not express any disagreements or arguments against other viewpoints.


Passage number 39.
 MR. POWELL.  Okay. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no obvious contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. Mr. Powell's response of "Okay" and Chair Yellen's statement of "President Lacker" do not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 40.
 MR. LACKER.  I believe it’s the case that it’s a theoretical possibility, in the uncapped scenario, if every counterparty bid their limit, the bids would aggregate to more than reserve account balances right now.  I believe you alluded to that fact, Jane.  So, what would we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage suggests that there is contention or disagreement as Mr. Lacker presents a theoretical possibility while acknowledging that Jane has already alluded to that fact. This indicates that there is a differing viewpoint or perspective being discussed.


Passage number 41.
 MS. IHRIG. First, let me say that it’s true that if you took $30 billion per counterparty times 164 counterparties, you would get more than what’s in the SOMA, but I think that’s not a very realistic number.  In part, if you look at the 164 counterparties, I think 24 are banks who get IOER.  I couldn’t imagine that the banks would be coming in when they could get IOER.  If you look at the GSEs, they’ve been coming in quite small.  Many tend to just be investing cash that they have for any cash needs of the institutions that are members.  Freddie and Fannie come in, and they do come in around the cap when it’s P&I day, but those are kind of special one-off situations that we know about.  The primary dealers are very sensitive to interest rates right now.  They are not coming into the facility because they are finding market rates are higher, and as long as market rates are higher, we wouldn’t expect them to come in as well. So it’s really the money funds, and you’d want to look at how much of their portfolio you think they might want to shift into the facility. Right now, they have about $700 billion of short-term Treasuries or repos on their books.  I would say that might be an upper bound, but again, they have only been coming in a little over $100 billion over the past couple of months on average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any specific contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing their analysis and perspective on the potential number of counterparties participating in a facility.


Passage number 42.
 MR. LACKER.  I’d agree.  I’d find it persuasive that it’s really unlikely, but you’re not arguing the probability is zero, are you.  We have taken a fairly risk-averse approach as a Committee, and it seems to me we ought to have a plan.  What’s our plan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is agreeing with the previous statement and expressing the need for a plan.


Passage number 43.
 MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, can you outline exactly what event you are thinking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is simply asking President Lacker to provide more information or clarification.


Passage number 44.
  MR. LACKER.  Wouldn’t we have to cap it and stop it out at less than full allotment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a hypothetical scenario and suggesting the need to cap or limit something at less than full allotment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 45.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think you’re doing a partial equilibrium analysis.  In general equilibrium, the flowing of all these funds into the overnight RRP is going to have an effect on money market rates, and that is going to prevent the funds from flowing into the overnight RRP.  It can’t be that you can just drain $4 trillion of reserves from the system and not expect money market rates to rise, something that would prevent this outcome.  I really think it’s impossible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is disagreeing with the notion that draining $4 trillion of reserves from the system will not cause money market rates to rise and prevent the outcome. They believe it is impossible.


Passage number 46.
 MR. LACKER.  You’re making a forecast.  You’re not saying the probability is zero, is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 47.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I am saying the probability is zero because it doesn’t make any sense.  Why would all of this money flow into the overnight RRP facility if doing so would put significant upward pressure on other money market rates.  It has to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a personal explanation or reasoning provided by the speaker.


Passage number 48.
 MR. LACKER.  How.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is being quoted without any opposing views or conflicting statements mentioned.


Passage number 49.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It would have to because the people that they were funding now would not be being funded, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a hypothetical question, asking if a certain outcome would occur based on a given condition. It does not express any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 50.
 MR. POTTER.  I think we’ve discussed scenarios in which they want the safest counterparty there is for a dollar liability. It’s very difficult to believe that something of the size that you’re talking about could happen overnight or within a week.  If we saw a set of events that were leading to that kind of pattern, I think you’d all be meeting and trying to understand exactly what was happening.  And I don’t know how you’d feel about the various tools that the Federal Reserve has in that situation.  It’s not a probability-zero event.  Obviously, we have a large balance sheet, but you’d all be looking at the events that would be leading up to it and deciding what the appropriate action was.  But it wouldn’t be the case that if you said tomorrow that we were running without a cap, there would be any issue of the increase in the facility being $2 trillion or $3 trillion.  Money markets don’t work that quickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is stating his perspective and discussing hypothetical scenarios without contradicting or challenging another viewpoint.


Passage number 51.
 MR. LACKER.  Look, I’m not arguing that this is highly likely.  It’s just that there are people out there in the market who are smart enough to do this math.  We call this “uncapped,” but we’d have to have some sort of cap.  There would have to be some backstop, upper limit, or cap.  And I think it’s fair and more transparent and better communication for us to describe this as not a suspension of the cap, but a dramatic increase in the cap to something—I don’t know— on the order of $2 trillion. The only point I’d make about this is that calling this a suspension of the cap is really a bit misleading, and the money market letters are going to smoke this out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the terminology used to describe a specific financial concept, but there is no argument or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 52.
 MR. POTTER.  I think one way to say it is we could take the size of the Treasury portfolio and say that it is the amount of collateral, taking off something for securities lending and the foreign pool, that we would be prepared to transfer over to the triparty agent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between the speakers. The statement by Mr. Potter seems to be presented as a possible way to express something.


Passage number 53.
 MR. LACKER. Just set an amount that’s much larger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 54.
 MR. POTTER.  But that would be an operational detail that the type of people in money markets that you’re talking about would be interested in, but most people wouldn’t.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter acknowledges that the operational details may be of interest to certain individuals in money markets but not to most people.


Passage number 55.
 MR. LACKER.  I mean, that seems like a cleaner way to communicate than to call it a suspension of the cap and have everyone doing a lot of math. CHAIR YELLEN.  Did you have a two-hander.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 56.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I have a less extreme tail event than President Lacker.  Let’s suppose at the time of liftoff that the cap is binding, so the federal funds rate is trading substantially below the target that we publicly announced.  We have two options.  We can either change the IOER rate, which would be a Board of Governors decision, or we can raise or eliminate the cap on ON RRP.  So either we have to have an emergency meeting of the FOMC  that night, or the Board of Governors has to have a formal meeting to decide if the IOER rate goes up.  Let’s say that we decide to do the IOER, but we don’t really understand what the spread is between IOER and ON RRP. After the Board has raised the IOER, we find out that’s not sufficient either.  So then, following that, we have to eliminate or raise the cap on RRP. What do we think the market’s reaction to the degree of uncertainty that the Federal Reserve has around this action would be.  We seem to be viewing this as an innocuous event.  I guess thinking about the decision trees—whether we do ON RRP or whether we do IOER and how the market reacts in that context—it seems, from a risk-management standpoint, it’s highly risky to have a cap and have no certainty whether it’s binding or not versus no cap, at least at initiation.  Could you tell me a little bit more about the costs and benefits as you think about the benefits of that cap and think about what happens if there actually is much more demand. I don’t think it’s going to exceed the amount of reserves, but I think it could exceed $800 billion.  I think the likely behavioral actions around this time are highly uncertain.  I hope it’s much less than $800 billion, but I have no certainty about any of our estimates of that.  If it’s not binding, both no cap and the cap have the same result, but if it is binding, there’s a very different sequence of events, and it’s unclear how our plan is to react to that.  Can you talk a little bit more about that cost-benefit calculation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention and disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is expressing concerns and uncertainties about the Federal Reserve's plan to deal with a potential cap on the overnight reverse repo (ON RRP) and its impact on the market. He questions the decision-making process and highlights the risks involved.


Passage number 57.
 MS. IHRIG. When I think about what I would do if I were a policymaker, I think about two key considerations, which are, how certain are you about setting the cap, and how much do you really want monetary control on day one.  Depending on your views regarding those two concerns, I think it can lean you toward setting a cap of a certain size, and you’re very comfortable and you think that’s more than plenty and you think that you won’t even need intermeeting adjustments—or maybe you think you do, and that’s just part of doing monetary policy and it’s not a big deal.  Or you’re at the other extreme, where you’re really worried that if we set a cap too low we’d be nervous, and it might hurt our credibility right at liftoff, which is a really critical time.  I personally don’t have an answer that would state specifically what to do.  I think that these are two key concerns, which are, how comfortable are you at a certain cap size, and how much do you really care about monetary control right around the time of liftoff so that you don’t have to come back and make adjustments. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is not contentious or disagreeing. It presents different considerations and viewpoints without any explicit disagreement or argument.


Passage number 58.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.  I have a quick question for Simon, which I should know the answer to.  If you were going to put the cap based on the size of the Treasuries we have in our portfolio, what would that cap number be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple question being asked by Mr. Kocherlakota to Simon.


Passage number 59.
 MR. POTTER.  It would be somewhere between $2 trillion and $2.5 trillion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Potter is simply stating a range of numbers without any conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 60.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Seeing no more questions, why don’t we begin our go-round, starting with President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement between Mr. Kocherlakota and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 61.
 MS. MESTER. Thank you, Madam Chair.  In considering the design and combination of tools that were used during normalization, my primary consideration is control of short-term interest rates. We need to demonstrate at liftoff that we can move the federal funds rate into our target range.  Another important consideration for me is consistency with the normalization principles we’ve communicated to the public.  Further communication should add clarity rather than confusion.  Both of these considerations speak to the Committee’s credibility, which is always important, but it’s arguably even more important as we begin to implement normalization.We’ve communicated our intention that the overnight reverse repo facility will be a temporary one.  As the staff memo lays out, various combinations of tools could be used to achieve control of short-term interest rates and allow for the eventual phaseout of the overnight repurchase facility.  Regarding the initial setting of the aggregate cap on reverse repos, I’d rather not put us in a position of having to raise the cap after liftoff.  I think we would send a confusing message, and it could undermine our credibility.  It could signal we don’t have adequate interest rate control or that we’re reconsidering whether or not the facility will be temporary.  That leaves me with the choice of setting a high cap at the start and then lowering it over time as we gain experience, versus setting no cap at liftoff and then imposing one later.  I don’t have strong preferences for one over the other.  Either one seems consistent with the normalization plans that we’ve laid out, provided it’s accompanied by appropriate communications. We are going to need to explain the purpose of whatever design choice we make, especially as it is going to differ, I think, from our test design. Then we need to reiterate that we will use the facility only to the extent necessary; that we plan to phase it out; and that phaseout might be accomplished by imposing caps on the facility’s size, which we could reduce over time; and that we’ll periodically reconsider various design features of this and our other tools.  Then, once we have a clearer sense of how our tools are working together to control short-term rates, we can communicate a plan for phasing out the facility.  To reduce its size while maintaining adequate control of short-term interest rates, we may indeed need to rely on several of our tools, including asset sales.  At this point I wouldn’t want to rule them out, but I do think we need further study of how these tools would likely interact with one another. One final thought:  I would be cautious in committing, at this point, to any particular timetable for a reduction in the size of the reverse repo facility cap, or imposition of a cap if westart without one.  As I read the staff memo, that seems to be the intention in option 2, and perhaps in option 1 as well.  This gives me pause.  Even if today we think it likely we could reduce the cap size fairly soon after liftoff, we may run into some surprises.  Aren’t the uncertainties surrounding interest rate control the crux of today’s discussion. I wouldn’t want to hurt our credibility by having to go back on an earlier communication.  That’s similar to my distaste for putting ourselves in the situation of having to raise the cap at a later date. Rather than commit now to a timetable, I’d prefer more general communication, as I just outlined.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different considerations and options for the normalization of interest rates, but there is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 62.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As I said just a few moments ago, I think the question is, what size of an initial cap we are going to adopt.  To me, $800 billion seems like a fine number.  I could support $1 trillion.  I could go up to the size of our Treasuries portfolio, $2 trillion to $2½ trillion, whatever that calculation is that Simon alluded to.  Regarding how to scale back usage after liftoff, the case in which usage falls fairly rapidly of its own accord is straightforward.  The harder case is one in which usage remains elevated and high. As I reviewed the staff memo, my attention was immediately attracted to the phrase “asset-side tools,” and I began fantasizing about auctioning off our holdings of MBS and long-term Treasuries at a fairly rapid clip. However, I suspect that option may fail to garner a majority of support from the Committee.  In that case, I would favor selling short-term assets, although it seems unlikely that we could sell a quantity sufficient to make reserves scarce enough any time soon.  As a third choice, I would favor raising IOER above the top of the federal funds target range, starting with 5 basis points and seeing what happens, moving to 10 or 15 basis points if that is not enough. As to the other options, using term RRPs seems inferior.  It is going to leave the RRP program, in general, with the same footprint and would take an unrealistically large set of operations to reach the point at which reserve balances are scarce enough to make a difference. I have always raised questions about whether term tools really make reserves scarce, because they are just term monetary assets.  They are not nonmonetary assets and are unlikely to be marginally constraining for the participating institutions.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual expressing their thoughts and preferences on various options.


Passage number 63.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Can I ask a clarifying question. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The individual asks a question, and Chair Yellen responds affirmatively.


Passage number 64.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Let’s imagine that the overnight RRP facility wasn’t very big; let’s just say its usage is $200 billion or $300 billion.  Would you still sell assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a hypothetical scenario and does not involve conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 65.
 MR. LACKER.  No, I wouldn’t see a need to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It simply states the answer of Mr. Lacker without any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 66.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention in this passage. The passage only includes a statement that suggests President Rosengren is speaking.


Passage number 67.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  President Lacker’s fantasy is my nightmare.  [Laughter]  When we announce that we are raising the range for the federal funds rate, it is critically important that we are successful in quickly moving the federal funds rate within the range and then keeping it there.  With our credibility at stake, and with a high degree of uncertainty about the market response when short-term rates are initially raised above current levels, I would argue against any cap on the ON RRP facility at the time of liftoff. If the ON RRP take-up remains very large for some period after liftoff—and we should discuss how long a period we would be comfortable with—we should raise the IOER high enough that the federal funds rate rises to be within the federal funds target range without excessive take-up of the ON RRP facility.  Again, we should discuss the Committee’s definition   of “excessive.”  For example, in order to reduce the risk of extensive use of the ON RRP facility, we might raise the IOER rate to 60 basis points to maintain the federal funds rate within the 25 to 50 basis point range.  The IOER rate can then be adjusted subsequently to fine-tune the placement of the federal funds rate as we better understand the relationship that the federal funds rate has with the spread between IOER and ON RRP rates. This raises the question of whether we have communicated sufficiently that, while the target range for the federal funds rate will be 25 basis points, the spread between the IOER and the ON RRP rates may need to be greater than 25 basis points.  Particularly in our explanation of liftoff, it should be clear that the IOER rate will be adjusted to ensure that the federal funds rate stays within the target range.  As a sidenote, the dependence on the IOER rate to generate the desired range for the federal funds rate does create a governance problem.  Ideally, the FOMC would be setting the IOER rate.  And, if reform legislation were to move through the Congress, I would prefer the IOER rate be a vote of the FOMC, as it is the key variable in setting monetary policy under our current exit guidelines. The main strategy for reducing the ON RRP take-up after liftoff should be setting the IOER rate high enough that the federal funds rate is trading within the desired range without excessive reliance on the ON RRP.  Some of the suggested remedies in the memo might be tantamount to changing monetary policy to minimize reliance on the ON RRP.  The tool should be set to generate the desired policy.  Policy should not be adjusted to minimize the use of the tool. For example, I am strongly opposed to asset sales.  First, this would reverse our often-repeated promise not to engage in significant sales, possibly reducing the credibility of our exit strategy.  Second, even if the sales were limited to very short-term securities, I am worried that investors might become concerned that longer-maturity securities would be sold next.  This concern would be exacerbated by the relatively small stock of short-term securities currently in our portfolio.  If monetary control is at stake and we choose to sell very short-term securities, these could be exhausted before control is regained, implying that longer-term securities will soon be on the auction block.  This could potentially cause a Treasuries sales “tantrum” as investors in longer-term securities doubt the credibility of our promise on holding securities to maturity.  The costs could be large if our initial announcement of short-term sales results in significantly raising medium- and longer-term rates.  The potential benefit would be avoiding elevated use of the ON RRP until our balance sheet is reduced, but that benefit does not seem worth the undermining of our announced exit principles. If we are seriously considering asset sales or other means to minimize the use of the ON RRP, I would want to stop reinvesting sooner, although this would also be changing policy to minimize use of a tool.  The key in my mind is that while the costs of a larger overnight RRP facility that lasts for longer are somewhat ill defined, the costs of tightening policy are reasonably clear. As a consequence, we need to have a better discussion of why short-term use of the ON RRP is such a problem that it causes us to tighten by stopping reinvesting or signaling in any way that we would engage in asset sales. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 68.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the first question regarding my views on the two aggregate cap options, I have come around to the view that the Committee appropriately should take minimal monetary-control risks in the first phase of liftoff.  I prefer suspending the aggregate cap—that is, option 2.  I think we can operate the overnight reverse repo facility without a cap for a brief period without serious consequence.  As a practical matter, if an episode of severe financial instability or risk of instability were to materialize in the early weeks post-liftoff, we could react with limits on take-up appropriate to the circumstances at hand.  I see little need to impose a limit at the outset as long as we clearly intend to assess take-up, assess rate control effectiveness and the risks post-liftoff, and then, on that basis, impose a cap. On the second question, strategies to later reduce the overnight reverse repo take-up, the staff memo lays out two discrete methods:  widening the spread to IOER and draining reserves. Early on, I think we must rely on widening the spread.  Execution of a draining strategy that includes asset sales would take a while.  For planning purposes, I anticipate a shorter time horizon for reducing and phasing out the overnight reverse repo program. I think there may be some scope for a combination of spread widening and draining, but I am hoping the need for the overnight reverse repo program will fall away long before we could get excess reserve balances of $500 billion.  So, I see draining operations, including asset sales, as a supplemental tool. The questions posed for this round were very high level, asking for our general views.  I think it would be prudent to go a little further and try to agree, at least tentatively, on a baseline post-liftoff plan for implementing reductions in the overnight reverse repo facility, if things go well.  To be sure, we will be learning by doing and we will make tactical adjustments as we go, but I think a discussion at this meeting or the April meeting of a plan with more specifics might highlight some issues important to consider. For discussion purposes, should participants care to react, here is how I am thinking about phaseout, if things go well.  After a couple of moves of the federal funds rate target range, we assess whether and where federal funds are trading in range and where other short-term rates are trading.  If satisfactory, at that point we announce an overnight reverse repo cap.  If all goeswell with respect to volatility and the rate continues to trade in range, at the next rate move we widen the spread by holding the overnight reverse repo rate where it is.  We continue to widen the spread with each rate move until take-up under the program fades away.  I am sure we can imagine other scenarios, and certainly the more adverse scenarios have been discussed earlier. For example, if federal funds trade at or very near the floor, and there is large take-up, that would be one scenario.  If such a situation persisted, it seems to me that we might have to resort earlier and longer to term tools and the decision to cease reinvestment, and maybe sales, as part of this process. If, as we proceed post-liftoff, we are to optimize the tradeoff between monetary control and avoidance of the costs and undesirable potential consequences of a large and persistent long-term overnight reverse repo program, I favor some concrete advance planning as a frame of reference, at least, for future decisions.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The author is providing their opinion and discussing potential strategies for reducing the overnight reverse repo program, but there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 69.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I guess, in part, my remarks are taking up the issue that Eric raised.  I think it’s quite hard to say how much of a risk to financial stability an ON RRP facility could pose if it continued long enough and on a sufficient scale as to be plausibly regarded as a safe haven to which money markets could run from privately created assets, such as commercial paper, during a period of stress.  But because I seem to have fallen into the role of Cassandra for this topic, let me play to type today, at least for the heuristic purpose of exploring some of the potential costs of the ON RRP, which the staff memo alluded to but didn’t actually discuss.  I want to do that by placing this discussion in a little bit of context, and the context is essentially the progressive growth of the ON RRP as the centerpiece, what we expect to be the most important tool for policy-normalization purposes.   The use of an ON RRP was explicitly proposed to the Committee less than two years ago.  In a July 23, 2013, memo to the Committee, it was characterized as a “useful addition” to the proposed set of normalizing tools that had been previously identified as consisting of IOER, TDF, and non-overnight RRPs. In the intervening period, the staff and many Committee members have come to conclude that the ON RRP will actually be essential to making IOER an effective tool, and that the other tools, while perhaps playing a secondary or tertiary role, have significant limitations.  This focus on ON RRP was evident in the memos that were circulated to the Committee prior to our discussion last year.  As you may recall, at the time, the staff suggested a facility with a $500 billion to $600 billion cap.  And, in response to concerns expressed by a number of us, the testing has proceeded with a cap of $300 billion.  This apparently had the intended effect of curbing market expectations regarding the eventual size of the facility. Obviously, this is one means of trying to prevent the expectation that the Federal Reserve would be available as a borrower of last resort.  In truth, of course, even a cap might not do the trick in a stress period during which we might come under heavy, perhaps even self-generated, pressure to expand an ON RRP program in the interest of stabilizing money market funds in the wake of Dodd-Frank’s elimination of other sources of support for those funds.  But at least at the margin, and potentially more fundamentally, a moderate cap would work against the development of money market fund business models based on regular or contingent investment opportunities at the Federal Reserve. I gather that the mention in the January minutes of a likely increase in the cap at the time of liftoff didn’t lead to a basic change in market perceptions, but I think Governor Powell mentioned—and I noticed the same thing—that there has been at least  some change among some market participants in the expectation of a significantly larger program. Now, in the memo distributed prior to this meeting, the choice presented to the Committee is no longer $500 billion or $600 billion, but $800 billion or no cap at all.  This is not a particularly appealing choice for me because I think either one risks communicating a substantial program.  And it’s not hard to imagine a decision dynamic in the FOMC that gravitates, at each meeting, toward maximum assurance that our target range will be achieved with some precision, because financial-stability risks will probably always seem hypothetical and much less immediate than monetary policy targeting. This is the way financial-stability risks arise.  At any one moment, near-term policy desiderata always trump the potential hypothetical growth of financial stability concerns, whether it’s commercial real estate lending or mortgage-backed securities or anything else. That’s not to say that’s what’s going to happen here, but that really is the dynamic of decisionmaking:  You have something hypothetical, and you’ve got a near-term policy aim of some sort—whether it’s economic growth or monetary policy control—that, among the decisionmakers, always seems to have a higher priority.  By the time our balance sheet shrinks enough to make the ON RRP less relevant, it’s not hard to imagine a future FOMC being warned that reducing the cap or eliminating the ON RRP could itself produce significant disruptions in money markets.  At that point, the tradeoff between avoiding near-term disruptions and a possible exacerbation of what are, again, hypothetical, longer-term financial-stability risks, could well be decided in favor of avoiding short-term problems. So, at least at this time, I don’t have a favorite across those two alternatives, and picking up on one of President Lockart’s themes, I would like to hear at a future meeting a more  elaborated proposal.  My preference is not to decide this issue today but to try to build into the obvious imperative of achieving monetary policy control a more specific set of proposals for how to deal with the potential risks. As to the second question on strategies to reduce the ON RRP after liftoff, let me first say that I appreciate the language changes that were made in the bullet points on operational details proposed to be included in the minutes of this meeting.  I think the specific invocation of other tools in the context of an anticipated early reduction in the size of the ON RRP is helpful in countering expectations of ongoing, larger scales for the facility. I think, though I’m honestly not entirely sure, that I would favor something like an explicit commitment to reduce the cap beginning within a few meetings following liftoff, because I believe that the imperative is to have a successful liftoff at the early stage of normalization, but that the possibility of a little softness in the funds rate six or eight months later would not be damaging to our credibility.  Also, a specific commitment of this sort would force us to make use of some of the other tools mentioned in the staff memo.  However, based on Committee discussion to date and, indeed, the first group of speakers this morning, I’m not at all sure that I’d get much support for this approach—which, by the way, whether it’s reducing the cap or putting a cap in place following a no cap or $2.5 trillion cap at the outset is basically the same exercise. In the absence of such a commitment, I’d probably go along with just about any configuration of other tools and reducing reliance on the ON RRP that could garner substantial support on the Committee.  My own instinct is toward some combination of a higher IOER rate and greater use of term RRPs, and, depending on how large the ON RRP had become, perhaps even some sales of shorter-term Treasuries. I think Eric has already pointed out a certain clunkiness in trying to put these tools together, which, as a governance matter, is probably   something that we need to address.  But more important to me than any of these particulars are, first, that we convince ourselves that we have alternatives to a large, ongoing ON RRP that we are willing to deploy with full recognition of their possible downsides; and, second, that we state this position publicly with as much detail as fairly reflects our actual eventual consensus. In a similar vein, I would note in passing that I would favor continued testing of term RRPs at the end of quarters precisely because it will signal that we’re taking this tool seriously, though I also will note that I would understand the reluctance of members who might favor a liftoff during the next several meetings to authorize testing for the rest of the year because, as Simon says, once “patient” is off, that may send some signal on liftoff timing. Finally, Madam Chair, let me close with the hope that initial takeoff turns out to be about what we’ve been anticipating lately so that we’re spared having to make what I think is an increasingly difficult tradeoff that we’re contemplating in this discussion.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Acting President Prichard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a speech in which the speaker is giving their thoughts and opinions on the ON RRP facility and its potential risks and benefits.


Passage number 70.
 MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The FOMC must appear confident during the early stages of liftoff by exercising fairly tight control over the funds rate.  Doing so would establish our ability to conduct monetary policy under these unprecedented conditions and provide the necessary confidence to markets and the general public that the Committee can maintain sufficient control over monetary policy until such time as our balance sheet is fully normalized. In this regard, I believe that we should operate for a brief period without a cap and, then, as quickly as is prudent, impose a cap based on our initial experience.  We would initially refrain from imposing a cap because of the uncertainty of what that initial take-up would be.  By setting a specific cap, we could err on the low side by ending up with a cap that initially binds, resultingin a funds rate that would trade below the targeted range, or we could set a cap that’s too high, which might be misinterpreted as a Committee desiring an unnecessarily large ON RRP facility. By not specifying a number, we would avoid communicating any particular position as to the size of the facility.  However, it would also be important to communicate that it is the combination of this uncertainty regarding the initial take-up and our desire that the funds rate trade within its target range that leads us to begin without an aggregate quantity restriction. After obtaining information about the necessary size of the facility, a cap would be established. Further, we would emphasize that the ON RRP facility is intended to be temporary, and that we will reduce its size as circumstances allow. We may also wish to authorize the term RRP facility to initially operate only around quarter-end in order to counter the volatility associated with those periods.  However, once we have established our ability to move the funds rate in a regular and fairly precise fashion, I would prefer to ignore the quarter-end effects, as they will have little influence on the effectiveness of overall monetary policy. It is not unlikely we will find the initial size of the ON RRP facility to be uncomfortably large and, over time, wish to reduce its footprint on financial markets.  Reducing the size of our balance sheet will no doubt help, but that process will be quite long and drawn out, and, therefore, we will require other options.  The outcome I find most appealing is to widen the spread between the IOER rate and the rate paid on the ON RRP facility. The alternative of introducing a permanent term RRP facility does not seem like an alternative at all because it merely introduces a close substitute, and by not reducing the sum of the two instruments, has little effect on the imprint we will have on financial markets. The only meaningful way to reduce the size of the facility is to make reserves scarcer or to increase the spread between IOER and the ON RRP rate.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 71.
 MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am hesitant to comment on the issues related to tools, knowing that this discussion builds on many previous discussions in which I did not participate.  However, I have closely read the transcript from the previous meeting and found very insightful comments there, and I would like to thank the authors of the background memo, which was very helpful in helping me to understand these issues. I gained some perspective on the concept of liftoff as a result of a recent discussion with our director, who heads the Johnson Space Center, where liftoffs [laughter] are a regular occurrence. I know that you all are well aware that in Texas, we like to speak using analogies, so if the Committee will indulge me, a couple of comparisons seem relevant.  A NASA liftoff shares many characteristics with the liftoff that we are contemplating, including the possibility of last-minute circumstances and issues that change the plan or abort a launch, as well as the need for multiple gauges and alternatives that support in-flight corrections.  Our director noted that a successful liftoff is an important step to overall mission success, but what happens after the liftoff in the next 73 seconds, days, weeks, and—in the case of the mission they are launching this month—the next year are more important than the liftoff itself. So, in turning to the question regarding the initial cap, I understand that, like a space launch, our liftoff must go smoothly in order to ensure the successful completion of the mission.  Therefore, it will be important that the initial combined cap on RRP take-up be set high enough to ensure that the funds rate stays within the designated target range at liftoff.  Therefore, I support operating without a cap initially.  To preserve the credibility of our pledge to minimize use of the ON RRP facility, it will be important to either quickly reimpose the cap, if we begin without one, or to reduce our initial cap over time, even if the overnight bank funding rate falls below the lower limit of the Committee’s target range from time to time as a result. You asked that we include our comments on the options for the term RRP quarter-end testing as we go around.  On that front, I would say that obviously good quarter-end control of the funds rate will be important, at least through the early phases of the policy normalization process. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas research staff has advised that the best way to achieve this control will be with a term RRP facility, as the end-of-quarter term RRPs are relatively illiquid and not continuously on offer, and thus are less likely to facilitate bank runs than our overnight RRPs.  So, I would oppose discontinuing quarter-end RRP operations, as noted in our option 3, which I don’t think is really on the table.  Recognizing that through this period of transition, the Committee will be watching market developments very closely in order to make in-flight corrections, either of the other proposed options—reauthorizing term RRP operations on a quarter-by-quarter basis or through the end of the year—is a good alternative.  We lean toward option 2, knowing that there is still the opportunity to make decisions as to whether or not to actually conduct the operations, as was pointed out. After liftoff, we’ve looked at the remaining tools under consideration and have a few comments.  As previously indicated, we favor continuing end-of-quarter term RRP operations through at least early phases of normalization.  These operations help achieve good monetary policy control at quarter-ends, and the financial-stability risks associated with term RRPs seem likely to be lower than those associated with overnight RRPs.  If overnight RRP take-up away from the quarter-ends is so high as to raise unacceptable financial-stability concerns, we see additional term RRPs, not quarter-end RRPs, as the first line of defense. Interest costs from the term RRPs are relatively low, and term RRPs are likely to be nearly as effective as overnight   RRPs in supporting short-term interest rates.  Yet financial-stability risks are lower. We agree that substituting term RRPs for overnight RRPs will not reduce the Federal Reserve’s footprint in financial markets.  The best way to reduce that footprint is to phase out reinvestment of principal relatively quickly so that the balance sheet shrinks and both overnight and term RRPs are no longer necessary. We are less confident that term deposits will play a useful role in normalization.  They bear relatively high interest costs.  They would have to be adopted on a large scale in order to drain reserves to the point at which overnight RRP demand dries up, and it is uncertain that they will induce banks to pursue arbitrage opportunities more aggressively, even with an early withdrawal option.  This is something that we would like to learn more about as we go forward. And then, finally, because President Fisher will be president for four more days, I feel compelled to support President Lockhart’s call for advance planning that would lay out options under various possible scenarios and essentially create a decision tree.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Holcomb is expressing her support for various measures and options discussed in previous meetings.


Passage number 72.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Helen’s very nice comments about space analogies remind me that I had the very high honor yesterday of meeting former astronaut James Lovell, of Apollo 13 fame.  I had the feeling that we are going to find a way to bring everything together here, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing gratitude and sharing a positive experience about meeting an astronaut.


Passage number 73.
 MS. HOLCOMB.  Here we go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 74.
 MR. EVANS.  You know, to ensure monetary control, at any rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It simply states a statement made by Mr. Evans without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 75.
 MR. TARULLO. We hope not like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing hope.


Passage number 76.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  My views on the steps we need to take to ensure monetary control have not changed since the previous meeting. When the time comes to raise rates, it is important thatwe maintain monetary control in line with achieving our policy goals.  I do not have strong preferences regarding whether that control should be achieved with an elevated cap or a suspension of the cap.  I don’t think at this point we have sufficient knowledge to judge the relative risk of an $800 billion aggregate cap versus a temporary suspension of the cap on financial stability or our footprint in markets.  Therefore, to ensure we will have the control we seek, I would be willing to suspend the cap, if the Committee forms such a consensus.  As long as we effectively communicate to market participants that the elevated capacity is temporary and we follow through by reducing the capacity as needed, potential financial stability risks and footprint issues should be minimal.  Accordingly, we should make sure all other tools are ready, if needed, to reduce the overnight RRP cap.  So, I would continue with the testing of the term RRP facility.  And, by authorizing quarter-end tests for the remainder of the year, we reduce our administrative costs and avoid potentially confusing signals regarding the timing of liftoff.  So, I support this proposal. More generally, I would prefer to rely on our liability-side tools to reduce ON RRP take-up after liftoff.  I would not alter our previously agreed-upon exit strategy on asset sales.  First, I expect our liability-side tools to work as intended, so I don’t think we will need asset sales to maintain monetary control. More importantly, in the absence of material changes in market conditions, altering the exit strategy we already communicated might confuse market participants.  Of course, if circumstances did change enough to call into question our control, I would not be opposed to asset sales.  But based on our tests to date, I don’t anticipate we will need to resort to sales prior to our established plan.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their views and preferences on monetary control, but there is no direct opposition or dispute with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 77.
   MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage seems to refer to a person or title rather than conveying any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 78.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  And thanks again to the staff for the helpful background memos.  This discussion has already been very illuminating.  I didn’t actually realize that my colleagues’ both fantasies and nightmares centered on policy normalization.  I think when the transcripts come out, the psychologists will have a field day with this discussion. To me, the key overarching priority is for us to maintain monetary control at and after liftoff. Embarking on the normalization process with an overnight repo facility with an $800 billion limit would most likely suffice.  However, to avoid any chance of losing monetary control at this critical juncture, I am comfortable with operating the facility without an aggregate cap during the initial normalization phase.  Of course, a potential downside—which has already been raised by a number of people—to having a very large or unlimited initial cap is that it could be misinterpreted as signaling the intention to maintain a large presence in the market in the future.  We have already indicated that this is a temporary measure, and it will be ended when it is no longer needed, and we should continue to reiterate that message. But like President Mester, I would like to say that we shouldn’t get locked into a particular timing of the reduction of capacity.  For instance, the proposed language from the minutes states that we plan to reduce the facility’s capacity “fairly soon” after liftoff, which some might interpret as within a couple weeks or a couple months.  If this phrase appears in the FOMC minutes, I am fairly confident that we will be asked what “fairly soon” means, as it is apparently a new phrase for the FOMC.  I would prefer to leave our options open as to the timing of the adjustment of the cap, so that we maintain flexibility to best balance our goals of monetary control and financial stability.  So I suggest deleting that sentence.   Turning to the strategies to limit very high overnight reverse repo facility usage after liftoff, the best course of action is difficult to determine in advance.  And although, like President Lockhart, I think it makes a lot of sense to war-game different strategies or to have decision trees in connection with that, I do think the appropriate strategy will depend on the reasons underlying the high take-up rate as well as on the economic landscape. If a high take-up rate materializes, we will have to examine its causes and weigh the costs and benefits of alternative approaches in this light. Having said that, we were asked our views on this.  In general, I see term RRPs as the preferred tool for curbing demand for overnight reverse repos while still facilitating monetary control.  Again, this is in the context of the very high sustained usage of the overnight reverse repo facility.  Importantly, the term RRP tool provides some flexibility, because we can determine the time and size of offerings.  And, as the background memo highlights, we could also discourage the use of overnight reverse repos by raising the IOER rate.  Now, I find that option less attractive, as we would be widening the target range for reasons other than monetary control, which might muddle our communications.  I am also concerned about the negative public perceptions that higher interest payments going to banks at a cost to the taxpayer might create in that case. Now, on the other side of the ledger, sales of short-term Treasuries would likewise provide a sensible approach from a monetary policy perspective.  Just think about the economics of it.  It would put upward pressure on short-term rates while having little, if any, effect on longer-term rates.  However, as has been mentioned by President Rosengren and others, asset sales during the early stages of normalization could be misconstrued as signaling a tighter overall policy stance.  Some might think it hints that asset sales of longer-term securities may be in the offing. Looking further down the road, once we have moved sufficiently away from the zero lower bound and have ceased reinvestments, asset sales, specifically of shorter-term Treasuries, could be a useful approach.  Under those conditions, they could be accurately described as a tactical means to reduce the balance sheet with no greater implication for future monetary policy. In terms of the term RRP testing, I am supportive of reauthorizing through the end of the year.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual expressing their views and suggestions on various topics related to monetary policy normalization.


Passage number 79.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As the staff memo notes, the ability to clearly demonstrate that we can steer short-term rates is paramount. With that in mind, I support including operational details about the Committee’s plan for liftoff in the minutes of this meeting to remind market participants of the expected contour of the ON RRP’s purpose and its capacity.  I can support operating for a brief period after liftoff without a cap on the size of this facility—of course, subject to the size of the portfolio, as others have noted. In terms of strategies the Committee could follow to reduce ON RRP take-up after liftoff, it seems reasonable to adjust the cap at some point, as the staff memo suggests, with sufficient headroom to ensure control of short-term rates, but not too large to make the facility susceptible to large, rapid inflows. A more challenging scenario, of course, arises in the case of a persistently high level of take-up.  To prepare for such circumstances, I think all tools, including term RRPs and the Term Deposit Facility, should be considered to the extent they are needed to drain reserves. I also would support sales of shorter-term Treasury securities, as needed.  In general, I would argue to keep all of these tools on the table as we approach liftoff.  This includes the option of ceasing   reinvestments.  Waiting until after liftoff to start this process I view as something of a missed opportunity, so I would support keeping such an option available to use sooner rather than later to effect the level of reserve balances. How the Committee determines ex ante the sequence, the priority, and the circumstances for using these different options, of course, is more challenging.  I would agree with others that it may be worthwhile to engage in some sort of scenario analysis under various states of the world where the ON RRP facility is larger than we deem appropriate in order to give the Committee a better sense of which tools are first deployed, when, and under what circumstances.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Ms. George suggests various tools and strategies that could be used to reduce the ON RRP take-up after liftoff. She argues to keep all options on the table and considers the possibility of ceasing reinvestments as a missed opportunity. While there may be some differences in opinion on the timing and prioritization of these tools, there is no explicit disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 80.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As I listened to President Lacker and President Rosengren, I was reminded of a line from the great Ninth District poet, Robert Zimmerman, a.k.a. Bob Dylan, who said, “You can be in my dream if I can be in yours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is evident from the speaker's statement that he was reminded of a line from Bob Dylan's song, but there is no indication of any disagreement or argument being made.


Passage number 81.
” MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 82.
 WILLIAMS.  That was scary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their feelings about something being scary.


Passage number 83.
 MR. LACKER.  No, thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker simply declines or politely says no to something without any opposing view or argument being presented.


Passage number 84.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have just a few comments on the two questions that were asked.  The first question is, should there be an aggregate cap on the overnight RRP program at liftoff. My counsel is that we not have a cap at liftoff and then set a reasonable cap during the aftermath.  On the second question—general views on limiting the overnight RRP program take-up after liftoff—in what the memo calls the “complex case” in which demand for overnight RRP is significant during the period after liftoff, I generally think that interest rate control trumps the issues associated with potential financial instability.  I would not wish to put an artificial limit on overnight RRP if it would damage the Committee’s interest rate control credibility. The options in a large post-liftoff take-up scenario, as I understand them, include, one, raise the IOER rate to increase the spread between the IOER and overnight RRP rates; two, use term repo; three, use the Term Deposit Facility; and, four, use some type of controlled asset sales program.  I find myself in general agreement with the analysis in the memo evaluating these options.  Asset sales, in particular, would presumably be a slow approach to reducing dependency on a high-demand overnight RRP facility.  Even though I’ve advocated asset sales in the past, I don’t think they’d be useful for this particular purpose, and I agree with President  Rosengren in that assessment. The fastest and most direct response, in my opinion, would be to raise the IOER rate in order to increase the spread between the IOER and overnight RRP rates.  That seems like the tool the Committee will need to rely upon in real time. I’m not opposed to experimenting further with term repo, the TDF, or both, to reduce reliance on a high-demand overnight RRP program.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 85.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the first question, I favor operating for a short time without a cap and then imposing a cap based on expected usage.  I would actually keep the “no cap” in place for maybe the six weeks between FOMC meetings so you’d come back to the next FOMC meeting without any drama.  Then you would just put the cap in place, so you wouldn’t have to have a video conference.  You wouldn’t have to have all of the question marks concerning when are they going to put the cap in place.  In my opinion, that would just be a very low-key way of doing—it would avoid a lot of drama.  I’d set a cap after that six-week period with sufficient headroom so that the market could reasonably expect that it would bind rarely, if ever.  I would supplement that cap with term RRP around quarter-end.  The reason is that we see usage increases around the quarter-end.  So why not just have the term RRP take up that slack.  That would allow you to operate safely with a lower overnight RRP cap. To put that all in place, I would authorize the series of term RRP tests that we’re talking about over the next three quarter-ends—June, September, December.  Because you have the tests in place, there would be no errors of signaling to the market that liftoff was going to occur soon.  That way, you could go “live” if you actually decide to lift off in June, September, or December. To me, having no cap is slightly more prudent than having a high cap because, obviously, there’s a little bit of tail risk that the high cap might not be high enough.  I also think it’s superior   because, by having no cap, you’re not sending any message about how big you think the usage is going to be, how much headroom you think you need so that it’s not binding.  It is actually very content-free in terms of how much you expect the overnight RRP to be used over the medium term. With respect to the second question, I thought the memo made it very clear that we have two broad sets of options in terms of managing the demand for overnight RRPs.  We can change the relative interest rates, or we can drain the amount of excess reserves in the system. But my own view is a little different, maybe, from others’.  I think it’s premature to make a precise decision about what we should do.  I think all we really need to know at this point is that we have sufficient tools available to make overnight RRP usage go down faster than would occur just from balance sheet runoff and growth of currency outstanding, if we thought that a steeper decline in overnight RRP usage were desirable. It seems to me that we should see what happens after liftoff in terms of demand.  We may not have any problem at all that we need to address.  The take-up of the overnight RRP could be low.  I think making too big a fuss about this now sends a mixed message to market participants about how committed we are to monetary policy control over the medium term. Now, in terms of ordering them, I would think that raising the IOER relative to the overnight RRP would be your first port of call.  Then the reserve draining tools, like the Term Deposit Facility and term RRPs, would be a second port of call.  I’m sort of where President Rosengren is.  I’m pretty averse to going to the asset sales just because I think it would be very hard to be confident that that wouldn’t leak out into a bigger market reaction in terms of financial conditions.  I would very much support, though, all the other people that have called for more work on a decision tree to understand, if this happens, what would we do. I think there are a lotof branches, and I think we should spend more time working out how we would proceed down these different branches. One final thing:  I thought the language in the minutes was fine.  There was some discussion about the issue of “fairly soon.”  I think we want to tell people that it’s going to come down after some period of time.  So, my own view is that taking out that sentence may be “a bridge too far.”  I know “fairly soon” is imprecise.  I’d love to come up with better language, but I don’t have anything that’s more precise at this point.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN. Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 86.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m grateful to the staff for writing the memos on these topics.  They lay out the issues in a clear and straightforward way.  I’d also like to thank the Federal Reserve Bank of New York staff who have carried out the experiments that have gone a long way to persuading us that it will be possible to use the ON RRP tool to help achieve the target federal funds rates we set at and after liftoff. As everyone agrees, our primary aim with regard to the use of our new method of setting the federal funds rate by using both the IOER rate and the ON RRP rate must be to make sure that we’re able to insert and maintain the federal funds rate in the ranges that we decide and announce.  We’ve been saying for years that we have the tools we need, and we’ve been experimenting for some while, and the credibility of the Federal Reserve would be severely set back if we pushed the button and failed to lift off as announced. That means we have to set a very high initial aggregate cap to make sure we have the capacity we need.  Now, I wish I had a probability figure to attach to the scenario in which, if we set it at $800 billion, we’ll hit $800 billion, because if that was an extremely low number, on the whole it’s probably better to have a smaller cap than a bigger one.  But the problem is that not   only can’t I get anybody to give me a number—or at least nobody has given me a number they’ll commit to—it’s that we don’t actually have any idea about how to figure out that probability. Consequently, I favor not having a cap temporarily and then coming back to one reasonably soon after we start operating the new system. Once we’ve established the new system and learned more about the demand for it and the effectiveness of the facility, we can put a new cap in place. Between President Lockhart’s “couple of meetings” over which I hope we’ll be doing a gradual increase in rates—and that could be a year if we’re doing two or three increases—and President Dudley’s “six weeks,” I don’t know where we’re going to end up on that.  Obviously it will be better if it can be sooner, but I think that we just have to accept the fact that you can’t both pre-commit strongly and pay no attention to developments that happen afterward.  So we’re going to have to be flexible on this, with enough people being around the table to persuade us that we’d better not be too flexible if we want to retain our credibility. Regarding how long to avoid having a cap, clearly at every stage it would be more convenient to have the ON RRP facility—there’s always some utility to having an extra tool in hand.  But we’ll have to find a way of lowering the length of time we use it.  There will be a benefit to actually getting rid of it. I think if we were going to do it one way we’d thought through, it would actually be related to the volume of reductions we plan to undertake in the size of our portfolio, because when the portfolio is so big, that’s the period when we need this.  I it would, I think, be related to the size of the portfolio and not to the passage of time.  But I hope we do it much more rapidly than that. We’ve all discussed the fact that if it doesn’t work, there are other things we could do. We could increase our use of term RRPs and term deposits and, if necessary, we could begin to  sell short-term assets.  I would be very interested in getting some idea from the Desk, or anybody else who thinks they know, about how effective raising the IOER rate would be in enabling us to stay in the range.  If we actually have a thought of doing that, we’ll have to change the statement, which says the target range is going to be 25 basis points. With regard to authorizing the end-of-quarter operations, I think we should just do it for the rest of the year and not have to have extra discussions on this issue.  I would support that.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists mainly of the speaker expressing gratitude, sharing their thoughts on various topics, and making suggestions.


Passage number 87.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’ll start by saying that I’m of the view that it’s very important that we have good control of monetary policy at and immediately after liftoff.  To achieve that, I may be in a minority, but I prefer the first option, which is to have an $800 billion cap.  It seems very likely—and, I think, today got even likelier—that we’re going to be lifting off into a quarter-end.  I suspect the market will know at the time of liftoff that we already prepositioned $300 billion of additional capacity in term over the quarter-end, which really is $1.1 trillion over the quarter-end and then $800 billion in equilibrium. That’s almost four times the highest previous between-quarter-end take-up. That seems like plenty to me.  I can’t give any assurances about that, but it does seem like that’s enough.  Again, I may be in a minority.  That would be my first choice, although we also have the flexibility to take the cap off after a week or so. If we’re going to go with taking the cap off, then I would say two things.  One, I would not preannounce this.  I wouldn’t preannounce either of these.  I would announce these right at the time of liftoff.  I think it’s a bad idea to give too much information.  For one thing, you want to overwhelm demand with supply here, and to the extent you send a long signal ahead of time,you give a chance for the demand for ON RRPs to go up.  So I would wait.  In addition, I think there’s real risk in going without a cap for any long period of time.  There are really two risks.  One is that it’s subject to a lot of criticism from people about being insensitive to the size of our footprint in the markets.  And the second is, if you’re going to keep it on for two or three meetings, there really is a chance that some kind of an event would happen—and there are plenty of them that we have talked about—that could cause a real run to the balance sheet. So I would say, if we’re going to do it, I wouldn’t preannounce it, and I would do some sort of pre-commitment to imposing a cap.  Again, if you lift off on the 16th or 17th, which are the dates on which the next three press conference meetings end, then I would want to pre-commit to imposing a cap no later than Date X.  I don’t know what Date X is, but I would want to say that so people know.  First of all, there’s no notice of it, and then, second, we impose a cap.  And I would impose a cap that’s $200 billion-ish over the non-quarter-end amount, and then I would continue doing $300 billion at quarter-end.  That’s what I would recommend doing, and, of course, implicit in that is that I do support now authorizing, but not specifically deciding about, testing term RRPs at quarter-ends. In terms of the tools, I guess my takeaway is similar to Bill’s, which is that we have a good set of tools available.  I like lifting the IOER rate 5 or 10 or 15 basis points.  It is a perfectly useful tool to me.  In addition, TDF is a good tool.  We can do more term. We can increase the size of the ON RRP.  I think any and all of those would work. I do really like the idea of asset sales, but I think we’ve kind of promised not to do them for six months after liftoff, and I don’t really think we can revisit that.  But let me just say that after that six-month period, I really like the idea of using asset sales to shrink the balance sheet faster than we promised to do.  If it’s there to be done, I would take it.  Again, at that point when we’ve already six months earlier started shrinking the balance sheet, and things are moving along nicely, I think the risks that some have talked about are less. I guess it goes without saying, then, that I like the proposed March minutes language, except I wouldn’t so much eliminate “fairly soon” from the last sentence as make it a lot stronger, particularly if we’re going to go with no cap.  I would want to make some kind of a time-specific commitment to create a cap, and I wouldn’t wait long.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of one person's viewpoint and recommendations.


Passage number 88.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Establishing monetary policy control should be our paramount objective at liftoff, and our deliberations suggest it is highly likely the decision to lift off will take place at a meeting with a press conference, and, thus, proximate to quarter-end. We have seen previously that demand for overnight RRP tends to rise at quarter-end, raising the risk, in the presence of a binding cap, of a downward drift in rates following the announcement of liftoff.  Moreover, our experience so far with demand for overnight RRPs has taken place with rates near zero, where the floor has likely received some support from the zero lower bound.  So, we don’t really know the level of overnight RRPs that will be necessary to keep the federal funds rate in our target zone at liftoff.  For all of these reasons, to minimize the risk that the federal funds rate falls below our target range immediately following liftoff, it would be prudent to operate initially without a cap. Furthermore, I don’t see significant cost to the temporary suspension of a cap to balance against that achievement of monetary control.  By contrast, I do believe the establishment of a permanent overnight RRP facility would raise important risks of changing the structure of money markets.  But these risks will be addressed by being unambiguous from the outset, as we have  been to date, that the overnight RRP facility will be available only to the extent, and for the duration, necessary to reestablish effective monetary control.  For the same reason, I support planning for the phaseout of the facility.  But I would be wary of trying to specify a time frame at the outset, and I also am uneasy about using the language that is proposed for the minutes on reducing the capacity “fairly soon,” so as to avoid starting a debate on what, precisely, that means.  Once we have gained some knowledge about the demand for overnight RRPs away from near-zero levels of interest, we can more comfortably set a cap that is credible and that has the appropriate headroom.  By that point, it will also be clear that we have established monetary control following liftoff, and our credibility in this area will be less subject to doubts so that our risk tolerance can be a little greater. If the demand for the overnight facility remains elevated for a protracted period, relative to the usage patterns that we have seen so far, I would support increasing the IOER rate and, thus, the gap between the IOER and the overnight RRP rates in order to reinforce the pull of the IOER rate.  Of course, we don’t know precisely how a higher IOER rate will affect the demand for the overnight facility, so we shouldn’t take other policy options off the table.  Should it prove necessary, I would be open to considering additional liability-side options, including term tools, in addition to raising the IOER rate, to limit the usage of the overnight facility over time.  Precisely what the mix will be will depend on the circumstances, which argues for addressing this issue only after we have some experience with the new policy framework. By contrast, I do not believe that asset sales should be on the table for this purpose, nor do I expect it will be needed in light of the range of available liability-side tools at our disposal.  Putting asset sales into play could risk that being taken by markets as a signal regarding the overall stance of monetary policy.  Deliberations surrounding asset sales should be determinedon the basis of our overall monetary policy goals and not as a mechanism to fine-tune usage of the overnight facility.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MS. Brainard is expressing her views and opinions on various aspects of monetary policy.


Passage number 89.
 MR. TARULLO.  Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between Mr. Tarullo and Chair Yellen. The response of "Yes" suggests agreement and acknowledgement of Mr. Tarullo's statement.


Passage number 90.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I meant to ask this to President Williams, but now I could maybe ask both Governor Brainard and him, and possibly President Kocherlakota, too.  With respect to the “fairly soon” language, I obviously strongly favor it no matter where we are going, because I do think it is so important, in the absence of a credible commitment to reduce, that we say as much as we can. All three of you, I think, at least at this point, are leaning toward suspension of any cap for the liftoff period—and the language of the revised bullets, I think, carefully refers to “capacity” rather than to “cap.” I assume you are all thinking the way Vice Chairman Dudley was, that we begin with the suspension of any cap, and then at some point— Vice Chairman Dudley said six weeks, Governor Fischer thought maybe a little bit longer—we would come in and put in a cap so that we would, in fact, reduce the available capacity of the facility fairly soon after it commences policy firming.  If you are thinking in those terms, isn’t the way you have all described your preferences actually consistent with the language, if you are assuming that there is a suspension of the cap from the outset.  Thanks.  I am interested in what your views are on that. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a discussion among various individuals about their preferences and assumptions regarding a particular policy. They are seeking clarification and discussing their views in a respectful manner.


Passage number 91.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 92.
 WILLIAMS.  Sure.  Actually, can I, in answering your question—I feel as if I am a lawyer—go back to our Policy Normalization Principles and Plans from September 17, which states: “During normalization, the Federal Reserve intends to use an overnight reverse   repurchase agreement facility and other supplementary tools as needed to help control the federal funds rate.  The Committee will use an overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility only to the extent necessary and will phase it out when it is no longer needed to help control the federal funds rate.” So we have already said those things very strongly and very clearly.  Then, in the new addition, it says that we will “[a]llow aggregate capacity of the ON RRP facility to be temporarily elevated to support policy implementation.”  The issue associated with using “fairly soon” is that I think it is, first of all, unnecessary, in view of these very clear existing statements about our intentions and related things. It is really about this “fairly soon” being interpreted as being in terms of weeks or even a month or two, and having this time dimension when, really, I think our discussion is around the economics of this and what is actually happening with usage. Now, I think that there is a way to fix this.  Vice Chairman Dudley mentioned that he didn’t have a replacement.  It could be that we could just have in that first sentence something to the effect of “allow the aggregate capacity of the repo facility to be temporarily elevated as needed to support policy implementation,” or something that may be stronger than that.  It’s the “fairly soon” that I think could be misinterpreted, not only in the way you’re talking about, which is just logically lowering it from infinite to $1 trillion or something, but really more a misinterpretation that we are going to bring it back to a low level fairly soon.  That is my concern. CHAIR YELLEN. Can I just say that this exact language of “fairly soon” comes directly from the previous minutes.  The public, or those interested in this topic, are already familiar with these words.  And, you know, if we include it, the minutes of this meeting would probably indicate that a number of you have commented on essentially what you mean by “fairly soon.” There would consequently be a little bit more detail in the minutes about what this means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Williams expresses concern about the use of the term "fairly soon" and suggests an alternative wording, while Yellen defends the use of "fairly soon" and argues that it has already been used in previous minutes.


Passage number 93.
   MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 94.
 WILLIAMS.  I do think there is a difference between when we actually, in a sense, quasi-vote on something like this and when the minutes just captures the conversation.  I guess I read these bullet points as something that we were all coming to an agreement on.  And maybe I am misinterpreting the discussion. CHAIR YELLEN.  No, I think that is what we wanted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Williams and Chair Yellen agree that there is a difference between voting on something and capturing the conversation in the minutes. Williams admits to possibly misinterpreting the discussion, to which Chair Yellen responds by agreeing with his interpretation.


Passage number 95.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as the abbreviation "MR" does not provide any context or information to suggest disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 96.
 WILLIAMS.  When I read the minutes, I always just think, does that represent what was said.  Here you are really looking for us to sign on. CHAIR YELLEN.  That is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Williams and Chair Yellen are in agreement about the purpose of signing on to the minutes.


Passage number 97.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the passage itself. Please provide the specific passage for further analysis.


Passage number 98.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 99.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As I listened to the discussion around the table, I heard a wide range of what “fairly soon” meant being expressed.  President Dudley talked about six weeks.  I’m happy with six weeks, but I also heard people talk about six months.  Those are pretty big discrepancies in what “fairly soon” would mean.  So I will offer up again my preferred language, which is more bland than President Fisher would like, but here it is:  “The Committee expects to reduce the available capacity of the facility at an appropriate time after it commences policy firming.”  I think it gets away from, if you are asked a question, what the time frame is.  Well, it depends on the conditions.  That is what “appropriate” means.  So I will offer that as a suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing disagreement with the varying interpretations and timelines for "fairly soon" discussed by others around the table. They also suggest alternative language that they believe would provide a clearer and more flexible timeframe for reducing the available capacity of the facility.


Passage number 100.
 MR. TARULLO.  If I could just say on that, I appreciate President Kocherlakota trying to help us get somewhere in the middle.  But I actually would find that alternative worse than just taking “fairly soon” out, because I am afraid it reverts to this notion we will keep using the ON RRP until we really don’t think we need it any more for any purpose.  But I like “fairly soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their appreciation for President Kocherlakota's suggestion but also explaining their own perspective on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 101.
”   MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I see. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  So let’s go to the proposed March minutes language and see if we can reach agreement, and there are several issues outstanding.  First of all, President Kocherlakota proposed a change in the opening paragraph, in which it says, “the operational approach the FOMC will use,” to “intends to use.”  And, in the subsequent sentence, you also proposed replacing “will” with “intends to.”  Can I ask, is there anyone who would be unhappy if we change “will” to “intends to” in both places. [No response]  Okay.  So let’s make that change in both places, from “will” to “intends.” And now we have the final sentence of the third bullet point.  On this, we have views on both sides.  I guess our options are keep it as is and leave “fairly soon” in, or, I suppose the alternative you would see, Governor Tarullo, would be to remove the sentence entirely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the statement "On this, we have views on both sides. "


Passage number 102.
 MR. TARULLO.  I think that is what President Williams proposed.  I obviously prefer to keep “fairly soon” in, but I think I would prefer just deleting it to the substitution of “appropriate time.” CHAIR YELLEN.  Deleting the entire sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Tarullo and Chair Yellen express preferences regarding the wording of a sentence, but there is no conflict or disagreement between their preferences.


Passage number 103.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Well, let me ask for a show of hands.  How many people prefer leaving the sentence in and keeping it as is. [Show of hands]  And how many people prefer to get rid of the sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Tarullo and Chair Yellen are having a discussion and seeking a consensus from the group through a show of hands.


Passage number 104.
  [Show of hands] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with what John said, that we have already said it. And if we don’t like the “fairly soon,” why not just take the sentence out altogether.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 105.
 MR. FISCHER.  I have a two-hander. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. MR. Fischer simply states that he has a two-hander, and CHAIR YELLEN acknowledges him and allows him to proceed.


Passage number 106.
  MR. FISCHER.  I don’t think, when we make a decision, everybody looks back to every previous decision we have made on it and says, “Aha, they committed to this thing some months ago, which they have somehow left out this time.”  And, the argument was made that we said it when we issued the normalization principles. CHAIR YELLEN. Well, this is an augmentation of that policy.  It says explicitly it is something we are adding to those principles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer is expressing his opinion that not everyone will look back to all previous decisions when making a new one. Chair Yellen agrees with him and explains that the new policy is an addition to the previous principles. There is no conflict or argument between them.


Passage number 107.
 MR. FISCHER. But they do not see that, though, unless we publish the whole thing. CHAIR YELLEN.  That is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen seem to agree on the fact that publishing the whole thing is necessary for others to see it.


Passage number 108.
 MS. BRAINARD. Why can’t we just reiterate something like, “The Committee expects to use the facility only to the extent and for the duration necessary to.”  I mean, why can’t we just leave in that old language, which is, I think, a much more precise characterization of how I think we are deploying this facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. Brainard is posing a question and expressing her opinion, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 109.
 MR. TARULLO. Well, if we are, then I am opposed to the facility, I think, because that suggests, again, that it is going to be used—it is the instrument—which is the direction in which we have been headed.  And, I think the “appropriate time” language, or the “as to the extent necessary,” reinforces the sense that it is ON RRP that is going to get us monetary policy control. That is why I am worried about the language.  I don’t think that’s your intention, but I’m afraid that is the way it’s going to be read.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo expresses opposition to the facility and raises concerns about the language used, suggesting that it implies reliance on RRP for monetary policy control, which he disagrees with.


Passage number 110.
 MS. BRAINARD. That is certainly not.  Quite the reverse. CHAIR YELLEN. President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Brainard is making a statement, and Chair Yellen is agreeing with her by saying "quite the reverse."


Passage number 111.
 MS. MESTER. My understanding is the final bullet point is going to be added to what we have already done in the normalization principles.  Is that right. CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, I don’t think there is a plan to include the previous normalization principles in the minutes when this appears.  So while it says explicitly that it is an augmentation, my guess would be it will appear on its own in the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Mester is seeking clarification about the inclusion of a final bullet point, and Chair Yellen responds by explaining that the previous normalization principles will not be included in the minutes. There is no argument or disagreement between them.


Passage number 112.
 MS. MESTER.  Well, okay, that is something that maybe we should think about.  But the first part of the last bullet point says will be “temporarily elevated.” Isn’t “temporarily” enough to assuage this.  I mean, “temporarily” is telling you that the intention is for it to be elevated for a temporary period—unspecified, I grant you that.  Maybe that is enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply considering the use of the word "temporarily" in addressing a potential concern.


Passage number 113.
 MR. TARULLO. If you go back, President Mester, to the dynamic that I hypothesized, at each meeting it will always seem as though keeping it in place for another meeting is the best way to maintain precision in monetary policy terms, then it can just elongate.  And because we can’t make a credible, firm commitment to remove it, for the reasons a lot of people have given, I think it is important to reinforce, in as many ways as we can, that it is going to be temporary.  The best way to reinforce that is actually to reduce it, and that will take care of all of these problems.  But I will confess to concern about how quickly we will get to that point, if we are not being reminded that we have said that we are going to try to get rid of it fairly soon, and I actually regarded the ambiguity as a bit of an advantage here. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thomas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is expressing his concerns and opinions about the current monetary policy and the need to reinforce that it is temporary. Chair Yellen does not express any disagreement or counterarguments in response.


Passage number 114.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Madam Chair, would it be helpful if perhaps some of the staff offered to think some more, between now and tomorrow morning, about whether there are ways of bridging this gap between the two views. We may offer up some proposals that may be futile, but at least we will try. CHAIR YELLEN.  Simon, Do you want to give that a shot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Both individuals are expressing a willingness to explore potential solutions or compromise.


Passage number 115.
 MR. POTTER. There was six weeks, eight months, and two rate increases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of facts without any indication of disagreement or contention. It simply states that there were six weeks, eight months, and two rate increases without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 116.
  MR. FISCHER.  Two or three rate increases, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there will be two or three rate increases as agreed upon.


Passage number 117.
 MR. POWELL.  Two or three rate increases could be a year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple statement of fact without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 118.
 MR. FISCHER.  Well, I would like some judgment to be used, which I think Governor Tarullo doesn’t want, but I don’t see how you can do it without asking, “How necessary is it.”  It’s clear that we cannot say, “Well, it will help.” It will always help.  It will never be totally useless. That’s not good enough.  There’s got to be a positive value to getting rid of it. CHAIR YELLEN. That leaves you as wanting to keep this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Fischer and Governor Tarullo may have different perspectives on the issue being discussed, but there is no direct conflict or argument between them in this passage.


Passage number 119.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes, keep this for some time.  I can live with “fairly soon” and so forth. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. Thomas, if you think there’s a chance you could come up with some language, why don’t we defer until tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer is expressing his willingness to wait for a decision, and Chair Yellen is suggesting a delay to give Thomas a chance to propose alternative language.


Passage number 120.
 MR. LAUBACH.  All right.  Tomorrow, first thing. CHAIR YELLEN.  I would say that’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Laubach and Chair Yellen are in agreement and there is a sense of agreement and understanding in their conversation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 121.
 MR. POTTER.  The quality of what we come up with might be variable, though. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. It was pretty evenly divided.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is potential for disagreement or variability in the quality of what is being discussed or proposed. This is implied by the statement, "The quality of what we come up with might be variable, though."


Passage number 122.
 MR. POTTER.  I’d emphasize that it says “the Committee expects.”  It’s not “intends,” it’s “expects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is simply emphasizing the wording of the phrase "the Committee expects," indicating that it carries a specific level of certainty.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 123.
” MR. FISCHER. What was the total number of votes.  I had the sense that we had more than 10 voting on that one.   CHAIR YELLEN.  I think I counted, one more person in favor of keeping it than removing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The chair, Yellen, states that there was one more person in favor of keeping it than removing it, while Mr. Fischer expresses his sense that they had more than 10 voting on the matter.


Passage number 124.
 MR. LAUBACH. In this instance, remember that the minutes will note, just like with the normalization principles, that this is a straw poll among participants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the minutes will note that there is a straw poll among participants. It does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 125.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Right, yes.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement between Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen. President Bullard is not mentioned in relation to any disagreement either.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 126.
 MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair, the second sentence in the third bullet doesn’t make sense to me.  I think it may be used to be a bullet and then got moved to become part of the sentence. If we’re going to redo this, why don’t we also redo that.  I didn’t know we were going to get so precise on the language of the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard expresses his confusion and suggests that a particular sentence may have been moved from its original place. He also questions the need for precision in the language of the minutes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
 MR. FISCHER.  You mean actually worry about grammar. CHAIR YELLEN. What’s wrong with the second sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Fischer questions the need to worry about grammar in a sentence, implying that it is unnecessary. On the other hand, Chair Yellen challenges Mr. Fischer by asking what is wrong with the second sentence, suggesting that there is indeed a problem with the grammar in question. This disagreement highlights a difference in opinion or viewpoint regarding the importance of grammar.


Passage number 128.
 MR. BULLARD. “Adjust the IOER . . .”.  It is not a sentence. CHAIR YELLEN. “Rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 129.
” MR. FISCHER.  It is all written that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states a fact without any conflicting opinions or contradictory statements.


Passage number 130.
 MR. BULLARD.  That would be fine if it was a bullet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses their opinion about something without any opposing views or conflicting ideas being presented.


Passage number 131.
 MR. FISCHER.  This is a continuation of “intends to adjust.”  “Intends to” is there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "This is a continuation of 'intends to adjust'" is simply providing clarification or context about the previous topic.


Passage number 132.
 MR. POTTER.  Fix the grammar, right. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  We’ll come back to this tomorrow.  Let’s see if we can resolve the final issue that we need to today, which concerns the resolutions on term RRP testing. If you have the sheet with options 1 and 2 in front of you, option 2 at the bottom is the one that would authorize term RRP testing over quarter-ends for the remainder of the year.  Not everyone weighed in on that, but I did hear during our go-round a considerable amount of support to approve authorizing testing through year-end.  Would anyone like to comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply relaying information and asking for comments or input.


Passage number 133.
 [No response] MS. BRAINARD.  I have a question, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 134.
   MS. BRAINARD.  I don’t understand.  Suppose we temporarily suspend the cap, and we decide to lift off at one of these quarter-ends.  Is this an authorization to also do term RRP at that quarter-end, and would we make that decision intentionally at that point.  Or is this testing that simply would take place whether or not we’ve got unlimited overnight RRPs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and asking for further information.


Passage number 135.
 MR. POTTER.  We would look at the circumstances.  We would contact the Chair.  The Chair would decide on the terms, and we would be informing you.  You would have the chance, as always, to object to any operations that we do. We’re just putting the authorization in place, as Lorie tried to explain. Whether we would necessarily use that capacity would depend a lot on the situation we’re in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is explaining a process and the steps involved without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 136.
 MS. LOGAN. We make the announcements that the term transactions are going to take place at the beginning of the month, which would be before the meeting, but if you lifted the cap, we could run very small operations on the dates we had already announced or have a very low cap to adjust for what you’ve decided.  But if you don’t end up lifting off at that meeting, we would conduct them as we have been.  We would continue to make the announcement at the beginning of the month that they would take place on certain dates, but we may adjust the sizes based on the decision you make at the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a potential scenario and the actions they would take based on the decision made at the meeting.


Passage number 137.
 MR. POWELL.  I want to make sure I understand.  We’re going to announce these at the beginning, but we don’t announce the amounts at the beginning of the month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement by Mr. Powell, expressing his desire to ensure understanding of a process regarding announcements and the timing of disclosing amounts at the beginning of a month.


Passage number 138.
 MR. POTTER.  We would have announced, and we would say “up to” and give them the provisional schedule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is simply stating that they would have made an announcement, mentioning "up to" and providing the provisional schedule.


Passage number 139.
 MR. POWELL.  Right.  We’re committing before the meeting.  The meeting doesn’t take place at the beginning of the month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Powell is simply stating that the commitment is made before the meeting, and clarifying that the meeting doesn't occur at the beginning of the month.


Passage number 140.
   MS. LOGAN.  Right, but we would do the “up to,” and markets would be comfortable with us adjusting those once they have known the decision at the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a process of adjusting certain factors once a decision has been made, and states that markets would be comfortable with that adjustment.


Passage number 141.
 MR. POWELL. We could do zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only contains information about a statement made by Mr. Powell and does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 142.
 MS. LOGAN.  We could, or for credibility purposes, we may want to run them in very small amounts just because we committed to running something on a date.  You could cancel them, but I don’t see it would be a large cost for just holding a very small term operation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting running something in small amounts for credibility purposes and states that canceling them would not incur a large cost for the small term operation.


Passage number 143.
 MR. POTTER. We could also run them at the same rate as the overnight RRP, and if people want to use it, they could at that point.  There’s a lot of flexibility.  Actually, it would be at some point quite nice to say we said “up to,” but then have an operation that’s smaller than that and just indicate that it is flexible in that way. CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there any further comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is discussing potential solutions and suggestions in a collaborative manner.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 144.
 MR. POWELL.  May I just add one thing.  If you preannounce that you’re going to waive the cap, which I don’t think we should do— CHAIR YELLEN.  I thought we weren’t going to do that.  I thought the plan was that we would not preannounce waiving the cap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Powell suggests that they should not preannounce waiving the cap, while Chair Yellen states that she thought they had already agreed not to do so.


Passage number 145.
 MR. POTTER. Judging what was said today, you would be announcing that at a meeting at which liftoff happens. CHAIR YELLEN.  We would announce it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 146.
 MR. POWELL.  At the meeting.  Okay.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes that someone named Mr. Powell was present at a meeting.


Passage number 147.
 MR. POTTER.  One-day preannouncement. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only includes statements from Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen, without any indication of conflicting views or arguments between them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 148.
 MR. LACKER.  As I noted earlier, I’m going to decline to support term testing.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. Then let me put forward option 2 testing of authorizing term RRPs at quarter-ends through the end of the year.  Do we need to vote on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker declines to support term testing, while Chair Yellen puts forward the option of testing authorizing term RRPs at quarter-ends through the end of the year.


Passage number 149.
 MR. LUECKE.  It is a Committee vote. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. This is a formal vote.  All in favor.  [Show of hands]  All opposed.  [Show of hands]  Okay.  Option 2 carries, and we will return tomorrow morning to the bullets and see where we are on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are simply conducting a vote and discussing the next steps.


Passage number 150.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a short exchange between two individuals where one addresses the other and the other responds affirmatively.


Passage number 151.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I’d like to offer a suggestion, which is costless for me, as you’ll hear, but right now it seems like the fact that the press conference meetings are taking place so close to quarter-end is a cost in terms of Committee decisionmaking.  There is a chance that liftoff will not take place until 2016.  As you and the staff think about scheduling meetings for 2016, I think this is a reason to potentially move meeting dates so that they’re not two weeks before quarter-end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a suggestion being offered by Mr. Kocherlakota.


Passage number 152.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s really hard to do, given all the other things around the world that are set up. CHAIR YELLEN.  Incredibly difficult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the difficulty of a task.


Passage number 153.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m just offering it as an observation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply an observation made by Mr. Kocherlakota. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 154.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In an ideal world you might be right, but I think it’s really hard to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It acknowledges the possibility that the other person might be right but expresses difficulty in achieving the desired outcome.


Passage number 155.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  As I mentioned along with the observation, it’s absolutely costless for me. [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN. We will keep that in mind. No promises.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a light-hearted exchange between Mr. Kocherlakota and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 156.
   MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  The Board meeting has just ended.  Let’s move to our next agenda item, and I am going to call on Steve Kamin to begin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the sequence of events at a meeting.


Passage number 157.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Steve, in your projections of the paths of real dollar indexes, what assumption have you made on Chinese foreign exchange policies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question seeking information about the assumptions made on Chinese foreign exchange policies.


Passage number 158.
 MR. KAMIN. We’re assuming that China’s exchange rate is flat through the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an assumption about China's exchange rate remaining flat.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 159.
 MR. TARULLO.  Flat. Against the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement "Flat against the dollar" suggests that there is disagreement or contention about the value of the currency in question.


Passage number 160.
 MR. KAMIN.  Flat against the dollar for the remainder of the year, and then, after that, they allow it to again start appreciating at a very slow, around 2 percent, pace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no apparent contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about the future exchange rate of a currency and there does not seem to be any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions presented.


Passage number 161.
 MR. TARULLO.  Relative to the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the value of the dollar.


Passage number 162.
 MR. KAMIN.  Again, relative to the dollar.  As you’re thinking it through, the effect so far has been that even though they have actually allowed their renminbi to depreciate slightly against the dollar—very, very minimally, as Simon is using finger language to point out—over the past six months, because the dollar has been rising against most other currencies, the RMB also has been rising.  Our view is that, at a minimum, they’ll continue to depreciate it very slightly further, but our working assumption in our projection is to keep it flat until the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the view that the RMB will continue to depreciate slightly further, but the projection assumes it will remain flat until the end of the year. There is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 163.
 MR. TARULLO. But if one believed that they were likely to adjust their policy so as to continue to have renminbi appreciation on a global trade-weighted basis, but to depreciate somewhat against the dollar, would that change, in a nontrivial way, the projections of real dollar indexes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a hypothetical question being posed by Mr. Tarullo.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 164.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes.  Let’s put it this way.  They’ve already been doing appreciation, but if they basically wanted less broad, real trade-weighted appreciation than they have now been getting, then, if the dollar continued to rise at its previous pace, they would have to depreciate against the dollar more strongly in order to make that happen.  Right now their trade-weighted RMB has appreciated very strongly because they’re following the dollar up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage because it discusses the possibility of the need for stronger depreciation against the dollar in order to achieve a desired level of appreciation.


Passage number 165.
 MR. POTTER. They’ve moved up their fix, and the trading band has widened.  One choice would be to widen that trading band and just let the CNY trade at the top part of that.  Remember, it’s not a convertible currency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about the current situation of the trading band of the CNY (Chinese Yuan). There is no evidence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 166.
 MR. TARULLO.  Right, exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward response.


Passage number 167.
MR. KAMIN. If you were thinking that somehow they wanted to go back to a balancing trend, they’re actually already doing that in a big way, but just not deliberately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining that the subject mentioned is already taking action towards a specific goal.


Passage number 168.
 MR. TARULLO.  Lael, do you want to follow up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking another person if they want to continue the conversation or add something.


Passage number 169.
 MS. BRAINARD. To the extent that they widen the band because it’s already up at the top of the band and they slow, essentially, the rate of appreciation against the world, how much does that matter to us in terms of our trade, and how much does that affect our GDP forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking a question about the potential impact of widening the band on trade and GDP forecast. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 170.
 MR. KAMIN.  It could be material because China accounts for about 20 percent of our trade-weighted dollar, and so a reasonably large change in the pace at which the RMB moves against the dollar would, indeed, have important implications for the overall value of the dollar. Now, I will say that the very small depreciation of the RMB against the dollar that they’ve been doing lately, as well as the relatively small appreciation of the RMB against the dollar that had been taking place in previous periods, are all very much second order compared with the dollar’s movements against other currencies, like the euro and others.  For plausible changes in the rate in which they would change the RMB’s value against the dollar, it might not make much of a difference, but if they wanted to make some big changes, then it certainly could have material implications. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Kamin and Chair Yellen are discussing the potential implications of changes in the value of the Chinese currency (RMB) against the US dollar. While Mr. Kamin suggests that small changes in the RMB's value may not have significant implications compared to movements in other currencies, he acknowledges that larger changes could have material implications. Chair Yellen does not dispute or contradict this point in her response.


Passage number 171.
 MR. FISCHER.  Just trying to understand, I am never quite sure which way is up with dollar indexes.  A 30 percent gap has opened up between the emerging market economies and the advanced foreign economies.  What does that mean.  That the advanced foreign economies have depreciated by 30 percent against the emerging market economies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and stating a fact about the 30 percent gap between the emerging market economies and the advanced foreign economies.


Passage number 172.
 MR. KAMIN. Yes. Basically, the foreign industrial countries have depreciated against the dollar more than have the emerging market currencies.  Therefore, the AFE currencies must have depreciated relative to the emerging market currencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the depreciation of foreign industrial countries' currencies relative to the dollar and the implication that the AFE currencies must have also depreciated relative to the emerging market currencies.


Passage number 173.
 MR. POTTER.  Japan and the euro area have depreciated a lot in the past year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact that Japan and the euro area have depreciated significantly in the past year.


Passage number 174.
 MR. FISCHER. The emerging market economies, relative to us, still look more or less where they’ve been for the past five, six years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is describing the current state of emerging market economies compared to the past five or six years. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 175.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, harkening back to our earlier discussion, first of all, one of the reasons why the aggregate of EME currencies has not changed so much is because China is in the aggregate.  China is about 20 percent of the trade-weighted dollar.  EMEs are around, if memory serves, 55 percent of the trade-weighted dollar.  China accounts for a big hunk of the EME aggregate, and, therefore, when you look at non-China EME currencies, they’ve moved much more.  They’ve depreciated much more against the dollar than you would see just from that picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing factual information about the relative weights of China and other emerging market economies (EMEs) in the trade-weighted dollar, without expressing any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 176.
 MR. FISCHER.  Right.  Then the other question was for David.  David, I’m never quite sure when there’s a move in the mean of some expectation.  For example, for the average expected CPI inflation for the next 10 years from the Survey of Professional Forecasters was 3.3 percent in 1995, and it is now approaching 2 percent.  You look at the rate of change, and one could look at the level.  I’m not quite sure.  What makes you look at the rate of change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification from David.


Passage number 177.
 MR. WILCOX.  Part of why we’re looking at the profile of responses is because an important touchstone of our projection has been that inflation expectations are anchored.  That’s been our statement, full stop.  We’ve maintained that assumption in this current projection, and we feel obligated to be vigilant—to be on the lookout for evidence that could call that into question.  The CPI responses haven’t yet caused us to throw in the towel on that touchstone we used to construct the expectation, but it’s not going to take a lot more downward movement there to relent on that story or begin to qualify it more seriously than we have. The level isn’t particularly worrisome at this point, though I think one could have a vigorous conversation about that—well, so let’s have that conversation for just a second.  For these professional forecasters, suppose it’s really the CPI forecast that matters for their clients’ interests.  Historically, a more normal spread between the CPI and the PCE index has been something more in the neighborhood of 30 basis points than 10.  If you took that historical average spread from the 2.1 percent that they’re currently reporting, you’d have something that’s in the neighborhood of 1.8 percent for a longer-term PCE inflation expectation.  In level terms, to go to your question, that wouldn’t be particularly worrisome because that’s where we, at the moment, have pegged our longer-term inflation expectations. But, as I suggested, any further downward movement from there would begin to give us some greater concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing inflation expectations and the potential impact of CPI responses on those expectations. They mention the need to be vigilant for evidence that could call those expectations into question and discuss the current level of inflation not being particularly worrisome. There is a mention of a potential "vigorous conversation" about the level of inflation, but it is not presented as a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 178.
 MR. FISCHER. Okay.  Well, I suggest we follow this up when the meeting concludes because I have a feeling that we want to make progress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests following up on the matter after the meeting, indicating a willingness to make progress.


Passage number 179.
 MR. POTTER.  Can I just say that in the survey that we do with dealers which asks explicitly for their assessment of the five-year, five-year-forward expectation—we’re not seeing that much of a change. We’ve seen a little bit, and these are pretty similar people to those who submit to the Survey of Professional Forecasters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact and providing information about the survey results they have observed.


Passage number 180.
 MR. WILCOX. Indeed.  We, too, have backed out the longer-term, the 6-to-10-year expectations from the SPF regarding inflation in the consumer price index, and in the SPF database, they too show less downward movement.  There’s always a question.  What I don’t want us to fall subject to is the proverb about the frog who gets boiled by the water whose temperature progressively moves up.  It feels like the water temperature has just moved up from degrees to a few degrees above that in terms of the evidence here around longer-term inflation expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and expressing concern about potential inflationary pressures.


Passage number 181.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Well, among the many things I’ve learned is, apparently frogs do jump out of the water as it’s heated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact that the speaker has learned.


Passage number 182.
  [Laughter] MR. WILCOX.  Then I’ll have to stop using that little aphorism. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a lighthearted exchange between Mr. Wilcox and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 183.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A lot seems to hinge in your thinking on inflation expectations, and one of the charts indicates a pretty high correlation of long-term inflation compensation to oil prices.  I think we know that short-term surveys and consumer attitudes are affected by gasoline or, effectively, oil prices. I wanted to understand a little bit more what went into your forecast of oil prices and how much confidence you really have in it, because you’re showing oil prices rebounding.  I looked at it a little bit over the weekend, and there’s some interplay in forward rates between the cost of storage and a prediction of future prices. There can be forward rates that are simply the cost of storage with very little prediction of future prices.  There’s a lot of noise in the market today on both sides of this question of whether oil prices are rising or whether at least WTI, because of U.S. inventories, is likely to fall. This is, I know, a little bit of a roundabout question, but can you talk a bit about your confidence in your oil price forecast here and how deeply we went into it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and more information about the Federal Reserve's forecast of oil prices, specifically regarding their confidence in the forecast.


Passage number 184.
 MR. KAMIN.  Sure. Just to answer your question, we’re not very confident in our oil price projection, but let me explain how we constructed it.  Actually, it is based on futures markets for oil.  We basically take the futures curve for different categories of oil out several years, and that represents the basis for our forecast.  Frankly, that’s the best basis we can comeup with because that futures curve represents market participants’ best guess as to what will be those prevailing prices. That was the approach that we basically used for decades.  And moving into 2008 when oil prices were experiencing tremendous fluctuations, there was a lot of concern on the part of the Committee that our forecasts weren’t very helpful in predicting the future.  Our division did a full-court press to look at the forecast and ask how we could improve it.  In the event, we decided that we couldn’t improve it by very much.  One thing we could do was take a look at market participants’ outlook for the global economy, compare it with our own, and if there were any differences, we could adjust the futures curve for oil prices to take that into account.  We regularly do that, but the effect on our forecast path is not great.  Right now, we alter the path to raise it by 0.5 percent per year, which is very little if you take into account the fact that we may be predicting a little bit more exchange rate appreciation than the market, to take into account some differences between our appraisal of the global economic outlook and the markets’. Basically, we’re stuck with the futures curve, and the upward slope is predicated on a couple of very reasonable premises.  One of them is that, over time, the low oil prices will reduce the incentive for production and production should decelerate.  And we’re certainly already seeing evidence of that in declining rig counts and in declining investment in the energy sector.  Directionally, that’s a very reasonable premise, and that should give you, eventually, some upward tilt to prices. Another premise that seems to underlie the upward curve is that, over time, the global economy should strengthen, and that, too, should lead to some increase in prices.  Again, the direction seems reasonable.  What’s happened since January has been, first, the evidence of declining rig counts seemed so tangible that markets decided they were sure that, indeed, production was going to slow, and so oil prices rose and the whole futures curve rose.   Then more recently, as markets took note of soaring inventory levels, and as concerns emerged that these inventories might actually exceed the storage capacity available to put aside this oil, thus basically leading in a figurative sense an overflow of oil onto the market, those oil prices have come back down. Those are reasonable explanations, and that leaves us, again, with our upward tilt for oil prices, but do we have a lot of conviction that for sure that’s going to transpire.  No.  There have been a lot of analyses of how low oil prices could go, analyses looking at different fields in terms of what are the operating costs for those fields.  Those analyses suggest that oil prices could go down to $40 per barrel before you see shutdowns significant enough to bring oil prices back up.  We do have a lot of uncertainty.  It seems perfectly reasonable that, over the longer term, the oil prices should start trending upward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining how they constructed their oil price projection and acknowledging the uncertainty and lack of conviction in the forecast. They also discuss reasonable premises that support the upward trend of oil prices, but they acknowledge the uncertainty and variability of the market.


Passage number 185.
 MR. POTTER.  There is tremendous uncertainty.  I think that’s the crucial part. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen. They are discussing the presence of uncertainty but do not express conflicting views.


Passage number 186.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  David, I took note of your very careful discussion about a number of choices that you made in putting the projection together, and I want to take you back to a choice that you made some time ago having to do with the 2014 first-quarter GDP growth rate.  The reason for this is, as I looked at the table from the SEPs that I mentioned this morning—and it’s also evident in your exhibit 3—that at liftoff pretty much everybody’s core inflation rate is 1.3, 1.2, or 1.1 percent.  There’s one that’s 1.4.  Well, there are two, but those are participants who have liftoff in 2016.  That’s somebody else, myself and somebody else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they noticed a particular choice made by the person they are addressing and wants to discuss it further.


Passage number 187.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Voldemort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement as it only mentions "Voldemort" without any context or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 188.
 MR. EVANS. I don’t remember the rules here. But when I look at the likely rationale for this, it seems to be that everybody has low unemployment rates, there’s been strong employment growth, and the economy is going well.  And I look at this and see the Phillips curve is alive and well here. That is, the inflation forecasting power coming out of that relationship seems to be why people have so much confidence.  The size of gap seems to be important in this regard, and you mention that in your figure 3 on output gap estimates.  I want to go back to the GDP estimate for the first quarter of 2014 because you made the choice that the bad number was all potential.  That’s a tough judgment, I understand that, and I was reminded of that when I looked at the staff’s decomposition of potential GDP:  You’ve got 1.6 percent for 2011 and 2013, half a point for 2014, and for 2015, it’s 1.6.  I wonder if you were instead just treating 2014:Q1 as a missing observation—never even saw that number and used monthly data to forecast it—some Kalman filter might put something in between there.  I think the implications of this choice are modestly important because those gaps would be more negative if we had that. Could you discuss again your thinking on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question or request for clarification and discussion on a specific topic.


Passage number 189.
 MR. WILCOX. Bill, does this fall into your supply-side portfolio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question asked by Mr. Wilcox to someone named Bill about their responsibilities or area of expertise.


Passage number 190.
 MR. EVANS.  I tried to mention this at the outset of the question so that you could think about it while I was talking.  [Laughter].  I try to be helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. Evans is simply stating that he tried to mention something earlier in order to be helpful. The laughter indicates a light-hearted tone and does not suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 191.
 MR. WASCHER.  I think the basic answer is, we continue to consider 2014:Q1 GDP growth as anomalously weak, and we are treating it as measurement error. Because we don’t want to let that measurement error affect our estimate of the gap, we also build that into potential output.  That may or may not be the right assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their perspective and considering the possibility of their assumption being incorrect, but there is no clear disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 192.
 MR. EVANS.  It is very unusual to put a 100 percent weight on a hypothesis like that, though, isn’t it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing that it is uncommon to give complete weight to a hypothesis.


Passage number 193.
  MR. WASCHER.  We put a lot of weight on that explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The speaker, Mr. Wascher, is stating that they value or consider the explanation to be important, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 194.
 MR. EVANS. Now I heard the discussion about the choice you made about the natural rate, that after careful consideration it might be not the right time to move it down to 5 from 5¼ percent.  But if you made the judgment in the first quarter of 2014 that there was more of an output gap than looking at unemployment, you might kind of go, “Well, a lower natural rate would be more in line with a larger gap, too.”  I am just asking, upon further reflection, if you go back, do you still have the same confidence in that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement by Mr. Evans and there is no indication of anyone contradicting or opposing his point.


Passage number 195.
 MR. WASCHER.  Well, I am not sure we ever had a lot of confidence in it, but we have maintained that assumption about the anomalous drop in GDP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker states that they have not had a lot of confidence in their assumption about the anomalous drop in GDP but they have maintained it. There is no clear contention or disagreement mentioned in this passage.


Passage number 196.
 MR. EVANS.  But the output gap estimate in figure 3 looks a little more rosy in part because of that choice, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a statement that seeks clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 197.
 MR. WILCOX.  That judgment informs the contour of the Tealbook estimate of the gap, but it does not inform the contour of the FRB/US gap, nor of EDO.  Those are purely mechanical, model-based efforts to distill the data.  Now, it doesn’t mean that they are not suffused with uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that certain judgments inform the Tealbook estimate of the gap, while other models like FRB/US and EDO are purely mechanical and data-driven, but still subject to uncertainty.


Passage number 198.
 MR. EVANS.  That is helpful.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 199.
 MR. WILCOX.  But they are not contaminated by our judgment about the best treatment of the anomalous behavior of GDP in the first quarter of 2014.  Let me also reiterate the basis for that judgment, which was that GDP growth is currently estimated to have declined.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply stating that the judgment about the best treatment of the anomalous behavior of GDP in the first quarter of 2014 is not contaminated by personal judgment. It is not presenting any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 200.
 MR. WASCHER.  Two percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage "Two percent" does not express any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 201.
 MR. WILCOX. Against that backdrop, what we saw was a still significantly improving labor market with payroll employment increasing by nearly 200,000 jobs per month, which is considerably faster than the demographic requirement to absorb the increase in the labor force. The unemployment rate was coming down.  You may not feel our pain, but we did.  I didn’t know how to understand the world through that period if it were the case that we maintained an assumption that potential GDP growth was increasing at something like 1¾ percent, which by the way is where we think the “uncontaminated” estimate of potential GDP really is. We put the measurement in there, as Bill described, but as a matter of pragmatism and convenience, not as a matter of conviction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply provides information and his personal perspective on the matter without any conflicting views.


Passage number 202.
 MR. EVANS. Okay.  Thank you.  I appreciate that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of polite and appreciative statements from both Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen, indicating agreement rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 203.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have a question for Steve.  How unusual is dollar appreciation of this magnitude over this period of time.  How concerned should we be about it in terms of the implications for the economic growth outlook, in your opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question and seeking Steve's opinion on the matter, without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 204.
 MR. KAMIN. In terms of the big picture, there have been two much larger long swings in the dollar since we floated in the 1970s—one of them in the early-to-mid 1980s, and then more recently in the late 1990s, peaking in 2002 and coming down.  Both of those were in the neighborhood of the steepness of what we have seen recently, but obviously they went on much further. We did take note of the fact that our upward revision to the average level of the dollar going forward was very large—more than 6 percent on a real basis. We looked at our data going back to the global financial crisis, around early 2008, to see whether we had made other revisions that size.  This 6¼ percent that we just did was the largest.  But there were a few in the 5 percent range, during the run-up of the dollar during the crisis, but basically we are in very unusual outlier territory here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing historical data and revisions made by their organization, without expressing any disagreement.


Passage number 205.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It might be useful to do a little bit of a case study analysis, because the 1980s was a very different episode.  That was when we had very expansive fiscal policy in the United States, which drove up U.S. real rates really high, causing capital to flow here to push up the dollar.  I view this as a very different episode, because U.S. fiscal policy is pretty neutral, and we’re getting so much firming of the dollar.  I guess I am a concerned citizen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an analysis and expressing their own viewpoint without opposing any other argument or perspective. They simply state their own opinion as a concerned citizen.


Passage number 206.
 MR. KAMIN.  I take your point, and my colleagues and I have certainly started to think a little bit more about what might be the case if we really are at the—not really the beginning now, but let’s say the earlier stages of another what I will call “dollar super cycle.”  Now, what is true, of course, is that the most recent dollar super cycle in the late 1990s was actually very much a feature of our strength.  But that may not be true this time, although to some extent it is.  Anyway, we are going to continue that analysis, looking at those earlier episodes to see what clues they might have for the future.  Although we are, at this point, by no means committed to the view that indeed the dollar is going to continue to go up, we are cognizant of the risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although the speaker acknowledges that there is a different perspective, there is no clear contention or disagreement stated in the passage.


Passage number 207.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. Why don’t we begin our round, and start with President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 208.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage because no conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments are presented.


Passage number 209.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In this cycle of contacts in my District, roles were reversed somewhat compared with earlier periods.  In earlier periods, we noted improving data and presented an optimistic outlook, and our directors and contacts sometimes responded, “We’re not seeing it yet.” This time around, in contrast, we presented a current picture of mixed and even conflicting data and an outlook that, while in no way pessimistic, had lots of elements of uncertainty.  Our contacts, for the most part, remained upbeat.  Our directors   and contacts report that demand continues to improve at a steady pace.  Importantly, many contacts seem disposed to back up that outlook with investment spending and higher labor compensation.  A not insignificant number of firms say they intend to ramp up capital spending, and a significant share characterize their investment growth as expansion oriented. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s GDP-tracking estimate suggests a very soft first-quarter growth rate. Admittedly, a lot of first-quarter data are still to be published, but, at this point, what we call our “nowcast” model is showing real GDP growth significantly below 1 percent.  Our directors expressed doubt about our muted-growth story.  One reason for the upbeat tone is improving margins.  Firms indicate that they are treating the drop in commodity prices, including energy costs, as an opportunity to boost margins at least temporarily.  Any pass-through to their customers is expected to occur only gradually over the year and in response to competitive pressures. We were somewhat surprised by comments of our directors and contacts running businesses of national scope regarding February weather.  A number of contacts said work disruptions this year have been as bad as or worse than last year.  In these reports, the weather effects on economic activity were not limited to the Northeast. In the retail sector, while most firms have not yet seen the benefit of lower gasoline prices in consumer spending, one low-end retailer in the dollar segment did report a sales boost.  Most others anticipate improved sales as a result of falling gasoline prices as the weather improves. The government sector in some areas is described as now feeling the effect of lower energy prices in falling revenues. In our interviews this cycle, we asked about wage pressure. We heard more reports of growing wage pressure with some of that pressure in lower-skill job categories.  The Wal-Mart announcement has a number of employers planning for increases in lower-wage employee  categories. The often mentioned difficulty in finding qualified applicants is now extending beyond the usual list of hard-to-fill positions.  Labor turnover was also reported to be on the rise.  In our region, layoffs in the energy exploration sector have helped some businesses fill skilled-trade positions, particularly welders. Turning to the national economy and my take on the incoming data, I’ve marked down once again my near-term economic growth, unemployment, and inflation forecasts, based on the tone of the data, but I’ve left the basic narrative of my forecast unchanged.  I have real GDP growth about a half of a percentage point above the Tealbook projection over the next three years.  Otherwise my outlook looks much the same as that of the Tealbook.  I have not yet fully bought into the downshift reflected in this meeting’s Tealbook outlook.  In internal discussions in our Bank over the past two years, my staff and I have employed a simplifying device to describe the path of the economy.  We have argued that the economy is in a 3 percent world, or a 2 percent world that prevailed from the start of the recovery to mid-2013.  That’s been the basis of our economic narrative.  The staff preparing the Tealbook seems to have concluded the economy is back in that 2 percent world for the forecast horizon.  The Tealbook forecast is now underpinned by slightly lower longer-term growth potential that is, in turn, reflective of lower productivity growth.  The staff seems to expect a fundamentally slower economy over the medium term. As I said, I’m not there yet.  However, I have changed my assessment of the forecast risk and now have the risks to economic growth and inflation tilted to the downside.  I find the disharmonious character of the current economic growth and inflation data versus the payroll employment trend to be concerning.  I’m continuing to put a lot of faith in the transitory factors explanation for readings on economic growth and inflation. With a potentially historic policy   decision pending, this is a particularly tough time to read the underlying trends, and I’ll put this thought in more tactical terms in the policy round.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 210.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Discussions with business leaders in my District focused on two distinctive features of the economy this winter:  snow and the West Coast port strike.  While the amount of snow that closed the U.S. government barely warrants a visit by the snow plow in Boston [laughter], the many feet of snow in successive storms accompanied by extremely cold weather have been quite disruptive.  In fact, commuter rail service into Boston is still badly disrupted after more than a month.  Various Boston museums reported visits in February were down between 25 and 50 percent relative to last year.  Tourist sites, restaurants, and retailers all reported significant declines, with some making analogies to the drop that occurred after September 11, 2001.  On a more positive note, crime was down significantly in February because quick getaways are not possible when roads and sidewalks have three feet of snow on them.  [Laughter]  Many businesses that rely on complex supply chains, particularly light manufacturing and suppliers to aerospace, reported that the West Coast strikes had caused significant slowdowns as a result of shortages of parts, either at their company or from other parts suppliers.  In sum, the effect on the first quarter from these factors may be somewhat higher than anticipated in the Tealbook. Looking beyond the first quarter, I had been expecting real GDP growth to be well above potential this year.  With the dollar continuing to appreciate and weigh on net exports, I am now anticipating growth only modestly above its potential rate, slowing the decline in the unemployment rate.  I expect the slowdown to be reinforced by more workers returning to the labor force.  Consequently, our forecast envisions a more gradual approach toward my current   estimate of the natural rate of unemployment at 5 percent. In light of the lack of wage pressure to date, I could easily believe that the natural rate of unemployment is below 5 percent, and I will revisit this estimate if we continue to see very modest wage and salary increases as labor markets, I hope, continue to improve. On the inflation front, most private forecasters and many of our own SEP submissions have been anticipating a gradual return to 2 percent inflation.  In fact, forecasters have repeatedly assumed that we would be close to 2 percent PCE inflation within two years, an expectation that has consistently been foiled by the data.  But, undeterred, most forecasters have simply moved the assumption forward for another try with the next forecast round.  This pattern of recurring forecast errors makes me less confident that models that rely on the strong assumption that well-anchored expectations will drive inflation to 2 percent are capturing current inflation dynamics. These serially correlated errors should make us less confident of the models and cause us to place more weight on the incoming wage and price data and less weight on models, especially when the incoming data do not conform to the forecast generated by our models. As has been the case for some years, the most recent inflation data do not indicate that we are likely to quickly return to our inflation target.  At our December meeting, the range for core PCE inflation forecasts for the 2015 SEP submissions was 1½ to 2.2 percent.  However, the incoming price data indicate that even the lowest forecast in the range for December will likely be too high. The Tealbook has lowered its forecast for 2015 Q4-to-Q4 core PCE inflation from 1½ percent to 1.3 percent, and I have lowered mine to 1.2 percent.  While some may dismiss recent low-inflation readings as largely reflecting the indirect effects of lower oil prices seeping into core inflation, my staff’s work on oil’s effect on core prices finds this effect to be, similar to the Tealbook, quite small.  Similarly, my staff finds only a small effect for the indirect effect of  non-oil import prices. In addition, market indicators of expected inflation outcomes should make us less confident that we are returning to 2 percent inflation over the next two years. Breakeven inflation rates remain quite low, and inflation probabilities derived from inflation caps and floors have recently implied a substantial increase in the probability that inflation remains below 1½ percent over the next 10 years. I do not expect that by June we will have enough data to make us reasonably confident that we are returning to our inflation target over the next two years.  As a result, the appropriate policy assumption in the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s SEP submission entails liftoff in September, and I remain uncertain about how much evidence of increasing inflation will be available even by then.  In addition, even with a liftoff delayed until September, I expect only a gradual increase in interest rates. In part, this reflects my expectation that progress on inflation will likely be slow.  It also reflects that I’ve reduced my estimate of the longer-run real federal funds rate to 1½ percent.  This, in turn, reflects the continued disappointing productivity numbers that, in part, account for the significant labor market tightening despite only lackluster real GDP growth by historical standards. Finally, among the risks that concern me are the continued weakness in China and the possibility of more Greek tragedy that stresses the European economy, each of which could cause a negative surprise that policy at the zero lower bound is poorly situated to address.  As we get to the middle of the year, we may have a better sense of the likelihood that these risks materialize, and pose a greater potential drag on the U.S. economy.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a presentation of various economic factors and forecasts.


Passage number 211.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On balance, our regional information continues to indicate broad improvement in overall economic activity.  Anecdotal reports received from the service sector have been quite positive for a few months now.  An executive of a sizable retail chain has seen a distinct improvement in consumer spending behavior since last fall. Early registrations and orders for next month’s High Point furniture market are up notably from last year.  And a pickle manufacturer in North Carolina reported a surprisingly busy winter and noted the construction was under way for a new production line.  And, yes, this is the Mount Olive pickle company located at the corner of Cucumber and Vine in Mt. Olive, North Carolina, in case you were wondering.  [Laughter]  The preliminary results of our monthly survey of service-producing firms leaves the diffusion index at 12, a level that continues to indicate expansion.  The preliminary March reading on our manufacturing index, however, is negative 10, which indicates overall contraction.  Written survey responses and other anecdotal reports suggest that some of the weakness can be attributed to weakening exports and some to snow and ice in February. Both our manufacturing and service-sector surveys are signaling a more widespread pickup in wages.  I was pleased to note the appearance of the Fifth District service-sector wage index in the alternative scenario box in the Tealbook and that it has proven to be significantly correlated with compensation per hour, which the author argues should be our preferred measure of labor compensation.  Our service-sector wage index has been quite elevated of late.  It was plus 23 last month, and the preliminary number for March is plus 14.  Those levels would signal broader wage increases than have been indicated by the average hourly earnings series, and that’s consistent with the increasingly frequent reports we hear lately from our contacts of wage pressures.  For example, according to a staffing firm in South Carolina, “Quality candidates have choices and are being made multiple offers.  Our clients are beginning to understand this and are moving forward with generally higher wages.”  That comment is relatively typical.Turning to national conditions, I noted with great interest that the Tealbook’s GDP forecast has converged to mine.  For 2015, we’re both projecting 2.2 percent growth and we’re not far apart for 2016 either.  My own forecast for 2015 is little changed from the previous projection.  In fact, it has been basically stuck at 2.2 percent for nearly two years, but there’s obviously a lot of data to come yet for 2015. The critical aspect of the outlook, I believe, is the fairly robust trend in consumer spending, recent retail sales readings notwithstanding.  The consumer spending trend appears to be attributable to the strong labor market, improving income prospects, and rising real wealth, and should be sufficient to keep GDP growth above trend going forward.  Other components of GDP are a mixed bag.  A sharp decline this year in oil and gas drilling and slow growth in other categories of construction will damp nonresidential construction spending.  Net exports will also be a drag on top-line growth.  On the other hand, despite recent choppiness, solid business investment in equipment and intangibles will likely boost top-line growth.  For housing, I don’t expect it to affect overall growth one way or another.  Productivity I view as unlikely to accelerate significantly relative to recent trends.  I think the modest GDP growth in my and the Tealbook’s projection is still large enough to generate continued firming in labor market conditions. On the inflation front, prices have been held down lately by two clearly temporary factors: low oil prices and the strengthening dollar.  I don’t expect much, if any, further decline in crude oil prices, and I share the Tealbook’s assessment that the foreign exchange value of the dollar is likely to stabilize this year, although there’s some obvious risks around that forecast.  Meanwhile, measures of inflation expectations remain well anchored, and so I am confident now  that, barring further adverse shocks, both headline and core inflation will move to 2 percent once these two temporary influences are behind us.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Okay.  I suggest we take a break.  Now, the only question is, how long a break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 212.
 MR. FISCHER.  There’s a rule that no coffee break should last less than 10 minutes. CHAIR YELLEN. Why don’t we say 10 minutes. [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN.  Let’s continue with President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer is stating a rule about coffee breaks lasting at least 10 minutes, and Chair Yellen suggests making it exactly 10 minutes. There is no opposition or argument in their exchange.


Passage number 213.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In line with a lot of the recent spending data, many of my directors and other business contacts indicated some slowing in the growth of their businesses. For instance, our director from Manpower said U.S. demand for temporary workers has been soft so far this year.  Our trucking director reported that business has slowed nationally, and the steelmakers we talked to have seen prices fall and inventories increase.  However, just about everybody remained upbeat about the outlook for economic growth going forward.  They attributed the recent softening to weather or just the usual variation we might expect to see in a healthy economy.  My conversation with Ford was pretty typical.  The company suspected that weather was a big part of the decline in February sales. It actually upgraded its 2015 forecast a touch and modestly increased production plans for the second quarter.  Its biggest note of caution was over the weak yen, which was providing a bit of a pricing advantage to its Japanese competitors.  That type of comment is not unusual.  The lower dollar also appears to be helping in Europe, which that director from Manpower again said was an area in which demand was picking up, and in which business was doing quite well. My own outlook for the real economy hasn’t changed a great deal since our previous meeting.  Economic growth has obviously been a bit softer in the first quarter, but that softness   seems likely to be transitory.  I expect growth for this year and next to be around 2¾ percent.  That’s actually a little slower than I was thinking at the previous meeting.  In addition to the recent weaker data, the continued strengthening of the dollar has caused us to trim our outlook a wee bit. Still, economic growth should be strong enough to bring unemployment down to around 5 percent by the end of 2016, even with the participation rate moving closer to trend.  I don’t see an unemployment rate of 5 percent as overshooting full employment.  Five percent is what I had written down in my SEP for the natural rate of unemployment.  In view of the changing composition of the labor force, that seems conservative.  It could be a touch lower.  That would be consistent with the anemic wage growth and low inflationary pressures we’ve seen for several years. Wage growth is not impressive, even in parts of the economy like manufacturing, which seem to be doing very well, and the workweek is at a post–World War II high. In terms of the inflation outlook, I think it is still very hard to be confident that we’re headed back to our target in anything like an acceptable period of time.  Like others, my SEP submission for core inflation is lower than last time not only in the near term, but also a touch lower further out in the forecast period.  I see inflation only slowly crawling back up to 2 percent sometime in 2018 or later.  Importantly, the data on core inflation have continued to be soft, and we probably haven’t yet seen the full effects of the stronger dollar.  We really ought to keep in mind that the dollar’s appreciation is already imparting some restrictiveness that is somewhat like a monetary policy tightening, and, as I already mentioned, wage growth is far below where it should be if we were hitting our inflation target. I certainly think that if the labor market continues to improve the way it has, we will eventually see higher inflation, but we need to be appropriately humble about our ability to  forecast inflation.  The degree of slack in the labor force is quite uncertain, and the response of inflation to slack is, to put it mildly, uncertain.  Indeed, in evaluating inflation forecasting methodologies, it’s not that easy to beat a random walk.  The recent level of core inflation is usually a pretty good indicator of where inflation will be over the next one to two years.  I think that means that to be confident inflation is headed back to target, we need to see some firming in the actual wage and inflation data, and we should also see some improvement in inflation breakevens. Their small retracement in recent weeks is welcome, but market measures of inflation compensation continue to be well below the level we would anticipate if inflation was expected to approach our target in the medium term. To conclude, I think we are well on our way to achieving the employment part of our mandate in a reasonable amount of time, but my outlook for inflation is nowhere near satisfactory. When thinking about policy liftoff and taking a risk-management view, I just can’t see the argument for hurrying.  We need to manage the downside risk to inflation expectations and the risk to our credibility if we prematurely exit.  That means we really ought to have a reasonable degree of confidence that inflation is moving up to target before actively tightening financial conditions.  For me, I just can’t see how we can credibly say we have that degree of confidence in the current inflation environment.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any significant contention or disagreement. The speaker provides information and makes observations based on that information, but it does not contain any explicit or strong disagreements.


Passage number 214.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The 10th District economy continues to expand at a moderate pace with low unemployment, although the energy and agriculture sectors in the region have weakened.  District contacts report sharp declines in drilling activity and planned capital expenditures.  At the same time, drilling has increasingly focused on core areas, leading to greater production efficiencies and slight increases in overall production.  Crude oil stocks continue to build, and, at the current rate Cushing, Oklahoma, could reach storage capacity in late April or May.  For District states, particularly Oklahoma, Wyoming, and New Mexico, slower energy activity is negatively affecting state revenues.  In the agriculture sector, farm income is expected to decline considerably in 2015, but farmland values have generally remained steady. Weaker profit margins and reduced cash flow have led to a significant rise in farmers’ short-term financing needs and related bank lending. For the national economy, I continue to expect above-trend growth over the medium term, although I marked down my estimate for near-term GDP growth largely because of weaker recent indicators of business spending.  I also revised down my near-term inflation forecast, although I continue to see the current weakness as reflecting the temporary effects of lower energy prices and the stronger dollar.   Over the medium term, I expect the economy to grow at a moderate pace, supported mainly by consumer spending.  Although many consumers stayed home during February’s unusually heavy snowstorms, I expect they will head back to the stores in the months ahead as more moderate weather returns, with spending supported by savings from lower gas prices and ongoing increases in employment income and wealth. With payroll growth averaging 230,000 jobs per month over the past two years, I continue to expect stronger wage growth over the medium term.  My staff has noted that employment growth usually does not translate immediately into higher wage growth.  The contemporaneous correlation between growth in average hourly earnings and employment growth is almost zero, but the correlation between wage growth and employment growth from about two years prior is much higher, with a correlation coefficient of 0.7.  Indeed, some evidence of rising nominal wage growth is already apparent in the data.  Wage growth among job switchers and job stayers indicates that both groups saw wages accelerate in the fourth quarter.  Looking ahead, a further rise in the quits rate should support stronger wage growth as job switchers command considerably higher wages than those who stay. The Tealbook’s alternative view on wages is similar to work done by my staff, which suggests compositional changes in the workforce could be masking underlying wage pressures, particularly as measured by average hourly earnings.  As the labor market tightens, firms are likely hiring less-experienced workers, paying them relatively low wages, and, as a result, dragging down average wages.  Looking at measures of compensation that account for such compositional changes points to greater wage pressure than averages suggest.  For example, the employment cost index shows a modest acceleration in compensation over the past year, and   median expected income growth from the University of Michigan consumer sentiment survey has moved up this year from low levels last year. Turning to inflation, I expect low inflation to persist in the face of low energy prices and a strengthening dollar.  While longer-term market-based measures have recently dropped, they are above their lows from earlier in the year, and survey-based measures have remained anchored near our 2 percent objective.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 215.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In the intermeeting period, we talked to a wide range of contacts in the Ninth District about compensation pressures.  Overall, the unemployment rate in the District is now below 4 percent, markedly below where it was in late 2006.  Indeed, in the twin cities of Minneapolis-Saint Paul, which has more than one-third of the economic activity in the District, the unemployment rate is close to 3 percent. Nonetheless, other than in a few specific occupations and locales, compensation pressures remain, at best, moderate in the District, with wage increases typically reported to be in the 2 to 3 percent range. Why are wage pressures so constrained.  Labor leaders we talked to attributed the relatively low compensation pressures to increased post-recession risk aversion on the part of workers.  Consistent with the implications of bargaining theory, they report that this risk aversion reduces the bargaining power of workers relative to firms. For their part, business leaders reported being flush with liquidity, but they saw many other ways to use those resources, like capital expenditure, rather than paying workers. We saw these stories from both sides of the table as largely consistent with each other.  Other than in a few specialties, businesses continue to be able to find the workers that they want without paying them a lot. Let me turn to the national economy.  In terms of prices, as in December, my inflation outlook remains subdued.  Under the monetary policy stance assumed in Tealbook, Book A, I don’t see inflation returning to 2 percent until late 2018.  The behavior of market-based measures of inflation expectations continues to be a matter of significant concern.  The five-year, five-year-forward measures remain near historical lows. We also closely track the two-year, three-year measures, and these, too, are near historical lows.  In my view, participants in these markets appear to be putting nontrivial weight on an event in which economic activity and prices are both unduly low because the central bank is unwilling or unable to provide appropriate accommodation.  This is a signal that low inflation and the low-inflation outlook has reduced the credibility of the inflation target. Turning to the real side of the economy, my outlook for economic growth has weakened somewhat since December.  I now expect that the economy will grow about 2.7 percent in 2015.  This growth should be sufficiently fast to deliver a further modest decline in the unemployment rate by the end of the year.  I do expect this decline in the unemployment rate will be associated with an increase in labor input as measured by per capita employment and per capita hours.  We may also start to see some upward pressure on labor compensation.  But, as I just noted, nominal wage growth, and compensation growth more generally, remain very subdued, even in the relatively healthy labor market of the Ninth District. Overall, I expect the gratifying improvement in labor market outcomes that we saw in 2014 to continue.  It is important, though, to keep this improvement in perspective: 2014 was one good year, following four disappointing years in the labor market.  In the context of a very subdued inflation outlook, I believe that we should be doing what we can to deliver more years like 2014.  We should not be trying to use our tools to choke off the pace of the relatively nascent recovery of the labor market. Reflecting my outlook for prices and employment, my appropriate policy rate path involves deferring liftoff until late 2016.  But I will leave a full discussion of that until tomorrow, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The labor leaders attribute the low compensation pressures to increased post-recession risk aversion on the part of workers, while the business leaders attribute it to having other ways to use their resources.


Passage number 216.
MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  We face two significant puzzles in understanding the current macroeconomic situation.  The first is that labor market conditions have been improving impressively.  Hiring has been strong.  The unemployment rate is getting close to SEP estimates of the natural rate, while both actual and expected GDP growth have been a good deal less impressive.  The second is that despite the relatively low rate of unemployment, inflation, even core inflation, expected a year ahead shows few signs of raising its head. Now, by definition, the first puzzle—the difference between GDP growth and employment growth—can be explained by the behavior of productivity, but that just pushes the problem to another question, which is, can we explain the behavior of productivity. That’s difficult.  It could be a GDP data problem, one that would lessen as successive GDP data estimates are presented, but I suspect that even the final data will continue to show that productivity growth has fallen dramatically.  This could reflect the mix of economic growth, with employment gains being more weighted than usual to low-tech and low-productivity service jobs.  Whatever the source, we should bear in mind the Herbert Stein wisdom that the difference between a growth rate of 1 percent and a growth rate of 2 percent is 100 percent.  This means that the productivity slowdown is a major long-term problem for the United States, but in terms of our target variables, it’s not directly relevant to our immediate policy concerns, which relate to inflation and unemployment. In the Tealbook, the staff has responded to the latest discrepancy between spending and labor market data by lowering their estimate of structural productivity growth.  The staff’s view is that when there appears to be inconsistency between national income and labor market data, the labor market data are generally more reliable.  However, part of the problem may be, as has often been said around the table, that we need to look beyond U-3 to understand labor market developments, perhaps even more than the staff does in the Tealbook.  U-3 was almost certainly not a complete measure of slack in earlier stages of the recovery, but several anomalies are gradually being worked out, be it the long-term unemployment rate or the percentage of those working part time for economic reasons.  Further, the quits rate has jumped over the past six months. The currently low participation rate is the most important aspect of the employment picture that could give us an extra margin of employment as the economy moves ahead, but the bulk of the decline from a 67 percent to a 62 percent participation rate is explained by demographic factors.  Another possibility is that the natural rate of unemployment has been declining to a number that begins with 4, so that the reduction in the unemployment rate has not been as great a reduction in slack as we’ve thought hitherto. In this case, the unemployment rate will continue to decline if we continue to grow reasonably, but it’s unlikely that it will continue for long to decline at the rate it has over the past two years. That means that we’re getting closer to full resource utilization. On the inflation front, we can be reasonably confident that we’ll see an increase in inflation before too long.  Of course, the headline inflation figures will be aided by a turnaround in oil prices, or at least by a decline in the rate at which oil prices might continue falling. The effect of the appreciation of the dollar on domestic prices will stop after the dollar stops appreciating, but that date is harder to forecast because of the well-known overshooting phenomenon.  Nonetheless, the staff’s projection that core import prices will resume increasing late this year is plausible.  The staff’s forecast that core inflation will reach 1.6 percent in 2016 means that we may be close to our target inflation rate by the end of next year. The fan charts on  page 74 of Tealbook, Book A, suggest that the probability of core inflation being at 2 percent or more by the end of 2016 is somewhere around 35 to 40 percent. I have two more topics before concluding.  First, why are real wages not rising as we approach the natural rate of unemployment.  Well, they might be, as the box on page 24 of Tealbook, Book A, and evidence from outside the Fed suggests.  And some of the reports we’ve heard today also suggest that. In addition, real wages may be rising only slowly because productivity growth has been low, or, as mentioned a second ago, the natural rate might be lower than we recognize. Second, what about the headwinds. Some of the headwinds may be turning into tailwinds. Most important of those is that there is far less pessimism and even some optimism about European economic growth than there was only a few months ago, and similarly for Japanese growth.  There are also the promising fragments of information we’ve received during the briefings from the presidents of the Reserve Banks, including that on household formation, which is very interesting.  But some headwinds remain.  The most important among them is the appreciation of the dollar, the slowdown in Chinese economic growth, and the possibility of a Greek exit from the euro area.  I am reasonably confident that inflation will continue moving back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term, and that the unemployment rate is getting closer to the natural rate, but more on that and the other factors relevant to our policy decisions tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It discusses different macroeconomic puzzles and explores various factors that may be influencing the current economic situation.


Passage number 217.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As far as the overall development of the economy since the January meeting is concerned, we’ve had two stronger-than-expected employment reports balanced—and probably more than balanced—by a run of weaker data that suggests a modest weakening, let’s call it, including the February retail sales; the weak manufacturing reading; producer prices; and a weakening in consumer sentiment, as shown in the Michigan survey.  The dollar has increased well beyond expectations, with net exports now forecast to subtract 1 full percentage point from this year’s GDP, and there’s a risk that, as we move or seem to move toward liftoff, the dollar will continue to strengthen.  On the other hand, the picture in Europe seems to me at least a little bit brighter.  Lower oil prices and the weaker euro are providing a lift to sentiment in Europe, and, to the extent that that narrative plays out, in time it should limit further upward moves of the dollar, at least relative to the euro. Oil prices rose after the January meeting but have now essentially returned to their lows, particularly for WTI. There’s good reason to think that that will continue as we come close to running out of storage in the United States. Overall, I continue to see the picture as a positive one, although slightly weaker.  Low oil prices will support consumer confidence and spending, and they’ll also hold down inflation, perhaps for a little while longer than we expect.  I think we will see continued strong job growth, which is based on stronger business confidence, and that will also support consumer spending.  I believe the dollar is going to be a significant headwind and threatens to be an even bigger one. On inflation, it has been interesting to watch the co-movement of rates, the dollar, breakevens, and the price of oil in the intermeeting period and before that.  Of course, the spot price of oil tells us nothing about inflation 5 to 10 years ahead, which does tell me that the longer-term breakevens need to be taken with a grain of salt.  The pattern supports the view expressed in one of the memos that a lot of the movement of long-term rates—and breakevens, in particular—has been driven by global events and global flows, which probably don’t have important long-term implications for inflation expectations.  That’s not to express great confidence in the situation regarding inflation, but just to say I don’t think there’s a big signal in breakevens.  And I admit that’s far from certain and will need careful monitoring. I have a couple of points on my SEP submissions.  I did lower my estimate of the natural rate of unemployment to 5 percent.  I did reduce my estimate of the longer-run neutral federal funds rate to 3½ percent.  My GDP forecast is very much in line with the Tealbook, but I think there’s a reasonable likelihood that unemployment will decline more than the Tealbook forecast, given the GDP and payroll forecasts.  So I have actually forecast that the headline unemployment rate will decline all the way to 4.9 percent this year, conditional on the GDP and payroll numbers.  It’s worth pointing out that payroll numbers in the second half of this year are about 210,000 per month, which is certainly lower than the level of recent history and—as President George, I think, pointed out—lower than the level of the past 24 months. To conclude, as a modal case, I do see inflation returning to 2 percent as the unemployment rate declines to around 5 percent.  I’m reasonably confident that we will see an increase in inflation later this year, but I would emphasize that it’s actually, to me, very notable how much uncertainty there is around the inflation creation process as well as the natural rate of unemployment, both of which are tremendously important in the short term.  In fact, I would say that I found some real attraction in the alternative scenario that the staff offered at our Board meeting on Monday.  In that scenario—this echoes what Governor Fischer was talking about— the natural rate declines further to 4¼ percent; productivity and economic growth are a little bit higher; and inflation is a little bit lower, thanks to the wider unemployment gap.  Now, that’s not just a more pleasant way to align the output and unemployment gaps.  It is certainly that.  But it also strikes me as not at all wildly implausible.  So I think that, as we get closer to full employment, the level and character of these supply-side constraints become ever more important. To wrap up, I see the main risk to the economy coming from events abroad, particularly strength in the dollar and an exit of Greece from the euro, which might be managed well enough to avoid a catastrophe—at least for the euro system, if not for Greece.  But, in the meantime, it would almost certainly be a material setback for the recovery in Europe and for our economy.  So I think those risks underscore the need to be sure that we aren’t normalizing into a weakening economy, and I’ll have more to say on that tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by an individual with their own analysis and opinions on the state of the economy.


Passage number 218.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I’m glad to see the patience in the group.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is pleased with the patience observed in the group.


Passage number 219.
  [Laughter] MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of laughter indicates a light or humorous tone, suggesting agreement or amusement among the individuals involved.


Passage number 220.
 WILLIAMS.  How come we don’t have patience. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. We’ll defer, and we will also take up, first thing in the morning, the resolution on quarter-end term RRP testing. We’re starting at 9:00 a.m. tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The conversation seems to be a smooth transition from one topic to another.


Passage number 221.
 MR. LAUBACH.  The resolution has already been voted on. We’ll take up the minutes part. CHAIR YELLEN. Yes.  That’s right. [Meeting recessed] March 18 Session CHAIR YELLEN. Okay, folks, let’s get going. We’re going to start this morning by revisiting the proposed March minutes language on the additional points concerning normalization, and I’m going to turn this over to Thomas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a discussion about the agenda for the meeting.


Passage number 222.
 MR. LAUBACH.7  Thank you, Madam Chair.  You have in front of you a handout titled “Revised Proposed March Minutes Language,” which represents our best effort at threading the needle. First, you see there two changes in red—namely, a change from “will” to “intends to,” which participants already agreed to yesterday. Then two changes are noted in the final bullet.  That sentence is still in there.  It includes the “fairly soon” language, but it does add that “the Committee expects that it will be appropriate to reduce the capacity of the facility fairly soon,” which indicates that there would be an assessment on the part of the Committee. We also propose to strike the word “available” since, actually, the term “available capacity” had not been used earlier in these bullets.  The beginning of that final bullet speaks about aggregate capacity, and it seemed to be simpler to just talk about capacity here. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Are there any comments.  [No response]  Okay.  Then I’d like to ask for a show of hands among all participants.  I’m going to take a straw poll here to find out who supports this language being added to our normalization principles.  Can you raise your hand if you’re supportive.  [Show of hands]  Okay.  And is there anyone who is not. [No response]  Okay.  Well, it looks as though we have unanimous support.  Thank you, all, for cooperating on this.  Let’s now move to our policy round, and Thomas will begin it with his briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants have already agreed to the changes in the proposed minutes language and there are no comments or opposing opinions mentioned.


Passage number 223.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thomas, that was a very interesting analysis, which led me to think about a couple of things.  One, you mentioned the shortfalls in relation to the Taylor (1999) rule benchmark, asking whether they are a good measure of monetary policy accommodation.  Is there any empirical work that you did with this that might indicate, when you see residuals of this magnitude, whether they are often followed by stronger inflation or stronger growth over the time series that you used.  I’d find that interesting to know, in light of our increased inflation expectations, whether that’s in line with history.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is not a source of contention or disagreement. It is simply a request for further information and clarification.


Passage number 224.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I haven’t specifically looked into that particular issue: “What if you had run the Taylor rule with a constant intercept.  At times that followed when you saw large deviations from that, would you have seen subsequently high inflation.” I haven’t looked into that.  That’s an interesting idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they have not specifically looked into the mentioned issue and finds it an interesting idea.


Passage number 225.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Could I ask you a question about interpreting the lower-left chart on assessing individual members’ r*.  Am I right that the takeaway here is, the dots that are higher could be thought of as participants who are more confident the Wicksellian rate of interestis higher, but the participants who have the negative ones have more concerns that that’s not the case. Is that the way to interpret that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is a straightforward question asking for clarification on the interpretation of a specific chart.


Passage number 226.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I think the higher dots are primarily driven by a combination of higher paths for the federal funds rate and continued declines in the unemployment rate.  As you can tell from the equation in the middle, it is essentially that, from the change in the unemployment gap, you take signal about how accommodative policy was.  So if a participant has a relatively high projection of the real federal funds rate and, on top of that, sees the unemployment rate declining further, that must be a participant who has a relatively high estimate of the equilibrium real rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement explaining the factors that drive higher dots in a particular equation.


Passage number 227.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Lastly, in the statement, in the first paragraph of alt-B, you talk about market-based measures of inflation compensation.  There’s been a lot of changes in the description here, and now it’s just “remain low.”  Yesterday, in my own comments, I said that it was modestly comforting that those had risen. Is that still the case, or where does that stand relative to our January meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question seeking clarification or an update on a previous statement.


Passage number 228.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I’ve been looking at the five-year, five-year-ahead breakevens.  From the first day of the January meeting, they increased about 20 basis points and have since retraced 15 of those 20.  So right now, they’re up, on net, 5 or 6 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about the movement of breakevens over a specific time period. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 229.
 MR. EVANS.  Not a complete round trip.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a brief exchange of information.


Passage number 230.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 231.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes, I also have a question on paragraph 1 in alternative B, and it’s about, again, the change in the language in the blue and red.  In the sentence that says “Household spending is rising moderately,” it refers to “earlier declines in energy prices have boosted household purchasing power.”  Later in the paragraph, it says “Inflation has declined further . . . , largely reflecting declines,” and the word “earlier” is crossed out. I was wondering  if there’s actually a reason to have “earlier” in one place and not the other.  Is there something we’re trying to communicate with that.  It just seemed funny there, or maybe I’m misreading it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on the usage of the word "earlier" in one sentence but not in another sentence.


Passage number 232.
 MR. LAUBACH. No, obviously not.  I think the statement in the inflation sentence was more trying to indicate very recent movements in energy prices based on the idea that they feed into headline inflation relatively quickly. It is our assessment that, actually, the boost to household spending is showing up only over time.  Now, the sentence does refer to household purchasing power.  I’m not quite sure how quickly that feeds through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their own assessment and understanding of the situation.


Passage number 233.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: Since no specific passage is provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 234.
 WILLIAMS.  If I can break right now from the rules on making a comment on language, I think symmetry would suggest not having “earlier” in either case and just saying “declines”—unless we’re trying to say something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is raising a point about language usage, specifically suggesting a change for the sake of symmetry.


Passage number 235.
 MR. FISCHER.  I think they relate to different things.  What could make them consistent is simply that households take a while to react.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that presents a potential explanation for the consistency between two different things.


Passage number 236.
 MR. WILCOX.  This could also reflect the staff taking a while to react. [Laughter]  It might be about 48 hours out of date, before energy prices came back down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a lighthearted comment about the staff's delayed reaction to a situation, which is met with laughter.


Passage number 237.
 MR. LAUBACH.  So would you prefer to go, actually, back to the old language and just say “recent,” or would you drop “earlier”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Laubach is simply seeking clarification or preference on the use of language.


Passage number 238.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information to assess if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 239.
 WILLIAMS.  I would just say “declines” in both cases because I think they’re factually true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement made by Williams expressing their opinion on the use of the word "declines" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply reflects their personal stance.


Passage number 240.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think the issue is less material now, with oil prices back down at their basement level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the current state of oil prices.


Passage number 241.
 MR. KAMIN. Now what is true is that, in some sense, oil prices were declining nearly monotonically through late January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is being presented as a factual statement without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 242.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Then they bounced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the phrase "Then they bounced." It is a simple and straightforward statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 243.
  MR. KAMIN.  Then they went up and back down.  So they have, netting out over the intermeeting period, flattened out.  In that sense, the “earlier” could be correct, but it might be easier just to delete it. CHAIR YELLEN.  Cross it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker suggests deleting the word "earlier" to make the statement clearer.


Passage number 244.
 MR. KAMIN.  Both times. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is providing a brief exchange between Mr. Kamin and Chair Yellen, with President Kocherlakota agreeing with them. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 245.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would just point out to the Committee that “earlier” also appears in paragraph 2, in the penultimate sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply points out the use of the word "earlier" in paragraph 2. It is a neutral observation rather than an expression of disagreement.


Passage number 246.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, I would take it out in both places.  Wasn’t that your suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply confirming a previous suggestion made by the person they are addressing.


Passage number 247.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is insufficient information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 248.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 249.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I think it would conform with President Williams’s suggestion to take it out there as well. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. On this point, is there anyone who would object to crossing out “earlier” in both places.  [No response]  Okay.  Let’s do that.  Further questions.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individuals in the passage are in agreement about removing the word "earlier."


Passage number 250.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to follow up on the staff’s presentation yesterday about the recent correlation between oil price movements and five-year, five-year-forward breakevens.  I looked at a longer stretch of data than the staff presented to us, and it didn’t seem as though that correlation was as strong in previous years. So I was wondering what thoughts the staff had on the reason for the tight correlation over the past few months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a difference in observation and asking for clarification or thoughts on the matter. There is no overt contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 251.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s a bit of a mystery, isn’t it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about something being a mystery.


Passage number 252.
   MR. KAMIN. We talked about this a little bit this week in our Board meeting, and we agreed that we didn’t have any great ideas or any conclusive evidence.  Because it’s clearly the case that near-term movements in oil prices should not have implications for inflation 5 to 10 years down the road, we did talk about the possibility that they must be proxying for something else, such as, perhaps, anxieties or uncertainties about the global outlook.  And you could imagine that the uncertainties about the global outlook are pushing down the inflation compensation.  You could also imagine investors looking at these declines and basically reading through to inflation compensation. The fact that those correlations have become more evident over the past half year or so is suggestive of that hypothesis because it has been in the past half year that there has been mounting anxiety about the global outlook.  But, beyond that, we don’t have a lot, and we’re going to continue to investigate. CHAIR YELLEN.  Two-hander.  Question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is a lack of conclusive evidence and that they do not have any great ideas. They then discuss their hypothesis and potential reasons for the correlation between oil prices and inflation compensation. Finally, they mention their intention to continue investigating the matter.


Passage number 253.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  Just to add to that, it also could be a bit of an anomaly of the market itself in the sense that, when oil prices drop, TIPS traders have negative carry.  You remember that the five-by-five is a construct; it’s constructed from the TIPS markets. So to the extent that the TIPS market reacts in any way in terms of the liquidity premium and other factors, this could show through and not have any signal whatsoever about true expectations of inflation on a five-by-five-year-forward basis. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining a potential anomaly in the market and discussing how it could affect inflation expectations.


Passage number 254.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Madam Chair.  To reflect on what Vice Chairman Dudley just said, there’s some element of that, I think, in the TIPS markets.  I believe you’ll see less of that in the zero-coupon inflation swap market, and there you still see that over the past six months, these lower-frequency movements are still material. One idea that occurred to me is thatthe fall in oil prices means that headline inflation is going to be even lower below target for longer, and those lower realizations of headline inflation for longer periods of time could create more concerns about unanchoring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 255.
 MR. LACKER.  Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is contention or disagreement between Mr. Lacker and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 256.
 MR. LACKER.  I thought the carry effect affected the 5- and the 10-year TIPS the same, so it washes out.  But is there some asymmetry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply questioning whether there is any asymmetry in the carry effect on the 5- and 10-year TIPS.


Passage number 257.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It affects it all. But remember, this is a market with traders who have positions, and they’re responding to the profitability of holding inventory or not holding inventory.  Bond mutual fund flows are going to also drive the relative yields.  So the market may not be perfectly efficient.  That’s all I’m saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that bond mutual fund flows can influence relative yields in the market and that the market may not always be perfectly efficient.


Passage number 258.
 MR. LACKER. We’ll debate efficiency some other time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement suggesting that the topic of efficiency can be discussed at another time.


Passage number 259.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think we’ll be debating that forever, Jeff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there may be an ongoing debate, but there is no actual disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 260.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Vice Chairman Dudley has just waved a red flag for President Lacker.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 261.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to go back to exhibit 1 and the analysis of the SEP. As I understand the argument, if we just go by Taylor (1999), the Committee looks pretty dovish, according to the first figure.  And you might be able to rationalize that if you think r* is moving around. Now, one thing I would say about that is, Taylor (1999) was rationalized based on an application to past U.S. data, and the argument was that it fit the data pretty well and we got pretty good outcomes.  There are even models that might rationalize Taylor (1999) as an optimalmonetary policy rule.  If you say, “Okay, now we’re going to substitute in the time-varying r*,” we lose that rationalization, and we’re not sure if that’s really a good monetary policy rule or not.  So I think it might warrant further research. If that’s what you think is happening around the Committee and around monetary policy generally, it might warrant further research to ask, “Would it have been a good idea historically to follow the variations in r* the way it’s being described here in the bottom panel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker raises concerns about the rationalization of using a time-varying r* in the analysis of the SEP and suggests that further research is needed to determine if it would have been a good idea historically. This indicates a disagreement with the current approach or understanding of the policy rule.


Passage number 262.
” MR. LAUBACH.  I think I exercise truth in advertising by admitting that part of the sausage is the Laubach-Williams estimate of r*.  That estimate just shows a very unusual movement in recent years.  So maybe one way of reconciling these two things is that, actually, prior to the crisis, you would not have observed such large gaps, and because these gaps are really much more pronounced now, it looks as though this time-varying measure of r* has declined so sharply.  Maybe that’s why, in studies that used earlier evidence indicating you didn’t have such sharp deviations of r* from a longer-run average, this effect wasn’t so pronounced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It presents an explanation for why there may be a discrepancy in the measurement of r* during recent years compared to earlier evidence. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 263.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  I think one response to that is, you could look at cross-country evidence and start tracking instances in other countries in which r* did vary, and you could see whether this is a good idea or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 264.
 MR. LAUBACH. Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Laubach simply responds with "Yes" to an unidentified statement or question from Chair Yellen. There is no contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 265.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  You’ve obviously done a fair amount of work for this.  When I was looking at this exhibit yesterday afternoon, I saw the first two panels and thought to myself, “Okay, you’re comparing what Taylor (1999) with our submissions the right-hand side would predict for interest rates with what we actually put in for the interest rate, and that Taylor (1999) is a fixed r*.”  I’m thinking, “Okay, well, the difference must be that we have time-varying r*’s that are particular to each of us.  And if you just put that in there, you can make all of these dots go right on that zero line.  You can take all of the discrepancy and put it into the time-varying r* for each one of us.”  But you did more work than that.  That seemed really simple compared with what you did with this equation and so on.  So I’m wondering, what am I missing here. What did all of this other analysis add to the picture. Apparently, I’m not learning all you’ve intended to teach us about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asked by Mr. Lacker seeking clarification and deeper understanding of the analysis presented.


Passage number 266.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I think one way to interpret the bottom two panels is that, actually, what I do in the left-hand panel takes no information from the Taylor rule at all. Look at the bottom left—your r* estimates.  Those come out of the IS equation shown in the middle.  That doesn’t include anything from the Taylor rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their interpretation of the panels and explaining that the left-hand panel does not rely on information from the Taylor rule.


Passage number 267.
 MR. LACKER.  This is our r*.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating that "This is our r*," without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 268.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Exactly.  This is your r* that I backed out from the equation shown in the middle.  Sorry, I should be careful here.  I’m using your projections, and I’m backing out something that I do not necessarily want to attribute to you.  You may not agree with it, but that’s the calculation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that they are making a calculation based on the projections of the other person and clarifies that it may not necessarily reflect their views.


Passage number 269.
 MR. LACKER. Well, it’s a mixture of me, you, and John.  [Laughter] Okay, so then what’s there is from the IS curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is a lighthearted exchange with laughter, indicating a friendly atmosphere.


Passage number 270.
 MR. LAUBACH. The key thing is, I’m essentially arriving from two different points at a fairly similar conclusion.  One is, I could simply look at the upper-left panel and say, “Okay, let me just take these differences that are shown there relative to the rule’s prescription as the amount by which I need to reduce your longer-run r* to get your short-run r*.”  But that’s not what I’m doing.  What I’m doing is, I’m using this middle equation, which knows nothing about   the Taylor rule, and I’m deriving from that, based on this IS equation relationship, what the implied r*’s are. Lo and behold, when you then move to the lower-right panel, that actually does line up relatively closely to what you had in mind to do.  So you are arriving at similar answers from two completely separate thought processes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining two different approaches or thought processes that lead to similar conclusions. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 271.
 MR. LACKER.  And these Laubach-Williams estimates of r* don’t use the Taylor rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 272.
 MR. LAUBACH. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement as it only consists of a single statement from Mr. Laubach without any opposing or conflicting views.


Passage number 273.
 MR. LACKER. What does this tell us about a policy. It seems r* is sort of small for all of us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making an observation and questioning the implications of a certain policy.


Passage number 274.
 MR. LAUBACH. Yes. It essentially means that, on balance, your projections seem to be consistent with a view that the IS curve still has some ways to move out to its longer-run normal position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the projections and states that the IS curve still has some further movement to reach its longer-run normal position.


Passage number 275.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay. So we get the same answer two different ways.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions two different methods that provide the same answer.


Passage number 276.
 MR. LAUBACH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 277.
 MR. LACKER.  Great.  Okay.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any further questions.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 278.
 MS. BRAINARD.  I’m guessing that you want to start moving on to the statement, and that you’ve got a press conference coming up.  Just one thing:  This is more something to be noted, because I think it’s factually accurate, than a suggestion to change the statement.  But now that we are focused on current forces that are driving inflation, I would just say that core import prices are also relevant in that sentence.  I understand that we’re not taking that on board this month, but, clearly, core is also low relative to where we would expect it to be, and core import prices are obviously a factor there. CHAIR YELLEN.  I’m sorry.  Where are you proposing this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Brainard is making a suggestion and Chair Yellen acknowledges it without any objection.


Passage number 279.
  MS. BRAINARD.  I’m not proposing it, because I don’t want to create a lot of additional wordsmithing.  But in the sentence that says “Inflation has declined further . . . , largely reflecting declines in energy prices”—previously it was focused on earlier declines in energy prices—in terms of coincident forces that are a factor, obviously core import prices are also pushing inflation down. CHAIR YELLEN.  But you’re not proposing to change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Brainard is expressing her hesitation to propose changes to the sentence in question, but Chair Yellen seems to be in agreement with her and does not propose any changes either.


Passage number 280.
 MS. BRAINARD.  I don’t want to spend another half-hour, knowing that you’d like to continue moving along. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  If I could just start our round off with a couple of comments.  I think the economy has made considerable progress toward our objective of maximum employment.  And, because of the likely eventual implications of that progress for the inflation outlook, I believe it serves us well to remove “patient” from our policy statement at this time.  Doing so will provide us with the flexibility to raise the federal funds rate at any meeting after April, with the actual timing dependent on how the economy evolves.  I don’t view the removal of “patient” as a signal that liftoff in June is particularly likely.  In my press conference, I intend to make it clear that the modification of our forward guidance doesn’t mean that we’ve determined the timing of liftoff, and that such timing will depend on the Committee’s assessment of incoming information. In particular, I plan to indicate that the Committee will not necessarily raise rates in June. That said, I also want to be clear that a June liftoff cannot be ruled out.  Between now and the June FOMC meeting, we will receive three more employment reports.  Like most of you, I see room for further improvement in labor market conditions, and I expect the rate of decline in the unemployment rate to slow some in the months ahead.  But it is possible we could see a   continuing rapid decline in the unemployment rate, which could be approaching 5 percent by the time of the June meeting. On the other hand, readings on inflation are likely to remain uncomfortably low.  At the time of the June meeting, the latest inflation readings will be for April.  The staff projects that the 12-month change in total PCE prices will be just 0.2 percent in April, and that for core PCE prices will be just 1.2 percent.  And the trend may not be our friend, in that inflation may well soften further for a few more months, especially if the dollar continues to appreciate as we get closer to the beginning of the normalization process. As I noted in the economic go-round, I have tried to avoid establishing any simple criterion for achieving reasonable confidence that inflation will move up to 2 percent.  I have thus far emphasized—and I intend to continue emphasizing—that we do not have to see an increase in core inflation or an increase in nominal wage growth that would achieve the confidence that’s needed for us to move, and that we intend to consider a broad range of data and evidence in arriving at that judgment.  Further labor market improvement on its own will work to improve my confidence in the forecast that inflation will move back up to 2 percent.  But if core inflation, nominal wage growth, or measures of inflation expectations move the wrong way, I think we may find a decision to commence tightening quite challenging. These uncertainties about the outlook for inflation and the labor market are precisely why moving to a meeting-by-meeting footing in our policy deliberations is appropriate. As a final point, I intend to acknowledge and communicate that, if the economy evolves in line with our forecast, increases in the federal funds rate over time are likely to be gradual.  Indeed, in line with Thomas’s analysis, if r* is gradually rising as the headwinds that have held back the recovery continue to abate, a gradual rise in the federal funds rate is likely to be  appropriate. Of course, it’s also true that a gradual rise is required just to keep the level of monetary accommodation constant.  We may not know if this is an accurate description of how the economy is operating until we see how it reacts to higher interest rates. So, as a result, I favor a cautious and deliberate approach to tightening policy.  Let me stop there and begin our go-round with President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 281.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I can support alternative B.  It drops the word “patient” and thus keeps June on the table, which I think is essential, because if the data come in reasonably close to our forecast, I think we should raise rates in June.  While I support the new forward-guidance language, it’s important to be aware that it introduces some important internal tension into the statement.  The new language states that the Committee anticipates raising rates “when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term.”  This seems to leave open the possibility that we are not now reasonably confident that inflation will move back to our objective.  In contrast, the second paragraph states that we expect “inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term.”  In the broader context of that paragraph, I take this to mean that we are confident that our future policy actions will bring inflation back to 2 percent. So our new forward-guidance language appears to be in conflict with the second paragraph, because it seems to suggest we’re not confident about our future conduct of monetary policy.  This is an awkward and potentially confusing implication to convey.  One way to reconcile the two passages is to change the forward-guidance language to read “remains reasonably confident” instead of “is reasonably confident,” implying that we are now confident.  Another approach would be to interpret the “reasonably confident” language as conditional onraising rates—in other words, to interpret the forward-guidance language as meaning to say that the Committee anticipates raising rates “when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that an increase in rates is consistent with inflation moving back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term.”  Now, rewording the forward guidance this way would eliminate the apparent conflict with the second paragraph.  The language there is about our confidence that our policy will get inflation back to 2 percent, while the language in paragraph 3 says that, to raise rates, we want to be reasonably confident that raising rates won’t prevent us from getting back to 2 percent. I understand that, given the weeks and months of deliberations that have gone into crafting this language, this would be a late-in-the-game suggestion to make, so I’m not going to insist on this change.  But I think that it’s worth being aware of this tension as we talk about policy in public going forward.  In any event, this is something you might have to address in your press conference this afternoon, Madam Chair.  And it’s something that, as I said, I think we should be continually aware of. Looking ahead at how the data might come in between now and June, I believe it’s important to recognize that we could be reasonably confident about inflation then—as you said, Madam Chair—even if the monthly readings on core inflation continue to bounce around at a relatively low level. Certainly, we’d rather not see persistently soft core inflation, but our focus should be on the outlook for inflation, not on realized values.  In particular, I don’t think we should convey that a substantial rise in reported core inflation is in some way a precondition for lifting off in June.  Setting a high bar by waiting to see a vigorous rise in actual inflation ignores the long and variable lags that we know are associated with monetary policy, and it risks a return to the “go-stop” regime that made monetary policy a driving force behind real fluctuations.   As I noted at the outset, if conditions evolve close to expectations over the next few months, then I’m likely to argue for a rate increase in June.  If so, I will do so based on the premise that we should set our monetary policy instrument so as to align the real short-term interest rate with the economy’s underlying real fundamentals. What do we know about those fundamentals.  Over the past three years, we’ve seen the following:  Consumption has grown at an average annual rate of 2.5 percent, a number we last saw in the fall of 2007; the unemployment rate has fallen almost 3 percentage points, from 8.3 percent to 5.5 percent; and employment has grown at a 1.9 percent annual rate, a number we last saw in the spring of 2001. Over the same time period, the short-term real interest rate has been below negative 1 percent. Our understanding of the relationship between the natural real rate, as it’s called, and observable variables is admittedly imprecise.  But I think both theory and experience tell us that a real interest rate of negative 1 percent is unlikely to be consistent with continuing low inflation in the face of the steady growth we’ve seen in the real economy. Granted, the natural real interest rate may have shifted down in recent years, but I’d note that attempts to quantify that decline, such as those based on the work of Laubach and Williams, did not generate anything like the current level of real rates.  So I think a strong case can be made that our policy rate should be higher right now, and June represents the first opportunity to raise rates without contradicting our past forward guidance.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker raises concerns about the new forward-guidance language and its potential conflict with the second paragraph. He suggests alternative ways to reconcile the two passages and suggests that a substantial rise in reported core inflation should not be a precondition for raising rates.


Passage number 282.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I can support alternative B today as written.  I recognize that you and the Committee are at the point when we want to actively entertain the possibility of lifting off beginning in June, and every meeting thereafter is a possibility.  To achieve this flexibility for liftoff, it is important to dismantle all elements of our calendar-based guidance and rely simply on meeting-by-meeting conditional assessments.  I can support removing “patient” today and replacing it with meaningful conditional guidance in the form of a statement that we won’t raise rates until we have reasonable confidence that inflation will move back to its 2 percent target over the medium term.  As long as “confidence” represents a meaningful economic threshold, I can support alternative B. But let me discuss how I think about some of the nuances around this conditionality.  Madam Chair, you made a number of excellent points yesterday and again this morning with respect to the inflation outlook at liftoff.  In particular, you indicated it could be appropriate to lift off while inflation was still quite low, as long as theory and historical experience gave us  confidence that a near-term acceleration must be around the corner.  I will likely find such an assessment challenging to support, but it’s not impossible.  I’m not reasonably confident today. What continues to worry me is that the Committee may not be seriously embracing the symmetry in our inflation objective.  I made a special point of saying this at our January reaffirmation of our long-run strategy.  In weighing the costs and benefits of further policy delay at each meeting, I think it is important that the Committee be willing to risk overshooting our 2 percent inflation objective.  The increased risk of retreating back to the zero lower bound following a premature exit represents a significant cost to an early liftoff.  Unless we accept a substantial chance of inflation overshooting our 2 percent target, we won’t be properly balancing the costs and benefits at liftoff in line with our long-run strategy. If, while inflation is still too low, we lift off early just to ensure that we don’t cross our 2 percent inflation objective, that’s an enormous problem for me.  I personally think it would be overly conservative, in the Rogoff “conservative central banker” mode, to try to thread the needle to get to 2 percent while only staying all the while below 2 percent. I can’t see how this would be consistent with a symmetric 2 percent inflation objective.  In such a situation, if theory and experience are going to be our guide while inflation is still too low, I strongly believe we shouldn’t lift off until theory and experience tell us that we risk having inflation accelerate to, say, 2½ percent or higher.  Nothing in the Tealbook or our other forecasts suggests to me that this is close at hand.  For me, that would be a stronger and more useful statement about our confidence in theory and experience as being our guides. My view of appropriate monetary policy continues to be that liftoff should be delayed until the first quarter of 2016.  This assessment recognizes the strength of the labor market and economic growth outlook, but it also recognizes that the inflation outlook is too low and highly uncertain.  Moreover, I fear that an early liftoff could jeopardize the public’s assessment of our credibility regarding our 2 percent symmetric inflation objective. We’ve spent six years below 2 percent, and we are projecting another two to four years to get back to 2 percent. We are not the ECB or the Bundesbank.  We should not be trying our darndest to prevent any crossing of a 2 percent bright line.  The stakes for our 2 percent inflation credibility are very large.  If we don’t get back to 2 percent before this cycle ends, no one will ever think we are serious about our 2 percent goal, except that it’s a ceiling.  That would be very costly for our future success. On Friday, my colleagues Jonas Fisher, François Gourio, Spencer Krane, and I will be giving a Brookings paper that discusses the important asymmetry created by the zero lower bound when there’s uncertainty about the level of the Wicksellian natural rate of interest. Thomas’s figure on the range of participants’ r* assessment is one measure of this range of uncertainty.  That’s my interpretation of it at least.  I don’t want to downplay the excellent theoretical work of my colleagues—Jonas, François, and Spence—in our upcoming Brookings paper, but it is not that hard to show that optimal monetary policy under discretion in the workhorse New Keynesian models or older-style Keynesian models implies a strong motive to delay policy liftoff whenever risk and uncertainty increase and a binding and costly zero lower bound looms large.  In this situation, there is a motive to build up a buffer stock of economic and inflation improvements in order to reduce the chance that negative shocks send policy back to the zero lower bound. Having said all of this, I can agree to remove the “patient” language today and move to a meeting-by-meeting assessment.  But we should avoid becoming unnecessarily impatient and recognize the major asymmetry and the losses we risk as a result of moving too early in June versus later, as in September or even December. Thank you, Madam Chair.CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Although Mr. Evans expresses some concerns and reservations about an early liftoff and the inflation outlook, he ultimately states that he can support alternative B as long as there is meaningful conditional guidance and a threshold for inflation.


Passage number 283.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B today.  Based on realized and projected progress toward our dual-mandate policy goals, I believe it’s appropriate to make June and meetings thereafter viable options for liftoff.  As Chair Yellen pointed out, we’re going to have three employment reports before our June meeting, and, in light of the strength we’ve been seeing, it would be inappropriate at this point to shut down the possibility of a June liftoff. The “patient” language has served the Committee well as a transition.  But I’ve become impatient with “patient,” and I think it’s time for our statement to lose its “patience,” too. Regarding the proposed forward guidance in alternative B, I can support it, but I’m not convinced it adds, much clarity.  It would seem to open up questions about what particular labor market indicators and inflation developments the Committee wants to see before liftoff. So I was gratified to hear the Chair’s plan for the press conference.  I think that’s well said. I don’t believe we’ve come to that consensus.  So I’m gratified that Chair Yellen is recognizing that in what she’s planning to say at the press conference. That said, I recognize that the proposed language is similar to language the Chair has used in her testimony.  I actually would have a slight preference for it more closely echoing the language that the Chair has used before, because any difference might be viewed by the public as meaning something different and perhaps raising the bar for liftoff, which I don’t think is the intention.  But I’m confident that Chair Yellen can handle these types of questions in her press conference. It would seem that the next communications challenge we face is how to convey the idea that we are data dependent, meaning that the first rate increase doesn’t necessarily imply that  we’re on a path of rate increases at each meeting, nor does a pause necessarily signify that liftoff was the wrong thing to do.  The Chair has mentioned this in her public statements, and I think it’s worth emphasizing it as liftoff gets closer.  Managing expectations about the post-liftoff policy rate path would seem to be a key factor in ensuring that liftoff itself is not disruptive.  We’re also going to need to wean market participants away from detailed forward guidance and move toward language that explains our policy rationale, but not necessarily the timing of every expected action we plan to take.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and their agreement with Chair Yellen's plan for a June liftoff. They also express their admiration for Chair Yellen's handling of press conferences and their belief that managing expectations about the post-liftoff policy rate path is important.


Passage number 284.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the policy decision in alternative B.  Regarding the statement, I interpret the forward-guidance language with the removal of “patient” as conveying that liftoff is approaching.  April is highly unlikely, but the exact timing after April has not been determined.  I think this is the appropriate message coming out of this meeting.  This statement, if adopted, puts the Committee in a new decisionmaking and messaging phase.  I’d urge the Committee to confer early about how we’re going to manage through this phase.  In my opinion, it’s always advisable to think through our communications strategy one or two meetings ahead, under a couple of plausible scenarios.  That is especially the case because of the situation the Committee could face in the next few meetings. I’m concerned about how to reconcile the tensions between or among preserving decision optionality right up to a possible liftoff meeting; preparing markets by signaling in advance; and remaining disciplined regarding data dependency, having laid down a decision criterion of being reasonably confident.  Are we going to help prepare markets by signaling high probability of a liftoff decision at least one meeting in advance. Or are we going to make the decision at ameeting based on the latest data and present that to the markets and public with little or no signaling. My preferred approach is to give advance signals at a frequency of one meeting. If the Committee is inclined to follow the one-meeting-in-advance approach and it’s 50–50 at the April meeting—and I think this is a plausible scenario—we would face a challenging communication situation.  It seems to me that we would have to either lay out the reasoning behind a portrayal of June as still in play—and this was President Kocherlakota’s point in his quite useful memo last week—or provide some information in April about what we would need to see that would tip the scales to liftoff in June.  Assuming continuing strong labor market reports, the scales tipper would likely be price indications that make the Committee reasonably confident that the inflation outlook is satisfactory.  I think it is highly unlikely that by April we will have price data in hand to support a verdict of reasonably confident.  So, as I said, I think keeping June in play at the April meeting presents a communications challenge.  The sooner we tackle the wording options for that scenario, the better, in my opinion. I’d like to comment on the prospect of a liftoff decision in June.  I am skeptical—call it healthy skepticism—we will actually see a clear turn in the inflation trends in the data available for the June meeting.  I think it will be difficult to claim reasonable confidence in June, even with strong payroll jobs numbers through the May report.  At the risk of being a little tedious, I’ll again mention the data calendar.  By the June meeting, we will have two further PCE reports, March and April, and one further CPI report, April.  The CPI report for May comes out on June 18, the day after the meeting.  We won’t have any headline May price data at that meeting, although we will have the PPI and some other secondary indicators.  So I’m being a literalist  here regarding “reasonably confident.” And I certainly think it’s preferable to derive our reasonable confidence from key inflation data themselves. The Chair outlined a framework for getting to reasonable confidence based on indirect evidence, historical experience, and theory.  Reliance on these elements may require some verbal gymnastics in our communications if June is the meeting—just a cautionary statement. At this point, September seems to me far more comfortable as an alternative.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and offering their opinion on the messaging and communication strategy. They also express their skepticism about a liftoff decision in June based on the available data. Overall, the speaker is providing their perspective and concerns without directly disagreeing with anyone else.


Passage number 285.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  I do not expect to be reasonably confident that core PCE inflation is returning to our 2 percent inflation goal by June.  Nonetheless, I support dropping “patient” at this meeting, because I believe that we should no longer be giving time-based guidance.  Now that we are preparing to lift off from the zero lower bound, we should be more data dependent, and data can surprise us in either direction. There is great uncertainty around key variables, although that uncertainty seems somewhat asymmetric to me.  For example, I have lowered my estimate of the longer-run unemployment rate to 5 percent, but it may be lower still. It’s hard to imagine that that is much higher.  I’ve lowered my longer-run target for the federal funds rate, but it, too, may still be lower.  While I expect inflation to return to 2 percent, we must acknowledge that there is evidence that financial market participants are becoming less confident of this.  Few are worried about high-inflation outcomes.  In light of how far short we are falling on our inflation target, it is appropriate that we probe to see if our estimates of these key variables are too high.  We do not want to prevent returning to full employment by being too wedded to our uncertain estimates of variables and relationships that may have changed.  While it may take some time to be  reasonably sure, the accumulating evidence is certainly pointing in that direction.  Making policy based on natural rate, potential growth, and equilibrium rate assumptions that are too high could deprive workers who are out of the labor force or part time for economic reasons of being fully and gainfully employed. Finally, after missing our PCE inflation target on the low side for many years, we need to be sure to engineer liftoff only once we have truly attained reasonable confidence that we will hit the target within the forecast horizon.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Prichard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is expressing his support for alternative B and explaining his reasoning behind it.


Passage number 286.
 MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I view the transitioning of the statement to more data-dependent language as a very positive development.  I interpret the language in alternative B as leaving our options open for normalization to begin in June should the economy continue to improve and inflation evolve as some anticipate.  If the recent softening in some of the data should spill over and persist or if the decline in inflation should not prove to be as transitory, then subsequent meetings would continue to present new opportunities for liftoff.  But, in any event, alternative B allows for the very flexibility that is called for at this juncture. Thus, I support the language in alternative B as amended this morning.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support and interpretation of a specific language alternative.


Passage number 287.
  MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I also support alternative B for today.  I think that the removal of “patient” creates optionality for the Committee going into the spring and summer.  This is an appropriate step to take at this juncture. My preference is to create a situation during the remainder of this year and beyond in which the Committee is willing and able to move at any meeting at which we have reasonably good data to point to on the U.S. economy.  My sense is that if we make moves in response to data that are supportive of a move, the normalization process will go relatively smoothly. Conversely, if we try to force moves toward normalization on days when the data are not that supportive, such action will call into question the policy reaction function of the Committee and possibly lead to complications. My general view is that our current policy settings are increasingly out of step with the reality of the U.S. economy.  Our balance sheet remains at its peak level.  Our policy rate remains at its lowest setting.  These are, in effect, emergency policy settings.  Meanwhile, the economy continues to improve, with the unemployment rate likely moving below 5 percent in the third quarter of this year. We can look at other measures of labor market performance, such as the labor market conditions index, but the correlation between those indexes and unemployment is around 0.95.  The same is true for nonfarm payroll employment growth.  I think our workhorse indicators of unemployment and nonfarm payrolls are telling us what we need to know about labor market improvement. The goal for 2015 should be to make modest moves in the policy settings to position U.S. monetary policy more appropriately for the state of the economy in 2016 and beyond.  Even when we come off the zero lower bound, policy will remain extremely accommodative.  In particular, there will still be upward pressure on inflation coming from monetary policy.  In fact, according to traditional analysis, there will be upward pressure on inflation coming from monetary policy at all times in the next several years as the normalization process proceeds. That will help move inflation back toward the Committee’s 2 percent target.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 288.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not provided, making it impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 289.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, support alternative B as amended.  And I fully support your description of the economic outlook that you gave yesterday and your plans in terms of the press conference and thinking about policy. The first paragraph of alternative B properly characterizes the various crosscurrents in the data—some softening in spending numbers and positive surprises in the labor market—and my own expectation remains that the unemployment rate will fall below its natural rate around the middle of this year. I also continue to view the dip in core inflation as transitory, especially in view of tentative signs that reduced slack is starting to boost wage growth.  I therefore continue to view the risks to the outlook as balanced and little changed from our previous meeting.  This outlook and risk assessment point toward making policy decisions on a meeting-by-meeting basis going forward, based on the data as they come in.  Importantly, alternative B appropriately notes that the change in forward guidance does not have explicit implications for the timing of future policy changes. I do want to comment on President Lacker’s remark that there is some conflict in the language.  I think there’s absolutely no conflict in the language at all.  It does not imply at all that we don’t have confidence that inflation will return.  It just says that, at the time of liftoff, what we’re looking for is improvement in the labor market, and that we will have confidence.  It doesn’t suggest that that’s a change or anything.  It just says that those are the two conditions that we need to have in order to have liftoff.  So I don’t see a conflict or tension in the language.  It appropriately captures our dual-mandate goals and the progress we’re making on those. Looking ahead, I agree with President Lockhart that we really should be thinking ahead to the future statement language.  I’ve thought some about that and have some comments.  My own view is, we don’t want to be writing the statement in the meeting before, stating what we’re  going to do in the next meeting.  I don’t think that’s the right approach.  What we want is to have a statement that, through words, gives a probabilistic interpretation of how we see policy going forward.  I agree that these decisions should be meeting by meeting, based on the data that we have at the time. In thinking about the future statements, I prefer a communications strategy that avoids specific commitments to future monetary policy actions.  So I looked ahead to alternative C for possible thinking—again, for the future—about an approach.  In one sense, a hint that perhaps we’re getting closer to a rate increase would be provided by the language that says “In determining future adjustments of the target range for the federal funds rate,” as opposed to “In determining how long to maintain” the funds rate.  That’s a way to lean a little bit toward the idea that an increase may be coming sooner. That said, paragraph 3 in alt-B, the one that I think we’ll be using today, is a really good and flexible structure for our future statements.  We’ll have to clear some scaffolding that we built around the sentences referring to the April meeting and the fact that we’re changing the forward guidance.  And I assume we’ll eliminate those after this meeting.  But once we clear that scaffolding around it, the language in alt-B, paragraph 3, gives that data dependence pretty clearly. It implies that we will be making decisions based on the incoming data and our objectives.  In that regard, I really do think that’s preferable to returning to a date-based guidance such as “in a couple of meetings.” I believe that we want to avoid going back to date-based guidance in future statements, and that we really want this to be open-ended in the future.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Williams, expresses support for alternative B as amended and agrees with the economic outlook presented by the Chair. The speaker also comments on President Lacker's remark but states that there is no conflict in the language. The speaker further discusses their views on future statements and suggests a communications strategy that avoids specific commitments to future monetary policy actions.


Passage number 290.
  MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I can support alternative B and the removal of “patient” from our forward guidance.  Given the current state of the economy and my own outlook, I expect that it will be appropriate to lift off in June.  I also expect that interpreting the new “reasonably confident” language will bring its own challenges to our policy decisions in meetings to come, as well as external communications. In that regard, I appreciate the Chair’s proposed elaboration for today’s press conference. Beyond the language in this statement, though, I believe it’s becoming increasingly important to say something about the path of interest rates after liftoff, as others have noted.  The public’s fixation on the timing of liftoff often is accompanied by concern about a steady move to the neutral rate.  Given uncertainty about how the economy might respond to the initial removal of accommodation, a more gradual path may be prudent as we evaluate the effect of liftoff after a prolonged period of near-zero rates. Communicating the possibility of a more gradual path also could help dispel expectations that policy is poised to move on a preset course.  So it may be appropriate to pause after liftoff, not only to see how the economy and financial markets respond, but also to reinforce that we are not marching steadily to the neutral rate at increments of 25 basis points at each meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. GEORGE expresses support for alternative B and the removal of "patient" from forward guidance, and also agrees with the Chair's proposed elaboration. MS. GEORGE then suggests the importance of communicating the possibility of a more gradual path of interest rates after liftoff, but does not disagree with the current plan.


Passage number 291.
 MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  First, I’d like to thank the Board’s staff for the effort that was taken in the Tealbook, Book B, to explore the policy implications of a nonlinear link between the unemployment rate and the rate of wage inflation.  As you may know, the Dallas research staff has found evidence of such a link in both aggregate and regional data. As I understand it, the question today boils down to whether to take June off the table for liftoff from the zero bound, put it on the table, or go one step further and signal the intention to raise rates in June.  I think that liftoff in June is quite likely to be appropriate, but I see no reason to tie our hands, so I favor alternative B.  I see a June liftoff as likely to be appropriate not because of an immediate inflation threat or because we see our 2 percent inflation target as a ceiling.  In looking to prolong this expansion, we think that the best approach is to ease off on policy accommodation relatively soon so that we don’t need to take stronger and more risky action later.  As President Fisher emphasized, the track record in withdrawing accommodation after we’ve already pushed past full employment is not good. Perhaps one reason that “later and steep” may not work in practice is that the promise of “steep” isn’t seen as credible.  Because it isn’t regarded as credible, people make financial bets that pay off only if low rates continue.  Whether that is the explanation or not, we note that, in each of the three longest economic expansions in post–World War II economic history, the Federal Reserve began raising short-term interest rates while unemployment was at or above the natural rate and above the jobless rate we see today.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing the author's opinion on the appropriate timing for a rate increase and their reasoning for it.


Passage number 292.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B. At the previous meeting, I was uncertain that I’d be able to support the removal of the “patient” language at this meeting.  At the same time, at this meeting, I’ve actually moved back my projected liftoff date until December. How do I reconcile those two positions—that I’m actually now quite strongly supportive of removing “patient”. Well, there are basically three reasons.  First, there’s the background reason, which almost all of us agree with, that it is actually good to get this phrase out of the regular FOMC statement because, number one, it was intended to be a transitional phrase and, number two, it’s another one of those phrases to which I think markets are attaching potentially excessive weight.  So by removing it, we get rid of a lot of the speculation about it. The second reason is that I think the Chair has been very effective in her monetary policy testimony in shifting perceptions of what I have previously referred to as the “kitchen timer” phenomenon, which is to say that once “patient” is removed, the kitchen timer is flipped and we’re on course to a two-meetings-later federal funds rate liftoff.  The additional language in the statement reinforces that.  Third, and somewhat contrary to some of you who are looking forward to a potential June liftoff, I actually believe the recent softening of economic news makes it less likely the markets will think that there’s a kitchen timer phenomenon here—or, in Helen’s terms, that the countdown has begun.  There’s some risk that it’ll still be read that way, but that’s a risk worth taking in order to achieve the benefit that I noted earlier. I don’t see the case, as I said a moment ago, for liftoff any time soon, but it’s healthy for us to be thinking actively about our monetary policy stance at each meeting. Now, on the substance, we may be moving into a normalized procedural and institutional environment, but the conditions out there remain very unusual, with the aftermath of the financial crisis and the Great Recession and a variety of ongoing secular changes. So in thinking about the theory and history that are relevant, I’m not entirely sure what history is most instructive, given the number of things that have changed from more recent episodes of recessions and recoveries. I do understand the abstract point that a return to full employment and continued recovery will, at some juncture, push inflation up, but I haven’t yet heard the reasons why, at some particular point, we’ll know that we have crossed that threshold and we should have reasonable confidence that that’s the path that we’re on.  It will presumably be based on something specific that isn’t present right now.  We’re all emphasizing our data dependence, and so I look forward in future meetings to hearing what specifics people have that make us think we should conclude that now we have that reasonable confidence.  I presume that those of you who have been ready to move for some time don’t need any more data, but, for those of us who have not, I think it is important to have that conversation and, specifically, to say, again, what has changed so that now we can have that kind of confidence that we didn’t beforehand. I will say that there are a couple of other background reasons why my instincts are for later rather than sooner.  One is just a conversation to which I shouldn’t attach enormous significance, I guess, but it did have an effect on me.  Some weeks ago, I asked an economist who watches financial markets pretty closely what his explanation for the low level of inflation compensation was.  He proceeded to give me several interesting technical explanations, and then he said, “I don’t actually think that your inflation target is 2 percent.  I think it’s closer to 1.7 percent.  So the amount of inflation compensation required is actually less than you seem to have been assuming.”  Now, that’s one guy’s view.  But he’s a straightforward, smart person who was just purporting to interpret what he was seeing in markets, and that did concern me.  I’m also concerned with the issue that many in and out of this Committee have raised:  While we’ve got a lot of ways to tighten, we don’t really have that many ways to be accommodative, and so moving prematurely could risk putting ourselves into a circumstance in which we had a limited number of efficacious responses. The final point I’d make, though, on the substance is that, although I pushed back liftoff, as I said, to December, in 2016 and 2017 I move back closer to the pack—that is, my rate of increase of the federal funds rate will be somewhat faster than the norm.  It doesn’t quite get me to the middle of the pack, but it gets me back into the pack.  That reflects a view that we really should be sure and have a high degree of confidence.  Maybe my implicit reaction function is a high rather than reasonable degree of confidence, but, once we get there, I think that it will probably be more appropriate to normalize more quickly. In conclusion, I’d just say that I hope I am surprised in the coming months by the intensification of economic growth and maybe some wage growth and the diminution of downside risks.  Short of that, I look forward to discussions in April and thereafter of the specifics that will help me, at least, come to the conclusion that the relevant corner has been turned, and that the level of confidence that we’re moving back toward a 2 percent inflation target, while giving more opportunity for employment to grow, has been reached.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of support for alternative B and an explanation of the reasons behind the author's support.


Passage number 293.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B.  The revised statement puts the Committee in a position to react to incoming data and events without any specific time commitment about the liftoff or path of rates.  Independent of one’s view of theappropriate date of liftoff, that is an important step on the path to normalization and one that I welcome. In this SEP, I moved my estimate of the most likely liftoff date from June to September in light of the run of weaker data, the strength of the dollar, and the likely continued weakness in inflation readings.  But, as several have noted, there will be three employment reports between now and the June meeting and a smaller number of inflation readings.  If we continue to get very strong payroll numbers, declining unemployment, and at least modest inflation readings, I could be prepared to support liftoff in June, but I think it’s more likely that the date will slip to September. I’ll say again that, to me, in the long run not much rides on whether the first rate increase happens in June or September.  Far more important is that the Committee have a plan to deal with the range of possible data and events as well as a consistent and clear way of communicating that plan to the public.  And the center of that plan as we go forward will be the test of continued improvement in the labor market and reasonable confidence that inflation will move back to the 2 percent medium-term objective. If the Committee does choose to lift off this year, which today seems to me both desirable and highly likely, there will be a need to explain how that decision is consistent with our 2 percent medium-term inflation objective.  And that will not be easy—particularly if the dollar continues to strengthen and oil prices remain weak or even decline.  I see this explanation as based on the thoughts that diminishing slack will eventually produce inflation, and that monetary policy works with long lags.  The Chair persuasively outlined these points last evening and then again this morning.  I think that case needs to be made consistently—and no doubt repeatedly—if we’re to be seen as defending the 2 percent objective.  There will also be a need to foreshadow liftoff at least one meeting ahead, perhaps by signaling that the Committee is gaining confidence that inflation will move back to the 2 percent objective over the medium term. It’s become a near cliché to say that the path of rates is more important than the date of liftoff, a statement that is obviously true in the long run but not that helpful in the short term when what we’re trying to do is to choose the date of liftoff.  But it is appropriate that the Committee now turn to thinking about, and communicating more about, the path of rates after liftoff.  And I do think that, after liftoff, we can move rates up fairly gradually, particularly if inflation continues to be weak, as seems likely.  We don’t need to be in a hurry. In my view, policy should remain highly accommodative for quite a while longer, and that is consistent with a gradual path of rate increases after liftoff.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Powell is expressing his support for alternative B and providing his opinion on the liftoff date for interest rates. He also emphasizes the importance of having a plan and clear communication from the Committee. There is no indication of disagreement or contention with other speakers.


Passage number 294.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  It represents a carefully balanced approach that’s an appropriate response to the divergence we are seeing in the two legs of our dual mandate.  While it seems likely that we will see further movement in the direction of maximum employment over the next two meetings, it also seems highly likely we could see lingering softness in inflation and no observed progress toward our inflation target.  This is especially likely if the dollar continues to strengthen and core import prices soften further. The recent momentum in the labor market suggests that resource utilization has continued to increase and may continue to do so going forward.  Just how much slack remains in the economy is difficult to say, but there appears to be some slack along several margins, including unemployment, participation, and people who are working part time for economic reasons.  The outlook for inflation is more uncertain.  We should expect over time that temporary factors holding down inflation, such as energy price declines and dollar appreciation, will fade, and that continued increases in resource utilization will begin to put upward pressure on wage and price inflation.  But the fading of the so-called temporary factors may, in fact, take more time than we currently expect.  In particular, the effects of the dollar may fade only slowly, and dollar appreciation may well have some distance to go, exerting a significant tightening effect.  At the same time, we’ve seen little convincing evidence that tighter resource utilization is yet having a significant effect on prices and wages.  And we can’t dismiss the possibility that the lingering effects of the financial crisis may have some persistent effects on the relationship between resource utilization and inflation domestically.  While the partial retracement of market-based inflation compensation measures gives some support to our hope that inflation expectations will hold steady, it’s possible that they are softening in the face of stubbornly low inflation, which would be highly troubling.  Thus, I think the risks around the outlook for inflation are slightly tilted to the downside. I view it as highly significant that the removal of the word “patient” is accompanied by economic projections from the Committee that point to a later and more gradual path of policy firming.  I hope this combination accurately conveys to the public the high degree of nuance in the discussion that we’ve had in this room.  Let me be clear about how I interpret the removal of the word “patient.” I view this statement as announcing the end of forward guidance—which is to say, the commitment to a stated policy rate path for some time into the future—and the return to data-dependent, meeting-by-meeting policy determination starting in June. It’s important that the public understand the end of forward guidance does not prejudge the outcome of any subsequent meeting.  Rather, it creates optionality that the target rate couldbe moved without a commitment far in advance.  It’s also very important that the public understand there is nothing inevitable about either the pace or even the direction of policy moves following liftoff. In fact, the economic and price developments since we last met in January cause me to be more hesitant that we will see the appropriate conditions for liftoff in June.  Nonetheless, I support the removal of the “patient” language to communicate clearly that we will be very closely attuned to the incoming data and will have the option of altering the policy rate path to respond to those data starting in June. The policy reaction function in alternative B places great weight on our being reasonably confident that economic conditions and a monetary policy based on contemporaneous liftoff would be consistent with inflation moving back toward our 2 percent goal over the medium term. Assuming that core inflation remains soft relative to our target, the set of factors that might give me reasonable confidence that inflation is likely to move back toward our target are that employment growth continues at or near current rates; resource utilization gaps continue to close at about the same pace as over the previous year; measures of inflation expectations continue to firm; and we observe an inflection point in the forces that we now believe to be transitory that are weighing on core inflation—in particular, oil prices and core import prices associated with dollar strengthening.  Although the confluence of these events is possible by June, I find it more likely that many of these conditions will not be met in June.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Brainard, is expressing her support for alternative B and discussing her views on inflation and the removal of the word "patient" regarding future interest rate hikes. She is not disagreeing with anyone else's views or arguments.


Passage number 295.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  First, I want to thank Thomas.  I’ve had a headache about the Taylor rule for a long time, as you all know—in large part because of the slavish adherence to a constant real equilibrium rate of 2 percent, which I   think has been contradicted by the actual performance of the economy over the past few years. So thank you.  Your analysis is a welcome dose of aspirin.  I appreciate it. I support alternative B.  Taking out the “patient” language makes sense, given that there are some scenarios, especially those in which the labor market tightens further and wage inflation climbs, in which we’d want to lift off in June.  At the same time, the statement language, the Chair’s earlier testimony, and, I expect, the statement at the press conference today should make it clear that removal of the “patient” language in no way indicates any commitment to moving in June.  It just means that June is not off the table.  I also like the fact that we’ll no longer be boxed in meeting to meeting by our forward guidance.  We’ve said that we’re data dependent.  Now, I think, the statement is finally consistent with that. In terms of market reaction, I would expect a slightly adverse reaction from this change even though it’s widely anticipated, because the deed is often worse than the expectation.  That said, though, I think any effect should be modest, because the shift downward in the SEP’s federal funds rate trajectory for 2015 will likely be interpreted by market participants as suggesting that the Committee is shifting more toward September, away from June. As far as the statement language is concerned, I believe I’m like everyone else except President Lacker—I’m perfectly happy with the statement as it reads right now. CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, thank you, all, for a very rich discussion of the policy issues we face. With respect to the statement language, President Lacker made a suggestion for how to change it, but I did not hear any support for it around the table.  So unless I see some sudden show of support, I think what I’d like to do is to put forward for a vote alternative B, as it was distributed, with simply the word “earlier” crossed out in two places.  And I would note that Governor Brainard suggested saying something about import prices. I did want to simply   mention that, in my press conference statement, I will say something about import prices holding down core inflation.  So why don’t we proceed with a vote on alternative B, with just the two instances of “earlier” crossed out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 296.
 MR. LUECKE.  Very well. The vote will be on alternative B, as depicted on pages 6 and 7 of Thomas’s handout, and on the directive on page 11 of that same handout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating how the vote will be conducted based on the information provided in the handout.


