****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1.
 MR. ROSENGREN. My question is on figure 10.  If I’m reading this right, the move from the dark blue to the light blue means that the brokers have been moving down their expectations for the fed funds rate since January.  It looks like the December SEP is consistent with that lower rate, and I know we haven’t gotten to it yet, but when we look at our own dots, they’re moving in the opposite direction.  They’re moving up quite substantially.  Do you see it as a potential problem that the dealers are moving down, while our SEP is going to be moving up fairly substantially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is pointing out that the brokers' expectations for the fed funds rate have been decreasing since January, while the speaker's own "dots" (likely referring to projections or forecasts) are moving in the opposite direction and increasing substantially. This difference in direction between the brokers and the speaker's own projections suggests a potential problem or disagreement in their expectations.


Passage number 2.
 MR. POTTER. The light blue line is the market-implied path.  So it’s not quite what the dealers think. Those are the little triangles. We try to look at what the market expects the SEP to look like, in terms of the dots.  There are a few market participants who expect the dots to go up.  There are more market participants who expect them to stay the same, and I would say there are some market participants, probably more than those who expect the dots to go up, who expect them to actually go down, partly because some people think that the longer-run normal rate of the federal funds rate will be revised, based, I think, on GDP growth—that bottom panel there.  The estimates of GDP growth over the long run—for example, the CBO’s—are starting to move down, and that would tend to produce lower estimates of the longer-run federal funds rate.  So I would say that some people in the market expect the dots to go up, but it’s a small set of market participants who have that view.  Most market participants expect them to stay the same or move down.  There’s uncertainty because some dots do leave.  How they’ll interpret the dot that leaves—it’s a very important one that leaves—I’m not sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply describing different expectations and opinions of market participants without expressing any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 3.
MR. TARULLO.  It’s already gone. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement evident. Mr. Tarullo is making a statement, and Chair Yellen agrees with him by providing further information.


Passage number 4.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I have two questions.  The first one is about the buy-side survey.  What’s the sample size of that compared with the dealer survey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage consists of a straightforward question and does not show any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 5.
 MR. POTTER. It was 25 this time.  It was 20 the previous time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is simply stating the amount, without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 6.
  The dealer— MR. PLOSSER.  Is it the same group.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement that does not involve conflicting opinions or contrasting ideas.


Passage number 7.
 MR. POTTER. It’s not quite a balanced panel.  We added five.  So there’s some issue comparing responses from the January one. For the dealer survey, we went from 21 to 22.  We looked at the balanced panel.  So the first question I asked my staff was, “Did the median long-run federal funds rate fall because we added someone.”  And they said, “We knew you were going to ask that question.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 8.
” MR. PLOSSER.  Okay.  Thank you.  Here’s my second question:  Looking at chart 20 on the overnight triparty repo volumes, the picture suggests that volumes have actually stayed pretty stable, and that our reverse RP allotment has just replaced volumes that were occurring by other parties.  All we’ve done is change the mix.  Our involvement hasn’t really changed the volume, it’s just changed the mix.  Is that a legitimate interpretation. And if it is, what do I take away from this message that the volume has stayed the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and confirmation of their own interpretation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 9.
 MR. POTTER.  I think volume between private counterparties has definitely gone down.  That’s clear from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, claims that the volume between private counterparties has definitely gone down, implying a decrease in trading activity. However, the passage does not provide any supporting evidence or opinion from another person to confirm or refute Mr. Potter's statement. Therefore, there could be contention or disagreement regarding this claim.


Passage number 10.
 MR. PLOSSER.  But it went down about the same time that we intervened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is stating a fact that something occurred (went down) around the same time as their intervention.


Passage number 11.
 MR. POTTER. We can look at the microdata that underlie this from the triparty system, which we get each Tuesday, and you can see that for some funds there’s a 100 percent setoff.  For other funds, it’s more like a 50 percent setoff.  So you’ll see their volume in triparty go down by 50 percent of what they put into our overnight RRP, and that seems to be because they’re trying to conserve the right to the dealer balance sheet space. We know that the dealers reserve balance sheet for them over a period of time, and the implicit agreement is to keep on using that balance sheet. But what we need to do is look across the counterparties quite carefully.  The set of counterparties that move around the most are the primary dealers themselves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses different levels of setoff in funds and the need to examine counterparties carefully.


Passage number 12.
  So it’s probably in the trades between the primary dealers in which there’s been the biggest reduction in volume, as they will tend to use us more at that point than— MR. PLOSSER. Is there a message to take away from that in terms of either, perhaps, longer-term market functioning or depth of the market in some way that matters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making an observation and asking if there is a message to take away from it.


Passage number 13.
 I’m just curious whether or not— MR. POTTER.  I think if there weren’t a lot of regulatory reform bearing on repo and uncertainty about how short-term funding would be treated, it would be easier to take some type of message.  One of the things we’re not sure about is that some of the triparty behavior might be caused by the fact that there are a lot of reforms coming, which will affect that instrument—not as much as people thought before changes were made in the leverage ratio with regard to how it treated repo, but it’s a little bit hard for us to push through that.  We hope to send a report to research directors within the next two weeks that looks at some of the microdata, and they could probably tell you what we’ve seen there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It simply expresses uncertainty and the need for further research.


Passage number 14.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any specific statements or arguments that would indicate contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of thanks between Mr. Plosser and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 15.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have a question, an observation, and two other questions.  To follow up on Eric’s question, I wasn’t sure what the answer was. Wouldyou expect some kind of market reaction if our dots don’t align with this dealer expectation. I’m just curious about that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity and seeking clarification on a specific point.


Passage number 16.
 MR. POTTER.  I don’t have the chart in front of me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have a chart in front of them, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 17.
  I think, Bill, you’ll have that chart that shows the SEP relative to— MS. LIPSCOMB.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker simply asks Bill if he has a chart that shows the SEP relative to something. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 18.
  You should have it in the— MR. POTTER.  Okay.  Why don’t we let Bill go for this because he’s practiced on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests letting Bill handle a task because he has practiced on it, and there is no opposition or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 19.
 MR. ENGLISH.  In front of you there are some charts in the handout with “Summary of Economic Projections” on the cover.  As a couple of you have pointed out, the distribution, say, for the end of 2016 has moved up some.  The median value for the end of 2016 is 50 basis points higher than the median value in December, at least for the dots plotted here.  As somebody pointed out, it’s a different set of people, as one person has dropped out of that. As for whether that will have a market effect, I think it is the case that market participants look at the dot plot and take it as a signal of something.  If you go back and you look at the dealer surveys for December and March, you see some upward shift in the expected path of the funds rate.  You have to remember that from December to January, things looked a lot better, and then from January to now, they look somewhat worse.  The net, I think, is still a positive for the dealer survey projections for the funds rate, but not 50 basis points. And so it certainly is possible that market participants will read this as saying something about the Committee’s intentions that is a little bit more hawkish, a little bit tougher, than they perhaps expected, leading them to mark up the path for the expected funds rate a little bit further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the movement of the charts and the potential impact on market participants.


Passage number 20.
 MR. FISHER. Well, it is what it is, whatever we have put down there.  So I guess it’s just something that you may be asked, Madam Chair.  I’m sure you’ll be well prepared for the press conference.  CHAIR YELLEN.  No doubt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a conversation between Mr. Fisher and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 21.
 MR. FISHER. Here’s my observation:  When I signed off on our year-end financial statements under Sarbanes-Oxley at the Dallas Fed, my little Bank, I had an unrealized loss of a little over $2 billion, and I was happy to see on chart 15 that that’s come back up.  But over time, if we’re successful and the economy grows, the good outcome is that we will see a depreciation of our portfolio, particularly with the MBS holdings.  Even if they’re held to maturity, we’re going to see some movement there.  As much coordinated guidance as we can have in terms of answering any questions that may arise would be helpful.  Just an observation, Madam Chair. My question may be a little esoteric, but I want to ask the Desk, since we have the advantage of having you here.  In Kurt Lewis’s paper about dealer financing terms that was sent out, there was a reference to synthetic prime brokerage, and even though it was an excellent memo, it didn’t quite explain the significance of this financing technique.  Here’s the question:  Is this simply a way to escape regulators’ notice.  What is it, and how is it being utilized.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of observations and questions posed by Mr. Fisher.


Passage number 22.
 MR. POTTER.  I’m not an expert in that.  I don’t know if MA has got a view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Potter simply states that he is not knowledgeable about the topic and does not have a view on it.


Passage number 23.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I have a modest view.  This is something that we’re watching as a potential change in the way that markets operate, in the way that firms take on risk.  We want to be sure we’re on top of it because of concern that, over time, this could become a very substantial way to take on risk that isn’t being appropriately managed and measured. We had been hearing from contacts in markets that this was something that was developing, and we wanted to, in some sense, lay down a baseline as to what this looks like, who the participants are, and so on.  The basic thought is that, instead of going to a prime broker and engaging in purchases of assets and financing them, instead you can do essentially the same risk-taking by engaging in derivatives transactions and doing those through synthetic prime   brokerage.  So this was a first foray into this business, to try to understand it better—who are the participants, how big is it—and it’s something that we’ll be monitoring to see if it becomes a really big deal that we should worry about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. English, is describing their view and concern about a potential change in the way markets operate.


Passage number 24.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is simply thanking someone, Chair Yellen, and the response from Chair Yellen is not confrontational or conflicting.


Passage number 25.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am going to follow up on President Fisher’s question about chart 15.  I was interested in the reactions, if any, in the media and in the public to the documentation of an unrealized loss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a question asked by Mr. Kocherlakota.


Passage number 26.
 MR. POTTER. You have to look hard to find it in the financial statements.  I didn’t see any real coverage of it.  There was much more interest in the H.4.1 that came out the night before because of the large drop in Treasury holdings held at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply indicates that the speaker, Mr. Potter, did not see any real coverage of a certain topic in financial statements, and states that there was more interest in something else.


Passage number 27.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I will just note, Madam Chair, that if people are concerned about the SEP, I think we do have an opportunity to resubmit. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Good observation.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response from Chair Yellen validates and agrees with the observation made by President Evans.


Passage number 28.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Simon, on the first page, chart 3, you show three-year inflation swaps.  I think you made some comment about these countries and their inflation targets.  For the United States, is this CPI or PCE inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on an issue.


Passage number 29.
 MR. POTTER.  It is CPI, and I thought of mentioning that it is running below 2.5 percent, but it is not as far below as the red line is.  The green line is actually pretty close to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply providing information about the CPI (Consumer Price Index) and comparing it to the red line and the green line.


Passage number 30.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  That was really my question.  A 2 percent PCE target translates into what for CPI. What is the translation you would suggest—2.3 percent, 2.5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any elements of contention or disagreement; it is simply a question seeking clarification about the translation of a target percentage.


Passage number 31.
 MR. POTTER.  I’m not the expert.  We have experts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Potter, clearly states that he is not an expert and acknowledges the existence of experts. There is no disagreement or contention implied in this statement.


Passage number 32.
MR. WILCOX. It probably adds a couple of tenths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a statement of fact made by Mr. Wilcox, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 33.
 MR. EVANS.  So, Simon, your first comment was three- to five-tenths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Evans.


Passage number 34.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  But I’m not the expert.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Potter is not the expert.


Passage number 35.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  All right.  Interesting.  One more question, a follow-up on Eric’s, I guess.  Taking the dealer survey on policy expectations, would you say that the dealers are basically assuming that coming out of this meeting we will be maintaining our stance of accommodation or—or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a follow-up question regarding the dealers' assumptions about the policy stance.


Passage number 36.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  Nearly all of the dealers—and we try and ask a question to get at this—think that what you are trying to do with the statement, the SEP, and the press conference is to keep market expectations about where they are.  Quite a few people think that will be hard to do, partly because changes in the forward guidance are hard to execute. They don’t have access to the SEP right now.  You could think that the SEP doesn’t give the same signal.  Then that would cause issues that I think I addressed with the two questions I got before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different viewpoints or opinions without any disagreement between them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 37.
 MR. EVANS.  Madam Chair, if I could, I would like to take the opportunity to ask the staff or someone to write us an opinion on what the appropriate wedge is between PCE and CPI inflation, because I wasn’t actually expecting as low a number as two-tenths.  When I have asked before, I was thinking I had heard more like between three- and five-tenths.  And I think it’s increasingly important for us to have a better feel for that issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is expressing his disagreement with the current inflation number of two-tenths and requesting an opinion on what he believes to be a more appropriate range of three- to five-tenths.


Passage number 38.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think Jeremy Rudd has an update.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox simply states that he thinks Jeremy Rudd has an update.


Passage number 39.
 MR. RUDD. The table that I have shows that the gap between headline PCE and CPI, on a current-methods basis, has averaged about 35 basis points per year for the past, say, 11 or 12 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing a statement of fact without any indication of contention or disagreement. It presents a data observation regarding the gap between headline PCE and CPI.


Passage number 40.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude for something.


Passage number 41.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Two decimal places. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any further questions for Simon.  [No response]  If not, we need a motion to ratify domestic open market operations since January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a request for questions and a need for a motion to ratify domestic open market operations.


Passage number 42.
 MR. TARULLO.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Without objection.  Okay.  Let’s then turn to our briefings on the economic situation, and David Wilcox will start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the meeting will move on to briefings on the economic situation, starting with David Wilcox. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 43.
 MR. WILCOX.2  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’ll be referring to the packet that is creatively titled “Material for Forecast Summary.”  As shown in the top-left panel by the gap between the red and black lines, the indicators that have been published since the January Tealbook caused us to revise down our near-term forecast for GDP growth in the March Tealbook by a sizable amount.  As you can see in the table to the right by comparing the first two lines, the indicators that were published late last week rearranged the quarterly pattern of GDP growth a little further but left the overall profile of activity broadly unrevised.  This morning’s report on housing starts and permits was a little weaker than we had expected and would take another tenth out of GDP growth in each of the first and second quarters of this year relative to what’s shown in your exhibit.  Meanwhile, in the labor market, payroll employment growth has been roughly in line with our expectations in the January Tealbook after taking account as best we can of likely weather effects, but once again the unemployment rate has come in a little lower than we expected.  Finally, there has been essentially no news on the inflation front. As you know from the Tealbook, we spent a great deal of effort this past round trying to discern how much of the downward surprise to our near-term GDP estimates could be traced to the unusually severe weather that several of you experienced firsthand this winter.  (As one piece of quantitative evidence, the “W” word appears 60 times in Tealbook A, 25 times in the Beige Book’s national summary, and—at last count—15 times in this briefing alone.  I got tired of counting after that.) Our Tealbook assessment was heavily informed by an extensive empirical investigation undertaken by Charlie Gilbert, a member of our Industrial Output section, which is summarized in a box in the Tealbook.  For this exercise, Charlie used daily data from roughly a thousand individual NOAA weather stations to construct measures of extreme weather events at the county level; he then aggregated those readings to the national level using customized activity-related weights and used the resulting measures to explain the behavior of four key monthly economic indicators.  With these highly detailed metrics, Charlie was able to detect noticeable effects from both cold and snow on housing starts and auto sales and some restraint of extreme cold on 2 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). retail sales as well.  Payroll employment seems less sensitive to snow or cold, though the average length of the workweek seems more so. Adding up all the pieces, and taking account of the possibility that some of the weather-related hit to final purchases was likely buffered by inventories, our best guess—as shown on line 5 of the table—is that bad weather may have held down GDP growth this quarter by about four-tenths of a percentage point; next quarter, we expect spending and production to rebound, with no net effect on the level of output after the third quarter. We also think that adverse weather probably had little effect on the unemployment rate and only a modest effect on payroll employment. Some outside analysts have circulated estimates much larger than ours. While we would be the first to acknowledge that a good deal of uncertainty surrounds any assessment of weather effects, including ours, we are skeptical that recent weather effects could have been as large as some of the more adventuresome estimates would suggest.  Our skepticism is born of issues of timing, location, and sector: Some of the unexpected softness in spending predates the period of bad weather; some occurred in areas of the country that did not have bad weather; and some occurred in categories of spending that probably are not very sensitive to bad weather. Thus, in our estimation, even adjusting for weather effects, the recent data point to a somewhat weaker profile of GDP growth than we had expected in January.  As is likely more firmly emblazoned in my memory than yours, a rush of stronger data a few short months ago had encouraged us to mark up our GDP projection in the January Tealbook.  It now appears that some of this optimism was misplaced.  Thus, it is useful to go one step further back and compare the March forecast to the one we made in December, as I have done in the box in the middle-right panel.  The first two lines in the box compare our forecasts of GDP growth over the four quarters ending in the second quarter of this year—a period over which weather effects should come close to washing out; our assessment of GDP growth over that period is essentially unrevised relative to the December Tealbook.  Nonetheless, as can be seen by comparing lines 3 and 4, the unemployment rate appears on track to come in three-tenths below our December Tealbook projection. As I highlighted in my January presentation, this situation—a downside surprise in the unemployment rate despite real GDP growth about in line with our forecast— has been present to a greater or lesser degree for the past couple of years.  In part, we have responded to these forecast errors by trimming our assumption for the growth rate of potential GDP, and we took a further step along these lines in the most recent forecast.  Separately and additionally, this time around we took potential GDP growth in 2015 and 2016 down a touch further to reflect our revised—but still provisional— assessment of the effect that the Affordable Care Act may have on labor supply. The bottom-left panel shows the net effect of these latest revisions on the GDP gap.  By the end of the near term, the output gap is about unchanged relative to our January projection.  Over the medium term, the revisions that we made to potential output growth pass through one-for-one to our projection for actual output; as wemade only minor changes to our other conditioning factors—the only one worth noting being a slightly higher path for the dollar—the projected output gap from the middle of this year onward is little revised relative to January.  Our unemployment rate forecast is similarly essentially unrevised relative to January. In the past, we have emphasized that we would need to see a pickup in GDP growth in order to be assured that labor market conditions would continue to improve.  With the changes to our supply-side assumptions that we have made over the past few rounds, even continued growth along the lines of what we saw, on average, during 2013 would eventually be sufficient to achieve the employment-related goal in the Committee’s dual mandate.  It wouldn’t be speedy, but it would ultimately get the job done. Turning to the other component of the dual mandate, the incoming data on core PCE inflation—shown in the bottom-right panel—have been close to our expectations.  After the Tealbook was closed, we received the February PPI and—this morning—the February CPI; in terms of their implications for our PCE projections, these releases were also close to our expectations. With slack, inflation expectations, and core import prices all little revised from our January forecast, we have made essentially no change to our core inflation forecast; likewise, our projection for headline inflation (not shown) is also mostly unrevised over the medium term.  We therefore continue to expect a modest pickup in inflation over the projection period— though at this point, such a pickup is completely prospective.  Indeed, the anticipated increase is modest enough—especially relative to the usual volatility of the data—that I expect it will be difficult to discriminate in real time as to whether we are seeing the slow attainment of the Committee’s 2 percent target, or whether inflation is actually anchored at some slightly lower level.  Steve Kamin will now continue our projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 44.
 MS. LIPSCOMB.3  Thank you.  I will be referring to the packet labeled “Material for Briefing on the Summary of Economic Projections.”  Exhibit 1 shows the trajectories of your forecasts for key economic variables under the assumption of appropriate monetary policy.  The top panel shows a gradual pickup in real GDP growth this year and next.  Subsequently, in 2016, real GDP growth begins to move back toward its longer-run rate.  Your projections for the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, decline gradually over the forecast period and, by the fourth quarter of 2016, reach levels that the majority of you view as broadly in line with your individual judgments of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment.  The bottom two panels show inflation rising over the next few years; almost all of you see it remaining at or below the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Exhibit 2 compares your current projections with those in the December Summary of Economic Projections and the March Tealbook.  As shown in the top panel, in general, you made only small revisions to your forecasts for real GDP growth.  Most of you revised down projected growth in 2014 slightly, with many noting that some of the softness in recent data may reflect the transitory effects of unusually severe winter weather.  More broadly, the top ends of the central tendencies for growth in each year and in the longer run all moved down somewhat.  As shown in the second panel, the central tendencies of your forecasts for the unemployment rate shifted down by roughly two-tenths in each year of the projection, likely reflecting the actual decline in the unemployment rate in recent months.  In addition, the central tendency of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment narrowed to 5.2 to 5.6 percent.  In the bottom panels, almost all of you left your inflation projections nearly unchanged.  The Tealbook forecast for economic growth is at or near the upper end of your central tendencies over the projection period, while the Tealbook projections for the unemployment rate move from the middle of your central tendency this year to just below the central tendency in 2016.  For inflation, the Tealbook projections are at the bottom of your central tendencies throughout the projection period. Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for the target federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, most of you continue to think that it will be appropriate to begin raising the federal funds rate in 2015.  The middle panel of the exhibit provides your current assessments of the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over the longer run.  Although your expectations about the year in which it will be appropriate for the federal funds rate to leave the effective lower bound are little changed, a number of you marked up your target funds rates over the projection period:  The median funds rate projection now stands at 1 percent in 2015 and 2.25 percent in 2016.  This compares with 75 basis points and 1.75 percent, respectively, in your 3 The materials used by Ms. Lipscomb are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).December projections. On average, the changes to your target federal funds rate projections for the end of 2016 were roughly consistent with the revisions to your unemployment rate projections, assuming a policy reaction function similar to the standard (noninertial) version of the Taylor (1999) rule.  Fourteen of you judge that the funds rate at the end of 2016 will still be below your assessment of its longer-run level. With regard to securities purchases, almost all of you indicated that your assessment of appropriate policy was in line with the assumption in the Tealbook baseline forecast, which has purchases continuing to slow in measured steps and concluding before the end of this year.  Two of you thought it appropriate to reduce the pace of purchases more rapidly and end the purchase program somewhat sooner than assumed in the Tealbook. Exhibit 4 depicts the economic conditions that you anticipate at the end of the year in which you judge that it will be appropriate to raise the federal funds rate above its effective lower bound.  Because liftoff likely won’t occur at year-end, the chart shown is only illustrative of the market conditions around the time of liftoff.  Your projections for the unemployment rate at the end of the year of liftoff range from about 5¼ to 6¼ percent, with a median near 5½ percent, while your inflation projections are clustered between 1½ and 2½ percent, with a median of 1¾ percent.  For the 13 participants who view it as appropriate to first raise the target federal funds rate in 2015 (shown by the white diamonds), all project that the unemployment rate will be below 6 percent, and all but one judge that inflation will be at or below the Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent at the end of the year of liftoff. The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the uncertainty and risks surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the top two panels in the column on the left, nearly all of you judge the current level of uncertainty about real GDP growth and unemployment to be broadly similar to the average level of the past 20 years.  A majority of you also judge the level of uncertainty about inflation, shown in the lower two panels in the column on the left, to be broadly similar to the average over the past 20 years.  As shown in the top two panels in the column on the right, as in December, almost all of you judge the risks to real GDP growth and unemployment to be broadly balanced.  As shown in the bottom two panels in the right-hand column, the majority of you see the risks to inflation as balanced, but five of you now see the risks as weighted to the downside, slightly more than in December.  A few of those who saw risks to growth or inflation as weighted to the downside noted concerns about geopolitical factors or external demand.  That concludes my prepared remarks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  Questions for our presenters.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information and summarizing the projections and assessments of the participants.


Passage number 45.
   MR. ROSENGREN.  I apologize for my inquisitiveness today, but I have two questions.  The first one is for David.  Your memo on the weather effect, line 5, basically says that it washes out over the course of the year, which was basically my intuition.  So if people look at our SEP median forecast and see real GDP is three-tenths lower in 2015 and four-tenths lower in 2016, do you think they will assume that weather had no effect on that because it would have washed out over the course of the year.  As you think about private-sector forecasts and your own forecast, do you think it’s a standard assumption that it will all wash out over the course of a year. My second question actually goes to the alternative scenario about emerging markets in the Risks and Uncertainty section in the Tealbook A.  You have the financial crisis in the EMEs, and the result is a leveling-off of the unemployment rate at 6½ percent.  What’s interesting about this one stress is that it’s different from the others, which are getting more at plausible differences that people might have in their baseline forecasts.  This is getting a little bit more at a financial-stability type of stress, for which I commend you.  I think it’s a good one to be thinking about.  But I do wonder if some of the financial spillovers are incorporated in the modeling that you’re doing.  For example, European banks have a much larger exposure to emerging markets than U.S. banks.  And so if they are having a stress test in Europe at the same time that this emerging market financial crisis occurs, would you see more of a flow coming through Europe. Would you pick up those secondary factors in the way that you’re doing the modeling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 46.
 MR. KAMIN.  I’ll go first.  In regard to the EME crisis simulation, we incorporate some types of financial effects on the U.S. economy, but we don’t incorporate others.  Aside from the strictly macroeconomic effects that we incorporate—which are a bunch of shocks to the EMEs themselves that lower their output as well as flight-to-safety shocks that push up the dollar, both of which reduce our trade balance and have a direct impact on U.S. GDP—we do also  incorporate a number of financial market shocks in the United States itself, specifically upward shocks to corporate bond spreads and to equity premiums that are in part offset by downward shocks to Treasury yields as part of that flight to safety.  So those are the factors that we do build in, and they are factors that our DSGE model can accommodate. You mentioned an additional factor, which is the possibility that because European banks are very exposed to emerging markets, and because U.S. banks of course are very exposed to Europe, that could be an additional channel of spillover and contagion, and we have definitely thought of that.  In the QS surveillance report on financial stability that we prepared in December, there is actually some discussion of that, including a table that directly shows that certain economies, particularly the United Kingdom, Switzerland, and Spain, have pretty heavy exposures to the five fragile EMEs, and that U.S. banks in turn have pretty heavy exposure to the United Kingdom, less to the others.  So that’s a plausible channel of contagion.  It is not one that we have built directly into our simulation, but we could think about doing that.  I would note, additionally, that if you think about these different channels, the United Kingdom, for example, has somewhere in the neighborhood of 60 percent of capital as exposure to EMEs, and then U.S. banks have something on the order of 10 percent of Tier 1 capital in exposure to U.K. banks.  Probably that type of channel alone might not be enough to give you too much bang for the buck in terms of an effect of an EME crisis on U.S. banks, although it would be material. However, noting that the euro-area economy more generally is pretty fragile, and knowing that the situation of European banks in general is fragile and dependent on the outcome for the euro-area economy, if a crisis in EMEs derailed the euro-area recovery, and if it led to thetypes of fears of meltdown that were so prevalent a couple of years ago, then that could truly be an avenue for deep contagion through Europe back to the States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily involves explaining the factors and channels that are incorporated in the simulation and considers the possibility of additional channels of spillover and contagion.


Passage number 47.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think the answer to your question about weather-related effects is “yes,” in the sense that I think they should wash out within the calendar year 2014.  A convenient happenstance of the timing of the storms was that we basically don’t see any effect in the fourth quarter of last year.  So it all starts in the first quarter of this year.  And then we’ve got some complicated razzmatazz built in with payback, and so forth.  But that all works out within the four-quarter span from the fourth quarter of last year to the fourth quarter of this year.  I haven’t seen any outside analysis that materially deviates from that. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the timing and impacts of weather-related effects.


Passage number 48.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have a question for David:  The FOMC statement talks about the Committee “monitoring inflation developments carefully for evidence that inflation will move back toward its objective over the medium term.”  I would welcome counsel from the staff about what kind of evidence we should be looking for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a request for clarification or guidance.


Passage number 49.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t have anything that is not obvious.  Realized inflation would be good to see, inflation projections moving up.  I’m a partisan of ours, so I’d like to see evidence that convinces us.  What would do that would be continued progress on reducing margins of slack.  That will add mechanically, I think, about three-tenths to our projection between now and full attainment of maximum sustainable use of resource utilization. I think that some acceleration in measures of compensation would be consistent with that.  We’ve had compensation growing at the quite tepid rate of only about 2 percent.  A sort of rough rule of thumb is that something more in the neighborhood of 3½ percent might be consistent in  the steady state, with 2 percent inflation and labor’s share holding constant at some level.  Those are a few of the key factors.  Bill, do you have anything material to add.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and suggesting some possible factors that would convince them of their viewpoint.


Passage number 50.
 MR. WASCHER.  No, that’s good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Wascher's response, "No, that's good," indicates agreement or approval.


Passage number 51.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.   CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a polite exchange between Mr. Kocherlakota and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 52.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  David, let’s see, today the unemployment rate is 6.7 percent.  The summary table that you put before us reminds us that the Tealbook has the unemployment rate in the second quarter of 2014 at 6½ percent.  In our June meeting, we will have the May employment report in front of us.  In terms of the Tealbook analysis, what would you say the probability is that the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent at that meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for the probability of the unemployment rate remaining above a certain percentage at a future meeting.


Passage number 53.
 MR. WILCOX. For May, which would be the last report we would have in the scenario that you posed, we have penciled in an unemployment rate equal to 6½ percent.  I suppose there is some probability, which I can’t compute in my head, that we might actually be correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wilcox, mentions that there might be some uncertainty or probability associated with their estimate, but there is no clear disagreement or conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 54.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Let’s round that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of laughter suggests a lighthearted and agreeable atmosphere.


Passage number 55.
 MR. WILCOX.  We could round that to zero.  That would leave three employment reports to be received between now and the June meeting.  I don’t have any reason to believe that the risks are skewed either to the upside or downside importantly over that period of three employment reports.  So I think I’d say that it’s about a 50/50 proposition that unemployment would be either at or above 6½ percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion that the chances of unemployment being at or above 6½ percent are about 50/50.


Passage number 56.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a conversation between Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen where Mr. Evans expresses his gratitude.


Passage number 57.
  MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  To my surprise, I am within the central tendency of all those dots on every front.  Truth in advertising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement by Mr. Fisher expressing his surprise at being in agreement with the "dots" on every front. The phrase "Truth in advertising" at the end does not introduce any disagreement either.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 58.
 MR. TARULLO.  You can revise, Richard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The statement "You can revise, Richard" indicates that there is a suggestion or assertion being made by one person (presumably Mr. Tarullo) to another person named Richard. The use of the word "revise" suggests that there is a difference in opinion or perspective on something that Richard has written or proposed.


Passage number 59.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  I don’t plan to revise, but I do want to ask a question of David on the natural rate—the green line on the unemployment rate chart.  CBO projections of the natural rate go back to the historic year of 1949, Madam Chair, and they range between 5 percent in the early 2000s to 6¼ percent in the 1970s.  Even though it’s hard to tell from the scale, they average about 5.6 percent over that timeframe, 1949 to now.  On the scale that you have here, it’s hard to see, but basically you have us going from 5½ percent to 5.2 percent.  So my question is, why 5.2 percent. Where does that come from.  Why would we be below the historical average and not closer to what we saw in the 1970s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification on why the projected natural rate of unemployment is lower than the historical average.


Passage number 60.
 MR. WASCHER.  I think a lot of the variation in the natural rate over time has been associated with demographics.  So when there was the big influx of teenagers into the labor market in the 1970s, that drove up the natural rate because they tend to have high unemployment rates on average or to change jobs a lot and have periods of unemployment in between.  As we saw the aging of the population, the natural rate looked like it was coming down.  In the mid-2000s, or 2007, say, we thought the natural rate had come down to about 5 percent, and that seemed consistent with what we were seeing in terms of inflation at the time. The demographics are a relatively neutral factor since then, and so we have it basically going back down to where it was prior to the financial crisis by the end of the medium-term forecast period.  Our assumption is that for the most part labor markets are back to functioning normally.  We are not seeing the types of mismatches and things that we think drove up the  natural rate during the financial crisis and the subsequent recession.  So it is basically an assumption that labor markets are going to eventually return to more normal functioning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses the correlation between demographics and the natural rate of unemployment, as well as the assumption that labor markets will eventually return to normal functioning.


Passage number 61.
 MR. FISHER.  The reason I ask is that obviously it’s important if you are trying to get a sense of what the slack is and how far away we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement in which MR. FISHER asks for clarification or information.


Passage number 62.
 MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  I don’t want to overstate our confidence.  There is a lot of uncertainty around any estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is uncertainty around the estimates.


Passage number 63.
 MR. WILCOX.  I would say that that uncertainty is two-sided.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Wilcox states that uncertainty is two-sided. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 64.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes. With regard to the razzmatazz on the weather effect—I love the term “razzmatazz,” by the way—you mentioned automobiles, housing prices and housing activity, consumer activity, and so on.  And I’ll mention this a little bit in my go-round, but I think logistics are also a big part of it.  If you talk to the rails, it is very hard to move trains and trucks, to find drivers, et cetera.  So it may not have affected wages, but in terms of logistics— I’m impressed that Charlie could look at a thousand NOAA weather data points and assemble quite an impressive analysis—but the effect is the same, you expect a snapback.  But I wouldn’t ignore the gearing of the economy and how it was affected, whether it’s river transport, rail transport, air transport, et cetera.  I just wanted to make that point. And then the last point is that I would be very careful not to put Brazil and Mexico in the same basket.  I know you didn’t mean to, but they are geared entirely differently.  One is significantly manufacturing-export driven—the northern one—and the southern one is tremendously vulnerable to commodity prices.  You used them in the same sentence.  I just wanted to warn you.  Both have been underperforming, for sure, but in terms of the potential for recovery, they are geared to different demand functions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply providing additional information and making a point about the different economic situations in Brazil and Mexico.


Passage number 65.
 MR. KAMIN.  I certainly take that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging and agreeing with a point made by someone else.


Passage number 66.
  I guess I would just— MR. FISHER.  Plus, they hate each other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and then another person adds a statement about the animosity between two individuals. However, this does not indicate a disagreement or argument between the speakers themselves.


Passage number 67.
 MR. KAMIN.  Excuse me.  Oh, yes.  Well, what I would note is that for the past year, I, and I believe you and others, have been very heartened by developments in Mexico, by the many reforms that they have passed—things look very promising.  So I have to say, I view with some disappointment the fact that their economy has been underperforming.  If that’s just due to a series of idiosyncratic shocks, and then the economy picks up, as we have it doing in our forecast, that is all well and good.  But when the economy is doing as relatively poorly as it has been doing for this amount of time, that does lead to concerns that maybe there is something underlying that that we are not picking up.  So that’s the source of my concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their disappointment and concern about Mexico's underperforming economy, but there is no indication of any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 68.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply acknowledges gratitude or thanks towards someone named Mr. Fisher. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 69.
 MR. WILCOX.  President Fisher, the logistical kinds of bottlenecks that you are talking about are the types of situations that could give rise to a little inventory buffer.  So it’s a different thing, as you are implicitly pointing out, to try to discern a production effect than it is for the absorption, and in between, inventories could be playing an either intentional or unintentional buffering role.  A lot of the trucking and shipping phenomena that you describe could be in the unintentional category.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining different factors that could contribute to inventory buffering.


Passage number 70.
 MR. FISHER.  You saw that, by the way, in the sale of cereals through food retailers. They were drawing down the inventory because they couldn’t get anything out of Battle Creek, Michigan. So I think that point is correct. CHAIR YELLEN. Vice Chairman Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between Mr. Fisher and Chair Yellen. They both seem to agree on the point being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 71.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I was going to make an observation on the SEP, and if the staff want to react to it, they are very welcome to.  When I’m looking through the SEP, and I compare the changes in the 2016 numbers in terms of growth and inflation and unemployment,   and then I compare those with the change in the interest rate projections, it seems like the change in the interest rate projection is pretty large relative to the change in the central tendency and, in fact, the ranges. If you look at the unemployment rate, the changes are basically two-tenths at the top end and one-tenth at the bottom end, but the longer run is also being brought down by two-tenths at the top end.  On the range, there is a change of two-tenths at the top end, but that is offset by a one-tenth increase at the bottom end.  So basically you have a net change in the unemployment rate projection from December of, it looks like, one-tenth of 1 percentage point.  And if you look at the inflation numbers, they are basically unchanged for the central tendency, but they are actually lower for the range. So you get a 50 basis point move in the interest rate projection for what essentially seems like a marginal change in the unemployment rate projection and a change in the inflation projections that actually goes the other way.  If one were looking at this from the outside, would one view this as all fitting together. In contrast, I think the Tealbook forecast hangs together a lot better, because there you have upward revisions to inflation, downward revisions to unemployment, and then you have an upward revision to interest rates. It seems to me like we have a little bit of a challenge as a Committee here because either the SEP doesn’t hang together or there is just unbelievable interest rate sensitivity to incredibly minute changes in the unemployment rate. CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, you would expect, what, one-fourth of a point, two-tenths, on the interest rate for a movement of one-tenth in the unemployment rate with Taylor (1999), right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing disagreement or contention regarding the perceived inconsistency between the changes in the interest rate projections and the changes in the unemployment rate and inflation projections. They suggest that the interest rate projection seems disproportionately large compared to the marginal changes in the unemployment rate and inflation projections.


Passage number 72.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I certainly wouldn’t expect 50 basis points.  So I just throw that out there as an observation, and I’m curious if you have any reactions.  You don’t have to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal expectation and curiosity about a specific topic. They are not disagreeing or arguing with anyone.


Passage number 73.
 MR. WILCOX.  Well, I can’t speak for the 16 of you.  In terms of our forecast, though, just so you know what reflecting glass you are confronting—this situation motivates precisely our modus operandi of adopting a transparent and very mechanical approach to setting the monetary policy assumption.  So what we do, as best we can, is listen very carefully to the guidance that you give us, and we took that on board, for example, with respect to the liftoff date.  We interpreted the second quarter of 2015 as consistent with your statement in January that there would be a period of time between the cessation of asset purchases and the liftoff. After that, we turn over the setting of the funds rate to the inertial Taylor (1999) rule.  That’s what we did in December.  That’s what we did now.  So, in some sense, the settings on the box that is churning out these results are unrevised.  And what we’re trying to do is project back to you a forecast that is coherent and iterated.  In other words, it takes on board the monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It mainly describes the approach and actions taken by Mr. Wilcox and his team in setting the monetary policy assumption.


Passage number 74.
  So as best as we can, up to the limits of fallibility, the monetary policy assumption goes with the economic projection and the economic— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It feeds through mechanically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a process or assumption.


Passage number 75.
 MR. WILCOX.  Indeed.  And the economic projection goes with the monetary policy.  But policy in some sense is unrevised, and there is just a mechanical formula that drives the revisions that you are seeing in our funds rate assumption. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota has a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 76.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think the Vice Chairman raises some good points.  I’m not one of the people who revised their outlook for the federal   funds rate in 2016, under appropriate policy and all that—but one way to think about this is that participants might be reflecting their view of the headwinds that are prevailing at that time to give rise to those economic conditions.  So it’s really about their valuation of what the appropriate intercept is in the Taylor rule, as opposed to anything else.  And that’s hard to get at just through these questions.  So the reason alternative B talks about the Committee keeping the fed funds rate unusually low, consistent with maximum employment and target inflation, is because headwinds are so strong.  But if people change their evaluation of what those headwinds are, that’s going to lead to changes in what they think the appropriate fed funds rate is as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the good points raised by the Vice Chairman and agrees with the idea that participants' views on the appropriateness of the federal funds rate may be influenced by their evaluation of the prevailing headwinds and economic conditions. The speaker further explains that alternative B suggests keeping the fed funds rate unusually low due to the strength of these headwinds, but acknowledges that if participants' evaluation of these headwinds changes, it may lead to changes in their view of the appropriate fed funds rate.


Passage number 77.
 MR. ENGLISH.  If I may, one point that’s worth thinking about is something that Thomas Laubach looked into.  He applied a noninertial Taylor (1999) rule to the SEP contributions for unemployment and inflation in December and in March and found he actually could explain, on average, essentially all of the change in the funds rate contributions. There was a change in the coverage—who was submitting in December and in March—and that matters some as well, but in fact I think that, looking around the table, on average the people who are here were reflecting something like a Taylor (1999) rule in their contributions for the funds rate. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion of a research finding and the agreement among participants on the effectiveness of using a Taylor (1999) rule.


Passage number 78.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Steve, you helpfully drew our attention to a couple of potentially significant external risks, and I wonder if you could elaborate on both of them—that is, China and Ukraine. With respect to China, the question is, what’s the magnitude of the risk. If, for example, we hypothesize that instead of just slipping a bit, growth slipped pretty substantially—say, to 5 percent, which for China is a recession—what would your expected impact on world GDP be.  And then, with respect to Ukraine—I know anything that’s geopolitical in origin is hard to trace through because in the first instance it’s not an economic event that follows on, but instead a set of reactions to a political event—but how would you see a potential problem in Ukraine spilling over into the rest of the world. Is it principally a geopolitical—that is, a military—conflict, or is it a debt issue.  And if the latter, to whom do they owe money and, particularly, how much do they owe to people other than Russians.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for elaboration on two potential risks and seeking information on their potential impacts.


Passage number 79.
 MR. KAMIN.  Let me start with Ukraine and I’ll work back to China.  On Ukraine, there are really quite a number of different channels by which a deepening of the crisis there could affect the global economy and the United States.  So let me start with in some sense the most normal channels:  Imagine that Ukraine is just an ordinary emerging market economy, not located where it is but, let’s say, in South America, and is having deep financial problems.  It’s getting an IMF program but is widely expected to have great difficulties. Probably in that case the effect of its crisis deepening, leading it to default on some of its obligations, would be pretty small because, first, it’s a very small economy.  In terms of global trade, it accounts for less than 1 percent, and in terms of U.S. trade, less than 1 percent.  So on the real side, it wouldn’t have too much of an effect.  On the debt side, it has a weight in the emerging market bond indexes that is probably, I think, in the neighborhood of 1 or 2 percent, and in terms of its weight in U.S. bank exposure, less than 1 percent.  You name it—it’s very hard, when you consider the country by itself, to identify a big effect.  So just by virtue of that, those normal spillovers would not have such a big effect. Those effects become somewhat more discernible if you want to suggest—now putting Ukraine back where it is—that its economy as it implodes could drag down Russia’s, which would not be that likely, frankly, if only economic factors were present, but could becomerelevant as the political factors become more present. Russia, of course, is still not a particularly large world trader. It probably accounts for somewhere in the neighborhood of 2 or 3 percent of world trade.  It only accounts for about 1 percent of U.S. trade.  So, again, the impacts are not huge, even if Russia is brought into the fray, but they’re getting to be more material. The impacts that are more concerning are the following:  If the political situation were to deepen such that trade relations between Russia, Ukraine, and Western Europe were damaged, Europe is highly dependent on them for natural gas, and in addition the weight of Russia and Ukraine in European trade is a bit higher—though it’s still not great, around 5 percent.  So that’s one concern, and given the fragility of the euro-area recovery, that’s a material risk. But the bigger risk really is geopolitical, and that’s the risk that came to the fore a couple of weeks ago, right after the Crimea incursion, when global markets took a dive the following day.  They recovered on Tuesday when it became apparent to most investors that the events probably were not going to trigger a deep standoff, but that’s the risk that I think is most worrisome—that geopolitical problems leading to a real rift between the West and Russia could snowball in some way.  That would be extremely uncertain, and because markets don’t like uncertainty, they could really plunge.  And in that context, the impact on the economic expansion, particularly in Europe, could be quite damaging.  So that’s the Ukraine part. On China, the scenario that we worry about is that some combination of slower growth in China interacts with the financial fragilities there—the property market, the shadow banking market, the tremendous amount of dodgy loans—and that those two combine to lead to a financial crisis that pushes growth down a lot further. So then what’s the impact on the global economy and the United States.  It’s pretty hard to tell.  I will note that in the fall we did a simulation in the Tealbook that looked at a China hard landing.  In that scenario, Chinese growthfell to something in the neighborhood of 5 percent, which is considered quite low by historical standards, and aggregate foreign GDP growth ended up coming in some 3 percent below baseline.  That pushed U.S. GDP about 1 percent or so below baseline, which actually seems moderately contained. I am thinking as I review that simulation that it might not have given enough weight to financial factors that might attend those developments.  I actually think that if Chinese growth fell to 5 percent or below, it would create downdrafts in global financial markets that would lead to further downward pressures on GDP in China, in EMEs, in foreign advanced economies, and in the United States that would make injury greater than the 1 percent in that simulation. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Seeing no more questions, why don’t we begin our economic go-round. President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 80.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided a passage for me to analyze. Could you please provide the passage, so that I can determine if there is contention or disagreement?


Passage number 81.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair. In California, we’ve had the warmest winter on record.  [Laughter] Let me say that again.  In California, we’ve had the warmest winter on record—when, in much of the country outside my District, I have been told, the economy has been suffering through winter headwinds, literally.  Cold, snowy gales have held back growth.  Pinning down the effects of adverse weather on economic activity is always difficult, even well after the fact, but it appears a good share of the recent economic slowdown reflects unseasonable cold and snow.  For example, one of my business contacts, the head of a national freight-trucking company, reported a huge upswing in weather-related disruptions to his operations.  In a typical winter, he reports that about 2 percent of his shipments are delayed by weather, but this winter it has been more than 12 percent. This is December through February.  Now, since these trucks generally run at capacity, the commercial business loss is very hard to make up, perhaps even  after accounting for inventory adjustments.  A contact at a national retail chain tells a similar story.  Although they never like to use the so-called weather excuse for poor sales performance, this time he believes it is appropriate. Still, with some of the lost consumption and output merely postponed, I’ve marked down real GDP growth for the four quarters of this year by only a tenth, to just less than 3 percent. This modest revision reflects small permanent losses that are due to bad weather and a bit of underlying softening in the data. Looking further ahead, my outlook for growth remains unchanged at just over 3 percent for the next two years. Similarly, after adjusting for weather, favorable labor market trends are continuing, and I expect the unemployment rate to fall to almost 6 percent by year-end and to 5½ percent, close to my estimate of the natural rate, by the end of 2015. Although I view the risks to this projection as balanced, the latest slump in the housing sector is worrisome.  Even abstracting from adverse weather—I think I’m up to three uses of “weather” so far, David—the single-family starts and permits data are disappointing.  By now I expected housing to be much more of a tailwind for the recovery.  Also troubling is the drop-off in existing home sales since the middle of last year, which feeds through to fewer purchases of durable goods like furniture and appliances. As many in the popular press have suggested, slackening demand from institutional investors appears responsible for some of the decline in home sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and analysis about the impact of weather on the economy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 82.
  At a granular MSA level, my staff has found that recent sales have fallen more in those cities with a large investor presence. Furthermore, sales have slowed most in cities in which home prices have risen fastest relative to rents, implying that investors may be running out of attractive buying opportunities to pencil out.  But I’m skeptical that a decline in investor demand is a significant factor behind the  falloff in overall existing home sales.  My staff has found that the timing and the size of the sales decline were very similar across all of the broad regional markets.  So any location-specific factor is unlikely to be the whole story.  In fact, their empirical analysis indicates that before the winter weather hit, about half of the drop in home sales can be explained by last year’s jump in mortgage rates.  Looking ahead, their models predict that home sales should pick up, boosted by the underlying fundamentals, and this outlook is supported by what some upstream housing-related businesses are telling us.  For example, a major window and door manufacturer in my District reports solid orders and sees a pickup ahead.  This suggests that the latest disappointing housing data are just a soft patch, and that growth in housing will provide greater support for the recovery later this year. Turning to inflation, I continue to expect that it will gradually return to our 2 percent target over the next few years.  Admittedly, so far the consumer price data have shown little sign of cooperating with my projection.  The 12-month overall and core PCE inflation rates have stubbornly remained at about 1 percent for almost a year.  Furthermore, labor cost growth remains muted, and my business contacts uniformly indicate that they’re still implementing modest wage increases and unchanged merit pools.  On a more optimistic note, financial market participants appear to have become more confident about the return of inflation to our target. This assessment is based on what financial derivatives, such as inflation caps and floors, are saying about the risks that inflation will move too high or too low. So my staff has been tracking the implied risk-neutral probability that inflation over the next year will be in a 1 percentage point range around our target.  Just to be clear, this is based on CPI data, and we put a 0.3 percentage point gap between rates of PCE and CPI inflation, so we were looking at a 2.3 percent CPI.  They find that the probability that inflation will be in this target range has almost doubled over the past year, moving up from about 20 percent to 40 percent, and financial market participants are putting money on the table that both the upside and the downside tail risks to the inflation outlook are lower than they’ve been in recent years.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The passage starts by stating that recent sales have fallen more in cities with a large investor presence, implying that investors may be running out of attractive buying opportunities. However, the speaker is skeptical that a decline in investor demand is a significant factor behind the overall decline in existing home sales. This disagreement suggests a difference in interpretation or analysis of the data.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 83.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My own forecast is quite similar to that of the Tealbook.  I have the economy growing for the rest of this year at roughly 3 percent and then growing slightly faster in 2015.  This growth is sufficient to return the economy to my estimate of the natural rate of unemployment of 5¼ percent by the end of 2016, which, if correct, means that it will have taken nine years to reach full employment from the beginning of the recession in late 2007. Because I expect the PCE inflation rate in 2016 to undershoot our 2 percent inflation target by a bit, I have the federal funds rate somewhat lower than the staff assumption at the end of 2016.  Thus, almost a decade after the onset of recession, we will still be undershooting the explicit inflation target we have adopted.  Such a prolonged miss on inflation and unemployment is one reason for doing all we can to ensure that the return to full employment occurs as quickly as possible. I would note a couple of caveats associated with my forecast.  First, I want to thank the staff for doing an incredibly painstaking job estimating the impact of weather on data for the first quarter of this year. My own staff did a careful but somewhat less comprehensive appraisal of the impact of weather on recent data and, like the Board staff, concluded that the effect on this quarter’s real GDP would be rather modest. My estimate of first-quarter real growth, at a bit below 2 percent, implies that growth this quarter likely would have been roughly only 2 percent even in the absence of weather problems.  This makes me worry.  To date, the incoming data provide little evidence of a self-sustaining recovery that attains or exceeds 3 percent growth.While I and many others are forecasting such a recovery, tangible support for the forecast has yet to appear in the data, providing ample reason for caution as we consider our policy tomorrow.   A second caveat is that I still believe that the risks to the forecast are slightly skewed to the downside.  My modal forecast assumes that a variety of foreign disruptions do not turn into a much larger headwind.  Were developments in Ukraine or China to take a turn for the worse, the U.S. economy might face more severe headwinds.  In particular, problems in Ukraine have the possibility of being very disruptive to the fragile recovery in Europe.  Furthermore, European banks are much more exposed to Eastern Europe and emerging markets than U.S. banks and are less well positioned to suffer another adverse shock.  Similarly, developments in China have sent reverberations through financial and commodity markets.  More-severe economic problems there have the potential to be disruptive.  I would note that the 10-year Treasury rate has remained fairly stable, somewhat below 3 percent, since the end of last year.  These sustained low rates in the face of an improving economy suggest to me that investors continue to put significant weight on the possibility that international developments could derail our forecast of accelerating growth. A third caveat is that I continue to estimate that there is significant slack in labor markets. Not only is the unemployment rate at 6.7 percent, well above my estimate of full employment, but other indicators of slack tell a similar story. My staff has been looking at broader measures of unemployment such as U-6.  This broader measure of unemployment rose significantly during the recession and remains elevated relative to historical averages and also relative to our more traditional U-3 measure. The main driver of the unusual increase is the large number of workers reporting that they are working part time for economic reasons.  Last week’s employment announcement reported that 7.2 million Americans want full-time work but are currently   working part time.  This compares with only 4.6 million workers in that situation in December 2007. Furthermore, of those 7.2 million workers who are part time but seeking full-time work, 4.3 million report that the reason they are part-time is because of slack work or business conditions.  Note that unlike those that are classified as marginally attached to the workforce, there is no doubt that these people are willing to work since they are already working.  While much more work needs to be done on these measures, that these measures remain so elevated appears consistent with the contention that significant slack remains in the labor force. Whether one looks at the elevated measures of labor market slack or the continued low readings on compensation and PCE inflation, together they provide ample justification for maintaining a highly accommodative monetary policy for a considerable time.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is expressing concern and disagreement with the staff's assumption that the economy will reach full employment and inflation targets by the end of 2016. He believes that the economy is not showing enough evidence of a self-sustaining recovery and that there are still risks and uncertainties that could derail the forecast. He also argues that there is still significant slack in the labor market and justifies maintaining accommodative monetary policy.


Passage number 84.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Since our January meeting, the incoming data on the real economy have been somewhat soft, leading us to mark down our near-term forecast. However, it seems likely that a good portion of the slowing in activity is the result of an unusually difficult winter combined with a modest inventory swing. For the moment, it is most likely that the underlying growth trend remains reasonably healthy.  This view aligns well with reports from my business contacts.  Among those in the Midwest, all reported some weather-related slowing in their business.  Many have national business lines that were influenced beyond simply my frigid District boundaries.  Nevertheless, the tone of their reports remains quite optimistic and somewhat better than in January.  They all expect that activity will pick up once the weather improves. Of course, for most of my contacts, these are simply expectations.  While their conversations with customers were encouraging, they have yet to see a sustained increase in actual orders.  And, given the difficulties in assessing the weaker incoming data, it is not surprising that a few reports raise some cautions.  For instance, the auto industry has seen car inventories rise well above desired levels.  So far they have not reduced production, but they may need to do so if they don’t see improving sales in the next couple of months. On the inflation front, cost pressures remain low.  A number of contacts noted falling input prices, such as those for iron ore, steel, and other metals.  This included some businesses with fairly upbeat assessments on demand.  Weakness in China and emerging market economies accounts for some of the reduced demand pressures on materials prices, but a few reports indicated that additional supplier capacity also contributed to reduced materials prices.  Most of those reports were related to iron ore mining. Of the largest input cost—labor—I heard no concerns about overall wage cost increases. Sure, some skilled areas continue to be in high demand.  For example, one director cited complaints about shortages of long-haul truck drivers.  Another director in the staffing industry added that drivers quitting for better jobs was something that one often sees in the earliest stages of a labor market rebound. My CDIAC participants, many of whom are located outside of large metropolitan areas, say it is difficult to find more-skilled workers.  But this really is nothing new.  They have been saying this for quite some time, and my agriculture, labor, and small business advisory councils also recount these perennial challenges.  Frankly, a lot of what I hear from such groups is really about how difficult it always is to run businesses requiring new technologies in smaller regionalmarkets.  Importantly, they don’t appear to be on the leading edge in offering higher wages in order to solve their labor difficulties. With regard to our national economic outlook, our forecast of GDP growth for this year is down three-tenths since our previous submission, but that is all due to a weaker first quarter.  Looking through the inventory swings and the weather-related slowdown, final demand growth appears to be on a rising trajectory.  So for the balance of the year we still expect growth to average 3 percent or a bit more, with similar numbers in 2015 and 2016.  In our forecast, that kind of growth is enough to eliminate almost all the slack in the economy by the end of 2016. However, the low inflation outlook remains quite a concern.  The numbers haven’t changed for several meetings.  We are still running far below our target.  My SEP submission does envision an eventual increase in inflation, but we expect it to be slow—only getting to 1¾ percent by the end of 2016.  That’s my forecast, but I have to say that my level of conviction isn’t very high.  While diminishing slack plays some role, my forecast relies heavily on well-anchored inflation expectations pulling actual inflation up toward our 2 percent target.  While we’ve been waiting for this reversion to expectation for quite a while now, it would be useful if we, as a Committee, put a time frame on the table for how long we will allow inflation to seriously underrun our 2 percent PCE objective, much as President Kocherlakota was alluding to when he was asking about what the inflation markers are.  I think it would be very helpful for us to have more of a discussion. The 2 percent inflation floor presented in alternative A is a useful option if we are serious about defending our inflation objective from below.  For the time being, I am sticking to my view that we will get the expectations updraft and that inflation will move slowly back toward our 2 percent target, but I certainly see downside risks to this forecast.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 85.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Despite the significant impact that adverse weather conditions appeared to have on the Sixth District economy, business optimism is still running high.  For the most part, firms are looking through the weather events and are positive about the economic outlook for the balance of the year.  Firms seem to be operating under the assumption that the business environment for the final three quarters of 2014 will resemble the second half of 2013.  But we did hear an earful about weather effects in our most recent round of contacts.  Per these anecdotal reports, there was virtually no industry in the Sixth District north of Florida and east of Mississippi that was unaffected by bad weather. Contacts reported large cuts in sales and production in areas that were adversely affected by the weather. That’s three mentions of “weather” so far.  Are you counting these.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the impact of adverse weather conditions on the Sixth District economy and the optimism that businesses still have despite this.


Passage number 86.
 MR. WILCOX.  I am.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: unable to come to an agreement with the other party.


Passage number 87.
  [Laughter] MR. LOCKHART. The nation’s largest auto retailer said that sales fell abruptly and the decline was felt across all product and service lines.  He pointed out that when underlying demand changes, spending usually shifts between the new, used, and service categories.  In this instance, spending fell across the board. The Southeast’s largest utility reported that power usage shifted dramatically from commercial and industrial usage to residential in those areas experiencing bad weather. We also heard expectations of a protracted recovery process, particularly in transportation and the domestic supply chain.  These views run counter to the quick bounceback thesis.  Long story short, anecdotal reports of a sizable weather effect were widespread and consistent with my staff’s estimate that the weather cut first-quarter GDP growth by ¾ percentage point.  Regarding the Tealbook’s observation that three inches of snow probably has a different effect in Athens, Georgia, than in Athens, Ohio, we actually checked.  Both the University of Georgia and Ohio University were closed because of bad weather.  [Laughter] In considering the outlook, even with a different reading of the weather effects in the first quarter, our forecast is virtually identical to that of the Tealbook.  My outlook interprets the softness in the first quarter as a one-off development.  I am looking at the risks around growth as broadly balanced.  In my view, factors external to the United States economy—Ukraine, China, emerging markets imbalances—have gotten louder.  At the same time, I view headwinds coming from domestic sources as quieter. As regards the balance of risks for inflation, I see those as weighted to the downside.  Recent readings on wages and prices do not hint at a move in any direction from the current low rate. I am increasingly of the view—very similar to President Rosengren’s view—that a shadow workforce exists that is not adequately captured by the most-used measures of labor market conditions, particularly the U-3 unemployment rate, and that this shadow workforce must be taken into account in determining how near or far we are from full employment. Low wage growth amid modestly improving productivity trends suggests that there could be continued downward pressure on the inflation rate.  If this risk plays out, I am thinking we may need to consider strategies for increasing accommodation at some point during the current forecast horizon.  I will have more to say about that in the policy round.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides a summary of various reports and perspectives on the economy, including observations and forecasts by different individuals and organizations.


Passage number 88.
  MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  To commemorate this being your first formal meeting, I wore the special “Janet Yellen” tie— CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply portrays a polite exchange between Mr. Fisher and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 89.
 MR. FISHER. —which shows the donkeys, who are the Democrats, and the elephants, who are the Republicans, just butting heads, and you flying in—I think it’s on the wings of a dove— CHAIR YELLEN.  I believe it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of a statement where Mr. Fisher is describing a political situation using figurative language, and Chair Yellen simply confirms his statement.


Passage number 90.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have not found the recent incoming data overly informative in light of the abnormal winter weather.  Many of my business contacts alluded to the severe weather in their recent reports.  One of them noted that good news that he’s   heard is due to good management.  Bad news is weather related.  And my staff also suspects that a fair amount of the recent softness in the data has been weather related. As a result, I’ve only edged down my near-term growth forecast.  I still see the economy reaching a pace of more than 3 percent output growth in the latter half of this year.  I also continue to expect progress on unemployment, with the unemployment rate reaching 6.2 percent by the end of the year.  While a number of commodity price indexes are up recently, broader consumer inflation readings remain subdued, and I have left my inflation forecast largely unchanged.  I continue to expect PCE inflation to rise from a little more than 1 percent this year to about 1½ percent next year. Because concerns have been raised about the unemployment rate as an indicator of current labor market slack, my staff reviewed the state of a wide range of labor market indicators.  A good number of these indicators reveal a labor market that has improved substantially and continues to improve.  For example, if we exclude the data affected by the recent severe winter weather, average weekly hours of production and supervisory employees are back to the levels reached midway through the most recent expansion.  The same holds true for the job openings rate from the JOLTS data. Stronger labor market data like these may lead some to question our extremely accommodative monetary policy stance.  However, as others have pointed out, other indicators suggest that there’s still a lot of slack in the labor market.  For example, wage growth remains tepid and many workers are involuntarily working part time.  These conflicting indicators make it challenging to gain an overall assessment of the state of the labor market, and the lack of clarity in the labor market may add to communications challenges for the Committee as we continue to focus on meeting our maximum employment objective. The picture is different on the inflation side of the dual mandate.  PCE inflation is running well below our longer-run objective.  While CPI-based measures are higher, research done by my staff suggests that at least part of this difference is attributable to increases in OER inflation, but the ultimate source of these homeownership cost increases is unclear at this point.  I continue to project that our accommodative monetary policy, a strengthening economy, and stable inflation expectations will bring inflation back toward 2 percent.  But I expect that the process will be very slow, a view that is shared by the Tealbook.  Furthermore, my inflation forecasts have tended to creep lower ever so slightly with the passage of time.  Thus, I continue to see this outlook for inflation as my primary motivation for my position on monetary policy, which I’ll discuss tomorrow. In general, I see the risks to my projections as broadly balanced.  The real economy faces a number of downside risks, including recent geopolitical events and the potential slowdowns in key foreign economies.  But the economy has also shown considerable resilience over the past year, and as the fiscal drag eases and the labor market improves, upside surprises are certainly plausible.  At this point these risks to output growth are also the primary risks to my unemployment and inflation projections, resulting in my assessment of risks to both inflation and unemployment as balanced.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  I suggest we stop now and take a little break.  [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay, everybody.  Let’s continue with our go-round.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 91.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Tenth District economy has continued to expand at a modest pace with considerable support from the energy and agriculture sectors, so my comments about the region will focus on those two sectors. The recent winter weather has been a net positive for the energy industry, as natural gas prices rose considerably and oil prices remained at high levels.  As a result, energy firms in the District are seeing more cash flow from natural gas operations, which will likely be used to invest in further drilling for oil and natural gas liquids over the next 6 to 12 months.  Natural gas inventories are now very low and will need to be replenished ahead of next winter.WTI crude oil prices benefited from the opening of the Keystone Pipeline’s southern leg, which began shipping crude oil from Cushing, Oklahoma, to refineries in the Gulf Coast on January 22.  This development eased the bottleneck at Cushing, narrowing the spread between WTI and Brent crude oil significantly, from more than $13 per barrel to around $8. In the agriculture sector, farm income is expected to drop by more than 25 percent in 2014 from last year’s record levels, driven primarily by a sharp drop in expected crop prices.  Strong profitability in recent years should provide some liquidity for the farm sector in 2014, and the recent farm bill appears to have enhanced the safety net for some producers who could begin to face financial difficulties.  However, rural bankers in farm communities have indicated that the negative outlook for 2014 will likely stress the broader economy in their lending areas.  Gains in farmland values have begun to slow, with lower farm income expectations, although demand for quality farmland remains solid.  In the fourth quarter of 2013, District cropland values increased less than 1 percent from the third quarter, but they remain 9 percent higher than a year ago. My outlook for the national economy is basically unchanged from January, although I did revise down my outlook for the first quarter of this year by ½ percentage point, reflecting slightly more drag from inventory investment and payback for the stronger-than-expected growth in nonresidential fixed investment in the fourth quarter.  Weather-induced shifts in real activity during the winter months should have little impact on 2014 growth, according to analysis by my staff, although weather undoubtedly had some effect on certain labor market indicators, such as the decline in hours worked in February. Looking through some of these short-term fluctuations, I continue to expect above-trend growth of 2.6 percent this year, rising to 3 percent for the rest of the forecast horizon.  I would  also note that over the four quarters ending in 2013:Q3, real GDI continues to grow faster than real GDP.  The drivers for this growth outlook reflect fading fiscal drag and stronger growth in domestic demand. Business fixed investment also seems poised to move higher as corporate profits remain near record levels, although my business contacts continue to cite uncertainty and regulation as persistent headwinds. One contact noted that markets have rewarded publicly-traded companies for buybacks versus capital investments, which tend to pressure their margins. I remain encouraged by the progress in labor markets.  Over the past two years, an index developed by my staff to measure labor market activity shows sustained improvement supported by historically high levels of momentum.  Most of the key variables in that index improved over the past year.  In particular, the unemployment rate fell 1 percentage point and U-6 fell 1.7 percentage points, the largest year-over-year decline in its history, and the number of people working part time for economic reasons also fell substantially.  Finally, the NFIB survey indicates that small businesses are close to being more concerned about the quality of labor than about poor sales. With regard to inflation, with measures of inflation expectations holding steady, the labor market continuing to gradually normalize, and wage inflation moving higher, I expect inflation to firm and move toward 2 percent over the next few years.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and offering their outlook on the Tenth District economy, the energy and agriculture sectors, and the national economy.


Passage number 92.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I don’t take much signal from the slowdown in real GDP growth in the current quarter.  I agree with everyone that weather played a role.  I think the effect was probably a little bit greater than in the Tealbook, because there are probably some effects that are hard to measure.  So it’s probably a little bit  more than ½ percentage point rather than a little bit less than ½ percentage point, but I’m not going to quibble. Also, I don’t take much signal from the slowdown in real GDP growth because we did expect some payback from the contributions to GDP from inventories and trade in the current quarter, which were important in boosting the economy in the second half of last year.  I also think the fact that the payroll employment growth trajectory has held up makes me a bit more optimistic that this is just a short-lived pause.  To quote that well-known economic prognosticator, Chauncey Gardner, who was the main protagonist of Being There, “There will be growth in the spring.”  [Laughter] That said, I do take some signal from a couple of things.  The first thing from which I take a signal is the downward revisions to consumer spending that we have seen in the fourth quarter of 2013.  That does suggest that there is a little bit less impetus for growth from the household sector.  And I also take some signal from the fact that housing activity seems to have taken a greater hit from the backup in mortgage rates over the past year than I would have expected. There is also a broader question that I have been grappling with:  What is the impetus to faster growth in a global context.  It seems that several EMEs around the world are going to have to move to smaller current account deficits or to current account surpluses, if capital flows reverse.  China’s growth also seems to be a considerable downside risk.  We talked about that earlier.  And so I asked myself the question, what is the impetus on the other side that would push the global economy along at a faster pace. With respect to Ukraine, I agree that the direct effects on the U.S. economy are pretty trivial.  But if it goes a particular way, one in which there is a big standoff between the West and Russia and there are sanctions, I can imagine prettysizable effects because there could actually be a disruption to commodity supply, and then you would have a significant supply shock to the global economy. My bottom line is that I’m more optimistic still than I was a year ago. I still expect the economy to rebound to about a 3 percent growth trajectory over the remainder of the year as the fiscal drag abates and consumer spending and business fixed investment are supported by buoyant financial conditions.  But at the same time, I don’t think a fast recovery is yet “in the bag.”  I’m worried about the downside risks to my forecast, especially given the fact that our forecast errors have mostly been on that side in recent years. On inflation, I agree with President Kocherlakota that the 2 percent objective is supposed to be a target that you hit over time—it’s not a ceiling.  And so I think we should be trying to spend half the time marginally on both sides of that 2 percent objective.  But I am not as concerned as he is about the fact that we are continuing to track a bit below our target.  Inflation expectations are well anchored.  The slack in the economy appears to be gradually diminishing.  Compensation trends appear stable. Nominal incomes are rising.  So apart from the core inflation readings themselves, the situation doesn’t seem very dire. Also, I do think that core inflation will drift up over the next few months for several reasons. First, some of the softness, as the staff has pointed out over time, is due to special factors.  In addition to the very benign trend for some nonpriced services, health-care price trends have been unusually subdued.  And some of this is due to a one-time shift last April in Medicare reimbursement rates that won’t be repeated.  That is going to fall out of the numbers once we get the April data.  Also, I think the increase in home prices is almost certainly going to feed through more into owners’ equivalent rent and rental prices.  I would be very surprised if a   year from now we don’t see core inflation higher by at least a few tenths of a percent, if not more.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 93.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The first thing I want to say is, if that staff person who did all the weather work has researched and filled out an NCAA bracket, I think he should circulate it [laughter] before the deadline for getting your stuff into the pools.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 94.
 MR. FISHER.  Can we split the profit prize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if it is possible to divide the profit prize.


Passage number 95.
 MR. WILCOX.  He is subcontracted to Nate Silver.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Mr. Wilcox is subcontracted to Nate Silver.


Passage number 96.
 MR. TARULLO.  I join what seems to me to be something of a consensus around the table that, although developments since the previous FOMC meeting suggest a little diminution in the momentum of the economy, the basic narrative hasn’t changed.  I also agree that a notable development since then has been a significant increase in externally generated downside risks, although, for some of the reasons that Steve explained earlier, it is hard to quantify those, at least at this point. Like President Lacker, I am going to dedicate most of what I say to labor markets, although probably with a somewhat different direction.  But I do want to begin with a point of agreement with Jeff, which is that in speaking about the anticipated shift in our guidance we should emphasize the fact that we are getting to the 6.5 percent threshold, and of course that is exactly what the language in the proposed paragraph 7 does.  It says, “with the unemployment rate nearing 6½ percent.” I think it continues to be difficult to reconcile, at least on the basis of past experience and consequent expectations, everything that has been going on in labor markets.  It seems that, for each piece of information suggesting structural change in the labor markets—such as the large number of people out of the labor force who report that they don’t want a job—there is another piece of information suggesting that significant slack remains— such as the continued elevated levels of people who report working part time but who would like a full-time job, which is reflected, of course, in the U-6 number that several people have cited. We probably are going to continue to have to read most labor market indicators more tentatively than one might have done prior to the recession.  Some, like the U.S. Beveridge curve, have only a relatively short history to begin with.  And even those that have been around a lot longer are likely to be of at least somewhat less assistance in interpreting broader economic trends, precisely because the magnitude of the financial crisis and the Great Recession have either delayed the reversion of behavior by employers and workers to pre-crisis norms, accelerated secular changes in the economy, including labor market dynamism changes that were already at work, introduced a new set of changes in labor market behavior that will persist, or some combination of all three of these possibilities. There are a number of arguments out there now that purport to establish structural explanations based on experience to date.  In each case, there is, or at some point may be, something to these explanations.  But I don’t think that they can be more than hypotheses right now.  I have to confess to some disappointment that nobody has raised some of those yet today, because I had prepared a stunning rebuttal to any such arguments.  [Laughter]  So I am going to omit several of them—unless one of you has the temerity next time to mention it, in which case I will still be prepared—and instead just talk about one, which is the argument for less slack based on the fact that the rate of short-term unemployment has returned to pre-recession levels. I don’t think this observation tells us too much beyond the fact that the rate of separations has come down substantially, and that there is hiring going on.  Since the short-term unemployed   become, by definition, long-term unemployed after 26 weeks, the declining rate of separations assures that there is going to be a limited universe of the short-term unemployed.  And, more important, it doesn’t really address the issue that should be central for us, which is how much slack does remain in labor markets.  That is, a lot of these things are interesting intellectual questions, and people will be writing about them for years.  But from our point of view, in making monetary policy, the answer to each of these little conundrums is less important than the ultimate question of how much slack does remain. Now, some have tried to connect the observation on short-term unemployment more directly to slack by arguing either that the long-term unemployed exert little or no downward pressure on wages or that the supposedly stable Beveridge curve relationship between vacancy rates and the short-term unemployed suggests that the long-term unemployed do not represent slack in labor markets.  The Board’s staff circulated a memo last week that addresses the first argument quite well.  On the second, again, I’m not sure the argument adds too much beyond the fact that as a historical matter there are a lot of long-term unemployed relative to short-term unemployed.  And this seems to be the classic case in which it would be a mistake to infer too much from deviations from an observed relationship that was developed over a relatively short time span that did not include anything approaching a disruption in the economy similar to that which we experienced half a decade ago. Given these unusual circumstances, there could be other factors that are both shifting the Beveridge curve and contributing to long-term unemployment.  Read anything that Peter Diamond has written, and one will come to your mind, which is that in an environment of uncertain demand growth, firms have made less intense efforts to fill some kinds of vacancies or have awaited the perfect candidate rather than filling the vacancy with a serviceable or lessexperienced one as they might if demand were rising more quickly and the need were more intense. Going back to the data that we do have, we continue to see that job-finding rates for the long-term unemployed declined during the recession and recovery less than for the short-term unemployed—though of course, in absolute terms, the rates for the former are higher.  It is true that exit rates from the workforce by the long-term unemployed ticked up last year after having remained quite similar to rates for the short-term unemployed throughout most of the recession and recovery, and that is something that might indicate a shift, but to date it is a tentative shift.  I would end by saying, again, that there is almost surely some structural damage here, and it is very unlikely that all of the long-term unemployed represent labor market slack.  But to this point, there really isn’t very convincing evidence for the proposition that they reflect only a very limited amount of slack, which is sometimes the implicit premise of the arguments one hears. A couple of points on wages.  There has been some evidence of increased wage growth, but I would make two observations.  First, wage growth is hardly generalized or rapid to this point, and I think the anecdotal information that some of you have provided is supportive of that observation.  Second, and maybe more controversially, the prospect that wage gains from what have been very depressed levels for some time will be more generalized and sustained in the next couple of years should quite possibly be read not as bad news—the inevitable sowing of undesirable inflationary seeds—but as good news.  That is, you can make the argument that the economy is in need of a wage recovery that will allocate a larger proportion of productivity gains to labor, thereby reversing recent trends, allowing for more sustained increases in personal consumption expenditures, and thus helping to lay the foundations for a firmer demand, production, and investment cycle.Uncertainty around what is going on in labor markets makes it an interesting time to be a labor economist, but it makes it somewhat more frustrating for us.  To the degree that this issue has importance for us in deciding on monetary policy, as I indicated a few moments ago, the mixed signals should be of less concern now than they might have been had we experienced a period of rapid growth during the recovery. Just a couple of years ago, the prevailing view around this table was that eventually we’d see growth rates at an annualized 4 percent or more.  The expectation of rapid growth raised at least the debate as to whether a reasonably rapid tightening in monetary policy might be needed.  But now, probably in part precisely because we have had a modest recovery in place for several years, it seems unlikely that we will experience the sort of spurt in growth that might have engendered concerns about wage pressures and expectations that could get away from us. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Tarullo is expressing his agreement with the consensus around the table and discussing his views on labor markets and wages.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 97.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My forecast is not much changed and remains close to the baseline, except that I’ve got a lower path for the funds rate, and I moved up my funds rate from 1.75 percent to 2 percent in 2016. I’m going to devote the bulk of my remarks to the issue of labor market slack, as several others have.  But, first, I’m going to briefly revisit the SEP issue because I’m sitting here feeling as though we didn’t quite get to the heart of it in our earlier discussions.  The 50 basis point change in our SEP for 2016, in the face of a downbeat paragraph 1 in the statement and market expectations of no change at all, is going to be very hard to explain—more specifically, very hard for you to explain.  [Laughter]  There are three possible explanations, and this is about the disagreement between the new SEP and the expectation of the market.  The first is that we think the economy is better than the market thinks it is.  I don’t think that’s right. The second is that the market misunderstood our reaction function and has new learning to do on that subject.  First, I don’t think that’s true, but, second, we’re at the beginning of the normalization process.  It’s going really well.  The single worst thing we could do is to send a confusing signal about our reaction function.  So that’s not an answer we want to provide, and, again, I don’t think it’s true. The third explanation is that the market doesn’t really understand how the SEP works and how it gets put together, and I think that’s where the truth is.  Specifically, what I’m hearing is that—I’m not sure everyone around the room is aware of this—25 of the basis points are due to   what we euphemistically refer to as a change in personnel on the Committee since December. Another 25 basis points are due to the fact that 13 of the 16 members who are in the room now have an increase of 25 basis points or less.  Somehow that works out to be an increase of 50 basis points in a world in which people are going to rip to that page of the SEP, look at the dots, and, in the 30 minutes between the time when the statement goes out and the time when you walk in front of the cameras, some of them are going to land on the second explanation.  Even if they don’t this time, they will some other time.  This is probably stretching a metaphor too far, but it’s like the scene of a nuclear plant that’s blown up, and a series of engineers are all saying, “We did the right thing.  We did exactly what we were supposed to do.  It was right here in the book.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Powell disagrees with the market's understanding of the SEP (Summary of Economic Projections) and offers three possible explanations for the disagreement. He ultimately believes that the market does not fully understand how the SEP works.


Passage number 98.
” MR. TARULLO.  That is probably not the best metaphor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement apparent in the given statement. The phrase "probably not the best metaphor" suggests that there may be a more suitable metaphor, but it does not indicate a strong disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 99.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I guess you’ve been watching too many episodes of The Simpsons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses a guess about the speaker's television habits.


Passage number 100.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Well, I had a question.  I was struck by the dealer survey, in which the dealers seem to have the expectation of liftoff—whatever the right way to say that is—in the second half of 2015.  Bill, you mentioned expectations for forward guidance, and that’s to drop or de-emphasize the thresholds.  I guess the imponderable question, if you had any information on this, would be, is this because dealers see 6.7 percent as close enough to the 6½ percent threshold that they came up with this on their own, or is it because the FOMC talk has most recently ceded this expectation, given that we’ve said so many times, “Well, we’re close to this, and so we need to be dealing with that”.  And does the fact that we have a press conference in March have anything to do with this expectation, as opposed to the fact that in April we don’t have one scheduled.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is mainly a discussion and speculation about dealers' expectations and the reasons behind them.


Passage number 101.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think that it’s some of both.  Market participants have been thinking about this for a while.  If you remember the dealer survey back in January, the dealers were saying they expected changes to the forward guidance.  They didn’t necessarily expect them in January, but they thought they might be coming in March.  Here we are in March, and they’re saying, “Yes, we think that’s right,” in part, I think, because there wasn’t really pushback against the thought that there would be a change in March.  So they proceeded with the expectations that they had in January.  Simon, do you have any further thoughts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 102.
  MR. POTTER.  I think that the expectations in the January survey are not that different than the ones we’ve reported to you today.  That hasn’t changed.  They don’t know the language that you’ll use, and some of the uncertainty is how they might react to those words.  And that’s been—it’s very hard to work out, because you don’t have numbers, you have words.  And how they interpret the words is really hard for us to tell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining that the expectations in the January survey are similar to the ones being reported, but there is uncertainty in how people might interpret the language used in the report.


Passage number 103.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Very good point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is acknowledging that the previous point made is valid or well-argued.


Passage number 104.
 MR. EVANS.  That’s a good point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans acknowledges that the point made is good, indicating agreement.


Passage number 105.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m going to ask a leading question.  Don’t you think that, as it’s Chair Yellen’s first meeting, people view that as an opportunity to do something more to the statement than if it was just a random meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While the passage includes a leading question, there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 106.
 MR. POTTER.  I think that’s the logic we’ve used ourselves a lot, and, on the margin, they would definitely understand changes that way.  There are lots of other moving parts when it’s the first press conference from a new Chair.  So I’m not sure how to weight those moving parts with the internal logic, which is that it is much easier for us to think of a change at this point. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen are discussing their own perspectives on a certain topic, but there is no opposition or contradiction between their statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Governor Powell and President Kocherlakota highlighted the challenge of forward guidance at a time when the SEP is based on a different set of assumptions concerning optimal policy, which may or may not be consistent with the forward guidance.  This is a little bit radical, but I wonder if we should rethink the SEP and not hand out the SEP at this meeting, saying that we are going to revamp the process and think more carefully about how we make forward guidance consistent with what we’re doing for the SEP.  I know that is somewhat  dramatic, but I am a little worried that there have been a number of meetings at which the SEP and the forward guidance have been inconsistent.  At some point, we’re going to have to do it. This is your first meeting.  Saying that we need to revamp it and we’re going to take the time now to do it—judging from the faces, I’m not seeing a whole lot of support, but we should at least think about alternatives.  In effect, you may have to be saying, “I’m disregarding the SEP, and you should focus on the statement.”  That is going to be an awkward conversation, I would think, if the two aren’t congruent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is suggesting that the process of providing forward guidance and the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) should be revamped to ensure consistency. He expresses concern about the inconsistency that has been observed in previous meetings between the SEP and forward guidance. While the passage does not explicitly mention disagreement or opposing viewpoints, the mention of judging from the faces and not seeing a whole lot of support suggests that there may be disagreement among the meeting participants.


Passage number 108.
 MR. POTTER.  There’s no expectation of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement by Mr. Potter is a declaration with no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 109.
  So that would be a big shock, and then everyone would ask the question why— MR. ENGLISH.  “How bad was it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply reflecting on the potential shock and questioning the reasons behind it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 110.
” MR. POTTER.  “. . .why if it was a plan, could you please have spoken about this plan somewhere.  You could have told us something other than that you didn’t like how the dots looked, so you didn’t want to show them to us,” which might be even worse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. 

Explanation: Mr. Potter is expressing disagreement with someone's actions or decisions. He questions why the person did not mention the plan earlier and criticizes their reasoning for not sharing it. This indicates a disagreement or argument between Mr. Potter and the other person.


Passage number 111.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Which is pretty much true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The statement "Which is pretty much true" suggests agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 112.
 MR. POTTER.  No, that’s even worse, I think, than showing people the dots and trying to explain them, because then they don’t know whether the dots showed 3 percent for the median at the end of 2016.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is expressing his personal opinion about the situation, but there is no clear argument or contradiction present.


Passage number 113.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Maybe I’m being a little Pollyanna-ish, but I do think that there is a story behind what’s in the SEP that isn’t so bad.  You have to remind people that we’re looking from December to March, not January to March. We had a lot of good news from December to January, and we got some not-so-good news from January to March.  But, on balance, you and markets—as this is captured by the dealer survey—see the outlook as a bit better.  Our policy is data dependent and should be data dependent, so it’s not wrong that there should be some  adjustment to the path of the funds rate, because the outlook is different and is somewhat improved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and acknowledging the possibility of optimism despite some recent negative news.


Passage number 114.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The outlook is so marginally different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the outlook is marginally different, suggesting a slight variation without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 115.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Well, and it’s marginally the other way.  GDP for 2015 and 2016 is lower in both, one by three-tenths and one by four-tenths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about GDP figures for 2015 and 2016.


Passage number 116.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Growth—yes.  But measures of slack, at least as captured by the unemployment rate, are a little tighter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 117.
 MR. POTTER.  I think that’s definitely one way that they could take it.  Our experience in June was the other way around.  That’s the issue of what the tendency is, and the tendency might be, a little bit, to read more into the change than is actually there, because we’re at the zero bound.  And there might be some concern that the policy we’ll follow will be a little bit different as things actually do get better.  I think that’s what we saw in June, and you hear that from people in the market just a little bit—that it’s hard to change the forward guidance without sending a slightly hawkish signal, because it’s pretty hard to send a dovish signal from changing the forward guidance in the direction that this is going. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining different opinions on the potential impact and interpretation of a change in forward guidance. Both Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen are presenting their own analysis and perspectives, but there is no clear contention or disagreement between them.


Passage number 118.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes—thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m going to agree with what Bill English is saying.  The question is, how much information do you and the Committee feel is appropriate to reveal.  I think one thing you could say is that the median can be very sensitive to the behavior of one or two people near the middle of the distribution because it is at the middle.  In fact—and this second part is more uncomfortable to reveal, while the first part is obvious—13 of the 16 respondents moved their fed funds rate in 2016 by less than 25 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with what Bill English is saying and providing additional information.


Passage number 119.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. By 25 or less, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "By 25 or less" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a condition or limitation.


Passage number 120.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  By 25 or less basis points.  Revealing that will pretty much say, “Look, the Committee is not moving very much.”  And if people feel comfortable with your saying that, I think that will obviate a lot of the concerns.  I agree with President Rosengren, by the way, that we should be rethinking the SEP, but I don’t think tonight’s the night.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. it simply reveals Mr. Kocherlakota's opinion and agreement with President Rosengren about rethinking the SEP (Summary of Economic Projections).


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 121.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Or you don’t think we’ll finish the task by 2:00 tomorrow afternoon. CHAIR YELLEN.  How do people feel about my making such a statement in the press conference. We normally don’t say anything about how individuals have changed their views.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing doubt about the task being finished by 2:00 tomorrow afternoon, which goes against the assumption or belief of the person they are addressing.


Passage number 122.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it’s okay because you’re characterizing it as a broad group.  But, of course, the downside is, then you’re reinforcing that the SEP has meaning.  So my personal opinion is that there are two messages.  First, don’t overweight the SEP.  Pay attention to what the statement is, because the statement is the decision of the Committee.  And second, the SEP overstates the degree of change among the members of the Committee.  I think you really want to have both messages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 123.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think the way to say that is, actually, this is a great example of how the median of the SEP is misleading because it’s so sensitive to one or two people, and here we have 13 of the 16 not really changing very much.  So that could be a way to tell the story that emphasizes both of the messages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining a potential way to present information that highlights both messages without arguing against or contradicting any previous statements.


Passage number 124.
 MR. POTTER.  But you might get the question about the person who left.  That’s unfortunate in that sense, because that person, I think, was lower than the median.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a potential question that may arise about a person who left, followed by an opinion about that person being lower than the median.


Passage number 125.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You can’t answer that question. CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, I’m not going to say anything about that person, but I can point out that it’s not the exact same group of people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 126.
  MR. LACKER.  Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 127.
 MR. LACKER.  If it’s any consolation to the group, the mean moved only 24 basis points by my calculation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact ("the mean moved only 24 basis points") without contradiction or argument.


Passage number 128.
 MR. STEIN.  Can you say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 129.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that involve disagreement or contention.


Passage number 130.
 WILLIAMS.  That’s better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a simple statement by Williams indicating that something has improved.


Passage number 131.
 MR. LACKER.  Now, I’d hate to launch you on a practice of cherry-picking the median and mean from press conference to press conference. CHAIR YELLEN.  But maybe that’s actually useful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It shows Chair Yellen suggesting that cherry-picking median and mean data from press conferences may be useful, but there is no opposing viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 132.
 MR. TARULLO.  And, for tomorrow, it’s good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is stating a fact about tomorrow's plans and there is no conflicting or opposing statement.


Passage number 133.
 MR. LACKER.  I’d caution against backing away from the SEP.  It’s well enshrined.  It’s been an institutional practice for a couple of years.  Yes, you can complain about what color the dots are and the like and what information isn’t in there, but I think Bill had it right.  The solid way to stand is to say that this is December to March.  Things improved and then they didn’t, but this reflects the net reading of various people on the Committee.  Almost all of the dots had to move, and, if you assume a similar ordering, all of the dots that didn’t move were at the top.  This is a broad, central move on the bottom end of the curve here, and I’m not sure that putting a fine touch on it—that it’s dependent on one or two people—is going to fly.  I’d prefer to see you rest the case on just the net change in the economic outlook.  And it would be nice to condition markets—and ourselves, I think—to be less paranoid about a tiny hawkish move in our forward guidance or what’s embedded in the SEP.  We’ve been paranoid about that since April 2012, when this came up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of caution and preference, but there is no clear disagreement.


Passage number 134.
 MR. TARULLO.  But it did have quite an effect last year.  CHAIR YELLEN.  It sure did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Tarullo and Chair Yellen agree that the event mentioned had a significant impact last year.


Passage number 135.
 MR. TARULLO.  I don’t think we can ignore the fact that it did have an effect and that it is in need of remediation of some sort, but I totally agree with everybody else who said we don’t remediate it from tonight until tomorrow afternoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the effect and the need for remediation but agrees with everyone else that it shouldn't be remediated immediately.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, I disagree about the remediation, but we can talk about that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker disagrees with something (unspecified) regarding remediation, but they can talk about it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 137.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think the other problem is that the SEP puts too much attention on the modal forecast.  If you actually had people write down their probability distributions and then solve for what the fed funds rate was, who knows what we would come up with. The other problem with the SEP is, it basically makes people pay too much attention to what the modal forecast is when, in fact, there’s huge uncertainty about what’s going to happen two and a half years out.  So that’s the other problem with it as a device.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
The passage states that there are two problems with the SEP. The first problem is that it puts too much attention on the modal forecast. The speaker suggests that if people were to write down their own probability distributions, the results would be uncertain. The second problem is that the SEP makes people pay too much attention to the modal forecast, despite the fact that there is significant uncertainty about what will happen in the future. These statements indicate disagreement or contention with the use and reliability of the SEP.


Passage number 138.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m wondering if we’d have the same discussion if the outlook had marginally improved but the dots had moved down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply wondering if the same discussion would occur if the outlook had improved slightly but the dots representing the forecast had moved down.


Passage number 139.
  It just seems as though there’s an asymmetry in it, so— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’ve been pretty consistent in saying for some time that I want the SEP back in the repair shop as soon as possible. CHAIR YELLEN.  Agreed.  Okay.  Any further questions for Bill.  [No response]  Okay.  So we stand adjourned until tomorrow morning, and dinner is available.  And I have to ask your forgiveness because I am going to skip it, as I am figuratively under the weather.  We will resume at 8:30 tomorrow. [Meeting recess] March 18 Session CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  I think we’re now ready to go directly into the policy round.  So let me begin with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker and Chair Yellen seem to be in agreement, and there are no further questions or responses. The passage is mainly focused on logistical details and the adjournment of the meeting.


Passage number 140.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  The weak incoming data since December certainly justify a continued measured approach to tapering.  There should be a very high hurdle for changing our tapering strategy either up or down.  To date, the incoming data have been weaker than I anticipated in my December SEP. Adding paragraph 7 to alternative B was an important and useful addition.  It makes clear that the intent of the language changes is simply to reflect the reality that we could well reach our 6½ percent unemployment threshold within a few months, thus requiring an updating of our forward guidance.  However, it is important to be clear that this is an update in language, not a change in the policy content of the forward guidance from our previous meeting.  While I would have preferred language that deferred liftoff in short-term rates to when we are within one year of reaching full employment, the language of “a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends” is consistent with my current assessment that liftoff should occur toward the end of 2015.  At that time, I expect we will be approximately one year from my estimate of full employment, and we will still be undershooting our inflation target.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is expressing his support for alternative B and providing justification for his position. He mentions his personal assessment of the incoming data, his views on the language changes in paragraph 7, and his expectation for liftoff in short-term rates. There is no clear disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 141.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the substance of alternative B, so let me just move to offer some thoughts on how to change the forward guidance, starting with paragraph 5.  In my thinking, the tests of changes should be that the new language preserves accommodation at the present level and avoids inadvertent tightening, goes as far as possible to achieve alignment of the FOMC and public expectations, and establishes a durable qualitative framework under the baseline scenario for evolving guidance as needed. In paragraph 4, I’d support keeping the current “measured steps” and “not on a preset course” verbiage.  I can foresee holding to this language for another couple of meetings, but, at some point in the year, I think it will have to be adjusted.  I also support the transition in today’s statement to reliance on the phrase “wide range of information” in paragraph 5.  Likewise, I would keep the “considerable time after the asset purchase program ends” guidance.  I do suggest, however, that the Committee think about the question of how it wants the words “considerable time” interpreted—that is to say, to map to a specific time frame in the understanding of the public and markets.  Today, based on various communications about the course of tapering and the liftoff projections inferred from the SEP, in my view, expectations are grounded in an interpretation of “considerable time” as meaning six months.  If we want “considerable time” to be more flexible, then this may have to be communicated in some way. Regarding the guidance on the post-liftoff path of policy in paragraph 6, like President Plosser, I have some reservations—not the same reservations—about the inclusion of the last sentence in today’s statement.  I think we could hold this piece of guidance in reserve to use if and when the Committee decides that conditions require augmenting or adjusting accommodation.  The language has stimulus value, and I’m not sure it’s required at this time.  I’m also concerned that introducing at this time the subject of the post-liftoff path of the policy rate might encourage an interpretation that our intent is to be less accommodative.  I would simply append the first sentence of paragraph 6 to the end of paragraph 5 and drop the second sentence. Beyond today’s statement, I believe that the Committee would be well advised to think ahead a few meetings and envision how guidance might evolve.  So let me offer these thoughts.  As I’ve already commented, I can see the Committee changing the “measured steps” and “not on a preset course” guidance to something more concrete and predictive in the July or September meeting.  By that time, assuming the economy is conforming to the basic outlook, the Committee  should be able to either accelerate the end of purchases or say something to the effect that the asset purchase program will end in October, November, or December, and will be wound down in steps of $10 billion. Regarding the “considerable time” guidance, it will be appropriate to drop the reference to “after the asset purchase program ends” once it’s ended.  At that time, the “considerable time” language could be retained as straightforward qualitative guidance about rate policy. I’m satisfied that today’s alternative B, paragraph 5, language is a sufficiently durable framework within which to make necessary adjustments as time passes.  That is to say, I’m satisfied that the new language does not introduce new elements that might turn out to be awkward or troublesome in future months. Regarding paragraph 7, I was okay with the earlier version, and I support the revised version.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, offers his thoughts and suggestions on how to change the forward guidance, but there is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage.


Passage number 142.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 143.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I strongly support alternative B.  Data since our last meeting indicate an ongoing gradual recovery and continuing below-target inflation, and this situation calls for maintaining the path for monetary policy that we’ve laid out.  So I support a further measured reduction in the pace of asset purchases, along with forward guidance that signals a highly accommodative future path for the funds rate.  Alternative B provides this continuity in policy, while successfully navigating the transition from quantitative to qualitative guidance.  Importantly, the new qualitative language in paragraph 5 is completely consistent with our past statements about forward guidance.  In addition, the wording is robust enough that it can be used for quite some time, under the likely evolution of the economy.Paragraph 6 then provides further clarity about our post-liftoff funds rate expectations.  I see it as consistent with the views expressed by the Committee, and, importantly, it does not commit us prematurely to a particular path or tie us to a specific rationale.  It also makes clear that this is our current assessment, which might change over time. Paragraph 7 guards against the risk that markets may misinterpret the new statement. Any time we modify language, markets have to infer whether we’re signaling a change in policy or simply responding to events.  Paragraph 7 takes that inference problem “off the table” by being explicit about continuity in our policy. In terms of the bracketed language in paragraph 5, in my view, it’s not necessary to be explicit that it’s our “current” assessment.  I think that goes without saying.  So I’d omit that word, and then, in the second bracketed choice, we can continue to refer to the “current” target range.  But I view this as really an editorial distinction, and I’m actually fine with either way. In terms of President Plosser’s comment about the targeted federal funds rate in paragraph 6, I actually hadn’t thought about that carefully before, and I think it’s a good point that, instead of saying “keeping short-term interest rates,” we should say “keeping the targeted federal funds rate.”  Now, I recognize that we are going to have a robust and, no doubt, thorough and comprehensive discussion on this issue of what our future policy framework should be.  But, at this time, we haven’t had that discussion, and we’ve not expressed to the public what our framework will be. I think that switching to “short-term interest rates” could be a little confusing at this time.  If we do decide to go to a framework of not using the federal funds rate as our instrument, then, of course, we can change this language to say “short-term interest rates.”  I don’t think that would be confusing.  I actually think that there is a potential here for the question“What does this mean.” when, really, what we’re trying to do is to calm down uncertainty at this point.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and providing their reasoning for this support. They also make some suggestions for minor edits to the language used, but this does not indicate any disagreement or contention with the overall direction of the policy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 144.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the $10 billion taper today.  We said it’s a high hurdle for altering that path, and I’m fine with that.  My preference today is to retain our January forward guidance with thresholds in paragraph 5 and maintain this policy language until the unemployment rate falls to 6½ percent or inflation rises to 2½ percent.  This statement language remains fully serviceable even if unemployment falls quickly, owing to our additional guidance that the funds rate will remain at zero well past the time that unemployment falls below 6½ percent.  Since there appears to be perhaps a 50 percent probability that unemployment will remain above 6½ percent at the time of our June meeting, changing this language today as in alternative B prematurely risks an adverse market interpretation, in my opinion. My biggest concern today is that alternative B, along with the SEP release, looks like a tightening in our monetary policy stance.  This round’s SEP median federal funds rate dot in 2016 is 50 basis points higher than in December.  From yesterday’s discussion, I accept that the dealers and financial markets are prepared for a change in our forward guidance, but I think the current alternative B language is not enough guidance to validate the dealer survey expectations.  The dealer survey implies that markets have priced in a very strong degree of financial accommodation.  For example, the dealers envision a funds rate liftoff in the second half of 2015.  They also expect the funds rate liftoff to occur four quarters after the end of QE3 purchases.  The survey also suggests that the more likely values of the unemployment rate at liftoff are below 6 percent.  These observations seem important to me.  If our statement is as   vague as alternative B and financial markets see the higher funds rate projections in the SEP, they may price in tighter financial conditions. Turning to more-specific elements of alternative B, the qualitative language in the second sentence of paragraph 5 is about as weak as one could formulate for forward guidance.  It repeats that our goals are to support maximum employment and a 2 percent inflation objective, the third sentence says that we will assess a range of labor and inflation data, and that’s pretty much it. Frankly, this formulation is very much like our June 2011 language before we embarked on stronger forward guidance.  Maybe that’s the choice.  Yes, I can believe that markets are expecting us to change our forward guidance today, but I worry a lot that this guidance is too weak to maintain their expectations, especially given the SEP medians that we’re going to release. One way to strengthen the forward guidance would be to include the 2 percent inflation floor from alternative A.  In my opinion, this addition would move further toward maintaining our prior stance of accommodation, albeit with a slightly different emphasis on inflation.  In adopting this particular inflation floor following a long period of below-target inflation, the Committee would strongly advance the defense of our inflation objective from below.  This would help remind the public that we have symmetrical preferences for inflation over the long run. In terms of post-liftoff guidance, I think paragraph 6 helps because it instills a further expectation that any premature policy tightening will most likely proceed only slowly. Without this paragraph, the risk of a tightening inference by the markets is higher.  But I also think the earlier, fuller Tealbook version of paragraph 7 would have helped a lot.  I realize that many participants feel that our statement is long and unwieldy, and, sure, making efforts to streamline the policy description sounds like a good idea if you retain the most important elements.  But, look, once you’re involved in dressing a pig [laughter], no amount of lipstick is going to change the fact that this is a pig we are working with.  The statement is long and ugly, and it will always, almost surely, be that way. To maintain the link with our prior policy intentions, it seems to me that the important part of paragraph 7 was repeating explicitly our prior commitment that the funds rate would remain at zero well past the time that the unemployment rate goes below 6½ percent.  This would have been separate from our linkage with the end of asset purchases later this fall.  That additional commentary would prove useful if labor market improvement stalls over the next six months.  A labor market stall, combined with a continuation of 1 percent inflation rates, worries me, and hoping that that doesn’t happen involves accepting more risk.  This meeting is one of those opportunities to meaningfully reinforce that we are pursuing goal-oriented monetary policy to reattain both maximum employment and price stability within a reasonably short period of time. Madam Chair, as I said at the outset, my preference today is to simply update our January statement for economic developments and the additional $10 billion reduction beginning in April.  In order to strengthen alternative B enough to reduce the risk of an inadvertent policy tightening, two changes could help.  One change is to adopt the 2 percent inflation floor from alternative A.  This choice would show that we’re defending our inflation objective from below.  The other change is to revert to the original Tealbook alternative B language for the fuller version of paragraph 7.  This choice would include a reference to keeping the funds rate at zero well past the time that unemployment falls below 6½ percent.In addition, regarding the commentary about the “short-term interest rates” language in paragraph 6, I agree with the suggestion that mentioning the funds rate instead would be better.  After all, that’s what the Committee’s assessment is referring to in the SEP—the funds rate.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses disagreement with alternative B, stating that it looks like a tightening in monetary policy and is not enough guidance to validate the dealer survey expectations. He suggests two changes that could help strengthen alternative B and reduce the risk of inadvertent policy tightening.


Passage number 145.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, although the SEP results do give me some pause, as they did President Evans.  I had thought that, with a set of SEP results that didn’t vary much from last time or from market expectations, the somewhat general language in alternative B would be fine.  And I, on balance, think that’s probably still where we should land.  But there are going to be more difficulties. To a considerable extent, this is going to fall on the Chair to make the explanations on paragraph 5 and, to some degree, on paragraph 7.  It may be that an explanation or elaboration of paragraph 7 can reinforce the point President Evans made that, at this juncture at least, the guidance we’ve had to date is still operative because we haven’t passed the threshold. I want to spend most of my comments on paragraph 6, however.  I actually think a case can be made to strengthen paragraph 6.  But, more important, it’s critical that something along the lines of paragraph 6 be included in this statement.  For one thing, without such a provision, we will have identified the factors that will determine when the rate will start to rise, and we’ll have noted some expectations as to how steeply it may rise, but we won’t have identified what we expect the endpoint of that process to be. Now, one might have said that such a specification would be unnecessary if the shared assumption is that our equilibrium interest rate will be the same as it was supposed to be before the crisis—say, 2 percent above the inflation target, for a total of 4 percent.  But such an  assumption would be inconsistent with our own stated expectations.  Imperfect as it is, the SEP does communicate something about our individual and aggregated expectations.  We’ve just been talking about the difficulties the current results may create.  The results presented yesterday show that the central tendency of the Committee’s projections has the economy at or close to both full employment and 2 percent inflation by 2016.  And yet, with a couple of exceptions, everyone on the Committee expects the federal funds rate to be below 4 percent and, in most cases, well below 4 percent.  So that’s something that needs to be explained to markets and to the public.  The explanation has got to be that, individually and in the aggregate, we think there are various reasons why the equilibrium rate in 2016, and for at least some period thereafter, will be lower than 4 percent.  There are lots of reasons, as people have already mentioned, why one might believe this to be the case.  Some, such as incomplete repair of household balance sheets or the effects of fiscal consolidation, can be understood as shocks, or as the lingering consequences of shocks, that will have a restraining effect on growth for a nontrivial but finite time.  In the parlance we’ve been using, these are headwinds.  Other factors—such as demographic change, slowing technological innovation that translates into lower productivity gains, or durable changes in preferences manifested in behavior such as saving rates—are more permanent in nature, though, for that reason, observation of these phenomena would presumably need to continue long enough to convincingly make the case. There’s another explanation, though, which I think falls somewhere between the persistent but ultimately fading character of headwinds and the enduring character of demographics.  That’s reduction in growth potential.  Most, if not all, of us have, over the past several years, marked down potential GDP growth.  The Tealbook has, on several occasions,  explained why the staff has done so as well.  In some sense, of course, this explanation can draw on several other possible explanations, both secular changes and persistent but ultimately finite factors, but it does capture an important set of expectations on our part.  And I’d note that these expectations are also reflected in various survey data and spreads that we see in markets. Precisely because there seems to be such convergence around this general proposition, even if we differ as to how much potential has decreased, I do think a pretty strong case can be made for the proposition that we don’t need to make the language in paragraph 6 as conditional as it now reads.  Indeed, a case could be made that the levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run are themselves lower than assumed on the basis of pre-crisis experience. I do note in the SEP that six of us have already indicated that we believe the longer-term rate to be below 4 percent, and I suspect at least a few others on the Committee might come to that conclusion as well.  To be clear, I’m not arguing for such a change in the language in paragraph 6, at least not right now.  We would obviously need to analyze and discuss this issue much more before making such a change.  But I mention the case for it mostly to show that the position reflected in the proposed language is actually a good deal softer than the position that might be derived from the Committee’s own projections and stated assessments of growth potential.  I don’t disagree with those who have observed that the current language states the proposition without explaining why—President Plosser made this point today, and I think President Fisher made it in the teleconference meeting.  I’ve just explained why I think we could give such an explanation based on what Committee members currently believe.  But my more immediate response is that omission of any particular reason allows a certain optionality for the Committee.  If you think headwinds alone justify such guidance, your position is preserved, even   though someone else may feel that the reasons are likely to have greater permanence. While this may not be ideal, it would be far worse to leave markets and the public with no indication that the Committee has even recognized the issue and with no sense of where the upward trajectory of the federal funds rate would end.   I will end by saying I agree with others that Charlie Plosser makes a good point about the federal funds rate as opposed to short-term interest rates.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No- there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and discusses the need to explain certain aspects of the decision.


Passage number 146.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  With the economy continuing to recover and the outlook little changed since the January meeting, I believe it’s clearly appropriate to continue to slow the pace of asset purchases as laid out in alternative B.  That’s the easy part of today’s decision.  Changing our forward guidance on the fed funds rate is the more challenging issue. We face a tradeoff between maximizing clarity and maintaining flexibility in our guidance.  I preferred providing more, rather than less, clarity in our guidance.  In particular, as I mentioned in the videoconference, I preferred forward guidance that uses an inflation floor, for three reasons.  First, inflation forecasts can capture many of the factors that are likely to determine liftoff but which are hard to spell out simply in forward guidance.  Second, an inflation floor would refer to the component of our dual mandate for which we have a quantitative goal.  And, third, as liftoff draws nearer, the Committee will probably need to provide the public with further clarifications of its intentions in order to manage interest rate expectations. All of that being said, I recognize that a majority of the Committee does not support including forward guidance with an inflation floor.  Many on the Committee place a premium on   maintaining flexibility about which conditions will warrant liftoff of the fed funds rate and when. I appreciate that flexibility does have its benefits, and I have argued for flexibility in other situations. The more qualitative forward guidance that’s laid out in the current alternative B has evolved and has improved considerably since the first draft that we looked at.  So today I do support alternative B. Like President Plosser and others who have already commented, I do have a strong preference for referring to the federal funds rate in paragraph 6 rather than short-term interest rates.  At this point, it isn’t clear what the future operating framework will be, and referring to short-term interest rates could create confusion among the public and distract from the main message of the statement today.  And, obviously, the SEP also provides projections for the federal funds rate rather than other short-term interest rates.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, expresses her preference for using an inflation floor in forward guidance, but acknowledges that a majority of the Committee does not support this approach. She also expresses a preference for referring to the federal funds rate rather than short-term interest rates. However, there is no explicit disagreement or contention with these views.


Passage number 147.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, but I do see an opportunity for improvement.  First, I like the less heavy-handed version of paragraph 7.  I think that, combined with paragraph 5, it does a good job of cementing the notion of continuity in the forward guidance that we’re intending to provide. I join Presidents Plosser and Lockhart, though, with serious concerns about the second sentence in paragraph 6.  There are two main reasons.  First—and I don’t think it’s been mentioned—this would muddy our message today.  This is a new element of forward guidance. Taken by itself, I think it would be viewed as a downward nudge to the yield curve.  But we’ve strived in paragraphs 5 and 7 to emphasize continuity and that we don’t believe we’re changing this net stance of our forward guidance at this meeting.  So I’m concerned about how readers are going to interpret this.  Does paragraph 6 convey new information or not. Why did we add it now when, in the next paragraph, we’re emphasizing that our forward guidance is the same. Second, more broadly, I think it’s ambiguous and treads on ground that the Committee has yet to really thoroughly survey and understand.  What time period does this refer to.  You look at the language that says “mandate-consistent levels.” You look at the SEP for 2016, and it looks as though it lines up near there.  But, on the other hand, paragraph 6 seems to refer to something beyond 2016 as well.  It says “even after” we get to near mandate-consistent levels.  I’d point out that, of course, we haven’t said what mandate-consistent levels are for 2016. We have the longer-run projections.  We haven’t defined that as congruent with “mandate consistent.” We never said that.  The January 2012 statement explicitly avoids equating the longer-run values with mandate-consistent levels.  So we’re muddying up that nuance there. Now, I know there’s been discussion, to which Governor Tarullo has alluded, about the possibility that the appropriate intercept term in a Taylor rule—and some people refer to it as the equilibrium real rate—might have fallen.  But it was just a stray comment or two at the last meeting, and I’m not sure we’ve really digested the possibility that that’s going to be the case.  Besides, a whole lot of us still have the funds rate in the longer run at 4 percent.  So I don’t think we know enough now, on a sustained basis, about what the trajectory after 2016 is going to look like.  I just don’t think we’ve done our homework to be able to put in something of this specificity about the path after the liftoff. For those two reasons, the statement would be much better without the second sentence in paragraph 6. And I share President Plosser’s concern about “short-term interest rates.” I think this would be new to speak about our keeping short-term interest rates, as opposed to the funds rate, at any particular level.  But, otherwise, I support alternative B.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and suggests improvements to certain paragraphs. There is no disagreement with other members of the group mentioned.


Passage number 148.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I generally support alternative B in terms of a further reduction in asset purchases and a pivot from threshold-based forward guidance to a more qualitative approach.  I view these changes as appropriate steps toward gradual policy normalization as the economy continues to expand, with meaningful cumulative gains as well as a positive growth outlook.  As someone noted yesterday, most of the prescriptions from the policy rules on which the Committee has relied over the past five years also have turned positive, in terms of signaling a shift away from zero interest rates starting in the second quarter of this year.  For these reasons, I think paragraph 6, as written, lacks clarity as to why economic conditions warrant keeping rates below normal levels when employment and inflation begin to return to normal.  Further explanation of the Committee’s assumptions about economic conditions in 2016 will be needed, in my view, to be credible.   At last September’s press conference, factors such as continued fiscal drag and the slow recovery of the housing sector were offered as explanations.  The January 2014 minutes point to lingering effects of the crisis.  However, the Tealbook now shows almost no fiscal drag in 2016, with substantial gains in residential construction.  So as the Committee alters its forward guidance, I expect that the public will seek more clarity about the nature of our reaction function, and I look forward to discussing that communication. That said, I would highlight a few issues that continue to concern me about this policy stance.  First, in thinking about the potential challenges that may lie ahead, I believe that the alternative risk scenarios outlined in the Tealbook are useful. In particular, I see the “Supply-Side Damage” scenario as one of the more relevant and difficult scenarios to navigate, primarily because it would necessitate policy tightening faster than currently anticipated.  Growth would also likely disappoint in such a scenario, so banks and other financial institutions would be grappling simultaneously with rates that are climbing faster than they had expected and slowing growth.  Aspects of this scenario seem plausible, especially given the downward revisions to potential GDP by the Congressional Budget Office and in the Tealbook. Second, I remain concerned about the side effects of unusually low interest rates for this extended period of time and the incentives they promote for risk-taking and reaching for yield.  I continue to hear from contacts about fierce competition among lenders resulting in questionable terms and underwriting standards.  And I would note that consumer credit growth is beginning to accelerate, up nearly $300 billion in the second half of 2013, which does not include student loans.  Some of this goes hand in hand with an improving housing market.  If you look carefully at the data, it is the least creditworthy households that are more actively increasing their debt burdens. Finally, I would join others who would prefer that paragraph 6 refer to the target federal funds rate instead of short-term interest rates so that we can continue our discussions about what the policy framework might look like in the future.  Thank you.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Ms. George expresses her general support for alternative B in terms of reducing asset purchases and changing the forward guidance approach. However, she does mention her concerns about the lack of clarity in paragraph 6 and the potential challenges of the "Supply-Side Damage" scenario and the side effects of low interest rates. Overall, she provides a balanced analysis and suggestions for further discussion.


Passage number 149.
MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to add to something I said yesterday and explain why I walked through the stock and bond metrics as I did.  The bottom line is that, for those of us who are worried about putting the American people back to work, which is part of our mandate, investment-grade corporate yields have been lower than the S&P’s forward-earnings yield.  And what that does is to provide an arbitrage opportunity, an incentive to corporations to issue bonds and to use the proceeds to buy back shares—not to invest, as yet, robustly in job-creating cap-ex.  I think it’s important that we understand that dynamic.  That’s the only reason I go into it in depth. I’m quite sympathetic to Governor Stein’s sensitivity expressed yesterday.  But, in terms of that particular sector of the financial markets—referring, in particular, to junk credits or triple-Cs—you have to remember that the spreads are narrow over historically low nominal rates. And all of these issues that I mentioned and Governor Stein mentioned and so on—I think the key operative word in his intervention yesterday was “tiptoe.”  Like him, I was quite hawkish on the upside—meaning I wasn’t in favor of QE3.  But, having been there, we have to be extremely careful to tiptoe out of this room as we begin to change and provide forward guidance. I continue to support the easy part, as President Pianalto mentioned, which is the reduction in LSAPs.  In fact, I think it’s very important that, as we tiptoe out of that room, we not push much faster than the measured rate at which we’re taking it—even though I respect President Plosser enormously in terms of his suggestion.  We can take a look at that later, but, at this juncture—and I realize he didn’t make the recommendation for now—but just to put it on the table, I would not be in favor of going to more than $10 billion per month.  I like the way we’re proceeding presently, even though, again, I was more hawkish on the other side.  But, like Governor Stein, I think we have to be very careful here.In terms of tiptoeing—and remembering that we don’t have a whole lot of bullets left in our holster—as you know, I recommended that we take out that second sentence in paragraph 6, and I don’t expect us to do so at this meeting.  However, I think President Lockhart made the most convincing argument there.  I want to have a little bit of ammunition in case things slip to the downside.  Presently, as we put your imprimatur as Chair of this Committee on the statement, without that paragraph, we’re taking a good first step.  It may be that, by including that sentence, we take a step further than we need to take.  I don’t know.  In other words, I may want to put that in my holster and save it, because I think President Lockhart made a very good point, which is, it could help us later on should things slip to the downside.  I believe that was your point, President Lockhart.  If you’re going to keep it the way it is, like everybody who has talked so far, whether it was Governor Tarullo or the various presidents, I do think we need to change the “keeping short-term interest rates” and reference the fed funds rate. I was somewhat sympathetic to President Plosser’s comment on the word “current.” But, if you look at it from an expository writing standpoint, whatever we say is current. Also, we say “likely,” which is the conditionality in that sentence.  So I, like President Williams, could go either way.  I am getting deeply worried, Madam Chair, that President Williams and I tend to agree almost constantly now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker expressing their thoughts and opinions on various matters.


Passage number 150.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 151.
 WILLIAMS.  Deeply disturbing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 152.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  Yes, deeply disturbing.  But, otherwise, I fully support alternative B as stated.  Thank you for making the changes that were made, and I am in support of alternative B. I would consider that point, though, on the second part of paragraph 6.  What’s in our holster next.Here’s one last point: I have very strong feelings about shifting from a 2 percent target to a 2 percent floor.  I know we’re not arguing that at the present juncture, but I expect that to be an interesting argument in the future.  And I want to, again, put on the table that I am strongly against thinking of 2 percent as a floor as opposed to a long-term target.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 153.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not discussing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 154.
 WILLIAMS.  I want to go back to this issue about the second sentence in paragraph 6.  In describing it, the Vice Chairman did mention, actually, the earlier language, which referred to historical averages.  It doesn’t currently say that, and I think this is a point that relates to Governor Tarullo’s point, too.  So I want to emphasize that the language in the statement, which I do support, says “warrant keeping short-term interest rates below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run.” I think the only way you can interpret this is, looking at the 2016 numbers versus the long-run numbers.  It’s not really about the long-run numbers.  A number of the arguments that have been discussed at the table, including Governor Tarullo’s, probably affect the long run more than the difference between 2016 and the long run.  Demographic factors, productivity growth—those are all going to show up, presumably, in people’s estimates of the long run. I’m bringing this up because I think you have to be a little bit careful in talking about what this sentence actually says. It is talking about the fact that we expect real interest rates to essentially be zero at the end of 2016, even though we think that, in the long run, real interest rates are between 1½ and 2 percent.  I wanted to bring that up because I think there is maybe a little bit of mixing up two ideas here in terms of what the statement’s actually referring to. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a clarification and explanation of a point made by the Vice Chairman and Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 155.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think you’re right.  There are two ideas here.  One is that there are these temporary factors that may last a long time because of this extended crisis   and that are going to push you down for a while.  We’re not sure how long, but we think several years.  And then there are more persistent factors—demographics, potential GDP growth—that are going to last for a very, very long time, as they’re pretty much baked in the cake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement and presents two different ideas, discussing their potential duration.


Passage number 156.
  Those are two separate— MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents two separate items without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 157.
 WILLIAMS.  Right.  In our previous language, the one you referred to actually covered both of those.  The current language refers only to the difference between “for some time” and “the longer run.” I’m just bringing that up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying the difference between two different languages and how they refer to the concept of time.


Passage number 158.
 MR. TARULLO.  John, you would favor going back to “historical”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Tarullo simply addresses John's preferences without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 159.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 160.
 WILLIAMS.  No, I got a little worried that the discussion here was including things like long-run productivity growth or demographics.  Those wouldn’t actually fit into this paragraph 6 explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 161.
 MR. TARULLO.  As written.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage provided does not contain any statements that indicate disagreement or contention. It seems to be a normal statement.


Passage number 162.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the passage to analyze.


Passage number 163.
 WILLIAMS.  As written.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without additional context or content.


Passage number 164.
 MR. TARULLO.  No, I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker directly states that they agree with the previous statement without any indication of disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 165.
 MR. STEIN.  So do I.  I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers are expressing agreement with each other.


Passage number 166.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 167.
 WILLIAMS.  I was just trying to point that out because it seemed as though it may have been getting a little mixed up. CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, does that suggest we should go back to “historical”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Williams is simply trying to clarify a point, and Chair Yellen responds without any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 168.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 169.
 WILLIAMS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 170.
  Well, I think “historical averages” actually allows us to talk about both of these issues— MR. TARULLO.  I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is agreement in the passage as both speakers express their agreement with the statement.


Passage number 171.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 172.
 WILLIAMS. —the 2016 issue, which I agree could be thought of as an IS curve shift or an equilibrium real rate thing.  It also allows us to talk about longer-run issues that we also seem to agree on. If you look at, again, the SEP, flawed as it is, it’s pretty clear there’s a consensus that the long-run value of the real interest rate is significantly below its historical average of about 2½ percent. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 173.
 MR. EVANS.  Could somebody give us a table of what the historical real interest rates are.  Every time I’ve looked, there’s an enormous disagreement as to exactly how low they are. CHAIR YELLEN.  That was part of the reason for getting rid of that language, as we would immediately be asked “What period.  What historical average.”  It’s very different over different periods.  If we leave the language as is, it is consistent with what you see in the SEP, and it doesn’t prevent us from, over time, if we decide it’s appropriate, writing down our views as to what is normal in the longer run if demographics and productivity growth end up being important.  But I think it does point more in the direction of headwinds as what this is about. Okay.  Well, thanks.  I appreciate all of the effort and thought that all of you have put into this.  This is not an easy transition.  I agree that this is something we ought to do today. While I understand we’re not at 6½ percent—and, as President Evans indicated, one could make the case for waiting—I think it’s broadly expected.  And the fact that we are approaching 6½ percent, to me, seems like a compelling reason to move forward today.  I know that what we have here is not perfect as revised forward guidance, but it really does bridge a lot of different views on the Committee. I think the most controversial piece of this is the second sentence of paragraph 6.  I’ve listened very carefully to what all of you have had to say about it in the go-round this morning.  As I counted, there are certainly a significant number of people who would be more comfortable not including paragraph 6.  If I count numbers, since almost all of you weighed in on this, I  would say the “keep it in” camp outnumbers slightly the “take it out” camp.  And I would say that my own personal preference is, I would like to weigh in in favor of keeping it in, for the reasons that many of you have explained, especially since we have the dot plot.  If we don’t speak to this as a Committee, the dot plot will basically be what the world has to interpret our views on this.  I’d prefer it if the Committee, when it has a view, articulates that view in the statement.  I don’t think the SEP was ever meant to be a statement of this Committee’s policy views.  And, while I agree, I think we have had some analysis of this issue.  The staff prepared a very thoughtful memo—I believe that it was for the meeting before last—looking at alternative reasons why we are projecting low rates for a time, even after the economy is back at mandate-consistent levels. We include quite a few statements about our collective beliefs. We believe that inflation is going to be heading back up to 2 percent.  We feel some sense of confidence that the labor market will improve over time, and we don’t exactly agree on precisely what the reasons are. So, to me, this is a broadly enough shared view that I would like to see it expressed in the statement as a forecast. Clearly, it is something.  It doesn’t have the same status as the thresholds, which, I agree, were more like commitments.  This is a forecast, and I think it’s stated quite conditionally as such.  So, with your permission, I would like to stick with paragraph 6 and ask us to vote on that. With respect to wording, I heard a great deal of support in paragraph 6 to change “short-term interest rates” to “the federal funds rate.”  Is there anybody who would be opposed to doing that. I did hear a considerable amount of interest in changing it.  Anybody who would have— yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there are differing views on whether to include paragraph 6 in the statement, with some members wanting to keep it and others wanting to remove it. This is evident in the statement, "If I count numbers, since almost all of you weighed in on this, I would say the “keep it in” camp outnumbers slightly the “take it out” camp."


Passage number 174.
  MR. LACKER.  Madam Chair, I think some people expressed the preference for “target federal funds rate.” CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  Let’s try some wording here.  “The Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run.” Is that okay. PARTICIPANT.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  Then I think the only other open issue here in terms of wording was in paragraph 5.  Did we want to include the bracketed “current”.  Not everyone weighed in on that.  President Plosser, I know, supports that.  I heard a couple of no’s.  Are there other people who would like to support including the bracketed language “current”.  Okay.  Seeing no overwhelming support, I propose we stick with the original language:  “The Committee continues to anticipate, based on its assessment of these factors, that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate,” et cetera. Okay.  I think those were the major issues.  So if people are ready, Matt, do you want to read the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a discussion about potential wording changes in a statement, but there is no clear contention or disagreement expressed. People are mostly giving their opinions or preferences without strong opposition from others.


Passage number 175.
 MR. LUECKE.  Yes.  This vote will cover the statement as written on pages 6 and 7 of the monetary policy briefing package, with the changes to the sentences read by Chair Yellen.  And it will encompass the directive on page 12 of the monetary policy briefing package. Chair Yellen Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes President Fisher Yes President Kocherlakota No President Pianalto Yes President Plosser Yes Governor Powell Yes Governor Stein Yes Governor Tarullo Yes CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It only includes responses to a vote on a statement and directive.


Passage number 176.
 MR. FISHER.  By 10:00.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: Without more context or information, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in this statement alone.


Passage number 177.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That may be a new record.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  What do you think.  [Simultaneous conversation]  But, on the other hand, we did take a lot of time during the intermeeting period to ensure that this would be more efficient.  I appreciate all of the time you were willing to take in sorting this out so that today didn’t turn into a train wreck.  There’s one more opportunity for a train wreck, which I will try to avoid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the chair expressing appreciation and discussing the efficiency of the process.


