Passage number 1.
Federal Open Market CommitteeConference CallJanuary 14, 1983PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and RoosAlternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the individuals present in a conference call.


Passage number 2.
 Boehne, President of the Federal Reserve Bankof PhiladelphiaTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Callof January 14, 1983MR. ALTMANN. To make sure that all the Presidents are on theline, I'll be calling the roll by Reserve Bank. Please respond byidentifying yourselves so we know for sure who is on, given this newsystem we're using. [Secretary's note: Mr. Altmann then called theroll and all Reserve Banks were represented except Cleveland.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a transcript of a conference call where the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia is taking attendance. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 3.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Everybody's on here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage states that everybody is present or participating, indicating agreement or unity.


Passage number 4.
MR. PARTEE. Cleveland is missing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Cleveland is missing.


Passage number 5.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we might as well proceed with Mr.Axilrod telling us where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about proceeding with Mr. Axilrod providing information.


Passage number 6.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I'd like first to give theclearest thing I can give, which is where we've been. For the fourthquarter of 1982, the Committee had an objective for M2 of around 9-1/2percent and for M3 [of about 8 percent]. The actual results are thatM2 did grow 9-1/2 percent from September to December and M3 grew 7percent. So, in terms of the fourth-quarter objectives that were setat the beginning of the fourth quarter, those are the latest numbers.We will be publishing the December figures today and they will showfor M1 an increase of 9.1 percent, which will give us an increase forthe year of 8-1/2 percent; they will show an M2 increase of 8-1/2percent, which will give a yearly increase of 9.9 percent; and theywill show an M3 increase of only 2.3 percent, which will give a yearlyincrease of 10.4 percent. We believe the M2 increase in December wasimpacted to a sizable degree by the money market deposit accounts. Asof the latest specific data we have, which is the week of January 5th,these money market deposit accounts had grown to a level of $111billion. Making a reasonable estimate for the [week of the] 12th fromthe savings deposit figures we have, which include the MMDAs, wouldconservatively put them at a level of $130 billion. So, they'recoming very close already to the level that the staff had assumed wasconsistent with a 3 percent shift adjustment for the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and data about the growth of M2 and M3 and discussing the impact of money market deposit accounts.


Passage number 7.
That is, if your underlying--MR. ALTMANN. Excuse me. Could you hold it a minute. Let mesee who's coming in on this other line.SPEAKER(.). Cleveland operator for Mr. Altmann.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple interruption in the conversation.


Passage number 8.
MR. AXILROD. With this rapid growth in the MMDAs, we made avery definite attempt, based on what are rather rough data, to see howmuch of those funds shifted out of non-M2 sources. The only way wecan do it at the moment is by a residual method. It involves goingthrough the M2 weekly data, which aren't necessarily complete, anddeciding what they otherwise would have done and seeing what they did,and then assuming that that difference goes into MMDAs. That thenleaves a residual that comes from market sources. Our estimate of theamount that would have come from market sources in December would tendto raise M2 growth on the order of 3 to 4 percentage points at anannual rate. So that would suggest, if that number is right, thatunderlying M2 growth was somewhere around 5 to 5-1/2 percent inDecember. We've also looked at December in other ways. We have takenthe nonpersonal MMDAs out of M2 just to see what that would have1/14/83 -2-given; and that would have produced a 4-1/2 percent rate of growth inM2 in December. That assumes nonpersonal MMDAs are something likelarge CDs; that's probably not right because they include other kindsof things such as business savings deposits, but that would have beenthe result for M2 growth in December. We have a survey in which webegan to get data on MMDAs maturing in 7 days or more that are over$100,000. That survey has not indicated that there are very many ofthose. The first week's data show only $100 million, so that wouldn'thave any effect on M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting different methods and estimates for analyzing MMDAs and M2 growth in December.


Passage number 9.
 Looking ahead, given the strength that we nowhave, because the growth in December was very rapid in M2--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have an interruption here for somereason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing information about the growth in M2 and the interruption that occurs.


Passage number 10.
MR. ALTMANN. President Horn, are you there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only includes a question being asked and does not involve any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 11.
MS. HORN. Hello. Yes, this is Karen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply answers the phone call.


Passage number 12.
MR. ALTMANN. Okay, thank you. We're in process.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude for the current situation they are in.


Passage number 13.
MR. AXILROD. We had, of course, more rapid growth inDecember in the MMDAs than was implicit in the Committee's target, orreally even in the staff's estimate. As I said, we have virtuallyreached the midpoint of the staff's estimated range now; we're veryclose to it. Unless this slows down perceptibly or very rapidly, it'sgrowing at least more toward the upper ends of the staff's estimatesand probably well above what had been included in the 9-1/2 percent M2growth that the Committee voted on, which included a modest increasein shifts. Given what happened in December, that carries throughsomewhat into January because the level is being raised very rapidly;and simply carrying through that higher level raises the growth forthe quarter on our estimate of the shift by about 2 points. So, thatalone would raise the 9-1/2 percent to roughly 11-1/2 percent withoutshifts being even greater from there on in than [assumed] in theCommittee target. So, without an ability at this point to beextremely specific, I would say that fairly clearly, for reasons ofthe shifts, we're running above the 9-1/2 percent. To get at the so-called underlying strength of M2--[to determine] whether we're runningabove because of underlying strength as well--is really verydifficult. Given what we have so far in January and assuming over thebalance of January increases in M2 that are normal, as if there wereno shifts--in the $2 or $3 billion or $4 billion range weekly--we comeout with a very high M2 in January. To give you a rough idea of therange of possibilities, we have [an estimate] on the order of 28percent; the New York estimator has [an estimate] on the order of 20percent. So, I think growth somewhere in the 20 to 30 percent rangehere is certainly more than possible, it's probable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and estimates about the growth of MMDAs and M2, without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 14.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the full passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the text.


Passage number 15.
 This is after allowance--MR. AXILROD. No, gross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply clarifying a statement by saying "No, gross" after mentioning an allowance.


Passage number 16.
MR. GRAMLEY. Gross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 17.
MR. AXILROD. And 7-1/4 points of that is simply carryingthrough the December level that had been shifted. Given our estimateof the amount that shifted--from this residual method we've assumed 16percent of the MMDAs are shifted--and our projection for January over1/14/83the balance of the month, we would be reducing that 28 percent by only11.6 percentage points. The reason I'm that specific is that thatlooks way too high as a January underlying [growth rate]. It justdoesn't make sense. So we tried to undertake some [analysis of] thenumbers to see how sensitive things were. And it's so sensitive thatit's very difficult to guide ourselves in any very technical way. Ifwe had assumed that 25 percent shifted out of market instruments,which is not unreasonable--one could get that out of the numbers andI'm told that some market people think it's that high--then we wouldbe subtracting 17 to 18 points at an annual rate in January from theactual growth. So, [the rate of growth] is very sensitive to what onethinks has shifted, and we don't have a particularly firm way ofcoming up with an estimate of the amount of the shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mostly the speaker, Mr. Axilrod, discussing the sensitivity of the numbers and the challenges in estimating the amount of shifting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 18.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which seems to be the understatement youhave made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that the understatement made by the person they are addressing is not accurate or sufficient.


Passage number 19.
MR. AXILROD. But, Mr. Chairman, the one thing I can say tothe Committee with a reasonable degree of certainty is that the 9-1/2percent is too low relative to the amount of shift we've already seen.So from that alone one would expect growth above 9-1/2 percent, andthere is some growth above that that represents shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is stating a fact and providing support for his statement.


Passage number 20.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's further shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not convey any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 21.
MR. AXILROD. The shift we've already seen. The shift we'vealready seen adds 2-1/2 points to the first quarter. If you had an 8percent underlying growth, it would be at 10-1/2 percent; and I thinkthe Committee added roughly another one in there, so that got me to11-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the observations and calculations made by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 22.
MS. TEETERS. Steve, of the $130 billion you're estimatingfor January 12th, in dollar terms how much of it came out of non-M2components.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 23.
MR. AXILROD. It's 16-1/2 percent of that. All I have hereare growth rates that have been translated from it. But it's 16-1/2percent of that number. What we worked out through January 5th was aspecific number of $18 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a specific number and providing some context for how it was derived.


Passage number 24.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. After that enlightening discussion of M2,what is going on with M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that M3 is the topic of discussion after the enlightening discussion of M2.


Passage number 25.
MR. AXILROD. For M3, we've had a considerable weakness inlarge CDs, so we had that weak December growth. And it looks as ifgrowth in M3 in January will strengthen considerably, largely becauseof this huge M2. If M2 is up in the 20 to 30 percent range, I wouldassume that something like at least half of the growth will be in M3.And we're assuming large CDs are not going to be quite as weak as theywere. So, partly from the carry-through effect on that, we get a verylarge M3.Mr. Chairman, there's one other point I should make and thatis with regard to Ml. I'm afraid, again, that all it's going to showis how little we can say about these numbers. We're publishing a $300million decline for the week of January 5th. But in the week ofJanuary 12th, for which we do have preliminary data--and that's thefirst full week of Super NOW accounts--our preliminary data show a1/14/83$6.6 billion increase. One would think that that might be the SuperNOW account effect, and maybe it will turn out to be that. I'll getseparate weekly data on Super NOWs a week from today for these fewweeks. But in the week of the 12th the figures show the seasonallyunadjusted NOW accounts increased only $2.7 billion, little differentfrom their increase in the previous week. So the seasonal factor istransforming this into a fairly big increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a discussion of different monetary measures and their potential growth or decline.


Passage number 26.
MR. GRAMLEY. Does that include the Super NOWs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention or discuss Super NOWs, so there is no contention or disagreement related to them.


Passage number 27.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, they are in there. It doesn't lookstrong. And the old M1-A in that week is increasing $1.8 billion onthese preliminary numbers. So it's not clear from the data that we'rehaving any substantial effect from the Super NOWs as of now. We havebuilt some effect into the rest of January on that assumption; that'swhy we have a January estimate, based on what we have through the 12thfor Ml, on the order of 15 percent. We've assumed some further rathermoderate increase in the course of the month from the Super NOWs; ifthe Super NOWs take off, we'd have a much bigger number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 28.
MR. ROOS. Wouldn't that mean, Steve, if the Super NOWs don'ttake off, that Ml adjusted would be a more reliable target than eitherM2 or M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a question posed by Mr. Roos, seeking clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 29.
MR. AXILROD. I don't have an Ml adjusted. I did not workthrough these data, such as they are. Ml adjusted is affected inanother way; some of the Ml would go into MMDAs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have an Ml adjusted and did not work through the data. They also mention that Ml adjusted is affected in another way, without expressing any opposing views.


Passage number 30.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is Ml adjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for a definition or explanation of "Ml adjusted."


Passage number 31.
MR. AXILROD. I assumed President Roos was thinking of somesort of shift-adjusted Ml. We don't have one. What I was trying tosay was that Super NOWs would tend to increase Ml but the shifts intoMMDAs would tend to decrease it. We assume very little shift intoMMDAs from Ml because we couldn't see much actual change--an overtobvious effect--in the weekly figures. If you had assumed that Ml wasotherwise even stronger than we had in December, then you could put alot of shift in. We were reluctant to make that assumption. So, Ihave not worked through to get at what Ml would look like if youabstracted from all these shifts, which affect it in differentdirections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage consists of an individual explaining their assumptions and the reasoning behind them. There is no indication of disagreement or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 32.
MR. BALLES. Steve, you might be interested to know that atour board meeting yesterday the bank directors from all around theWest were pretty unanimous in the view that so far the Super NOWs havebeen essentially a nonevent. Banks weren't promoting them veryheavily nor were customers very interested, and not much was going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is contention or disagreement. While the bank directors believe that the Super NOWs have been essentially a nonevent, it is likely that there are customers and possibly other individuals who may have a different opinion or experience.


Passage number 33.
MR. AXILROD. That's [about] what our one week of datasuggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 34.
MR. BLACK. The same is true in Richmond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. "The same is true in Richmond" suggests disagreement or contradiction to a previous statement.


Passage number 35.
MR. GUFFEY. The same is true in Kansas City.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 36.
MR. BOEHNE. Also Philadelphia.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions the name "MR. BOEHNE" and the city "Philadelphia." There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 37.
MR. FORD. Ditto Atlanta.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is a repetition or agreement of a previous statement made about Atlanta.


Passage number 38.
1/14/83 -5-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who can make sense out of all thesefigures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question that expresses confusion or uncertainty about understanding and interpreting the figures mentioned. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 39.
MR. BALLES. We were counting on you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is being addressed and it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 40.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if you're counting on me, you'repremature in getting any answer at the least. I think this isterribly confusing analytically and factually. It just makes our jobin following these figures worse than it looked like [it would be] atthe Committee meeting, I would say. Beyond that, I don't know what toconclude other than that it's more difficult. All these figures lookhigh; I don't deny that. Whatever kind of adjustment one makes--unless there's something that we're missing here entirely--it's hardto say they look on the low side. I'm a little surprised about whatyou said about M3 in January; to the extent that this shift in M2comes out of M3, which some of it certainly does, you just don't addthe bulge in M2 on to the M3 figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 41.
MR. AXILROD. No, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that Mr. Axilrod agrees or confirms something, indicating there is no disagreement or contention present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 42.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the latest data you had for M3 werenot particularly strong, were they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The use of the word "not particularly strong" implies that the data for M3 were not impressive or positive.


Passage number 43.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I was looking at the large time deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they were looking at large time deposits.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 44.
We're assuming a drop in the course of January--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Forget everything you're assuming.Assumptions aren't very good these days. The last figures on M3 arenot nearly as strong as the M2 figures, are they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The first statement assumes a drop in the course of January, while the second statement contradicts this assumption by asserting that assumptions are not good. Additionally, the statement about the M3 figures suggests disagreement or contention about their strength compared to the M2 figures.


Passage number 45.
MR. AXILROD. In December, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not present any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 46.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know December, but haven't you anythingfor January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if the other person has plans or activities for the month of January, without expressing any opposing views or arguing.


Passage number 47.
MR. AXILROD. We don't really have weekly M3 data. Well, Ihave sort of an experimental look and based on that they tend to goup. They are very strong in the first 2 weeks largely because--if youbelieve what I have for the first two weeks in January--we have a $39billion increase in M2 and the M3 increase is $23 billion. It's not abad relationship; that is, you're taking off $16 billion of the stuffin [unintelligible]. That's why I said if M2 is really going to be upin the 20 percent range, M3 would be high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their analysis of the data and discussing the relationship between M2 and M3.


Passage number 48.
MR. GRAMLEY. You must be looking at an increase on averagein January of maybe $40 billion in MMDAs--December-to-January. If wehad 10 percent of the increase in MMDAs coming from market securities,that's $4 billion that comes out of market securities. Multiply thatby 12 and you get a [$48] billion dollar annual rate of increase, andthat's a lot in M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a calculation and discussing the potential increase in MMDAs and market securities.


Passage number 49.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He was assuming more than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "He was assuming more than that" simply suggests that the person being referred to had additional assumptions or expectations beyond what was initially mentioned.


Passage number 50.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a straightforward acknowledgment that the speaker is aware of something. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 51.
 That's why I say if only 10percent came from that amount--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, he's assuming more than that. Thefigure isn't all that low to say the least.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing agreement with the statement and refuting any disagreement or contention. It suggests that the figure mentioned is not low at all.


Passage number 52.
1/14/83MR. AXILROD. We have [assumed] more out of market securitiesthan out of large time. Who knows how that will work out. As I say,it's a pretty big reduction in the components of M3. But it can'toffset the big increase in M2 entirely, by any means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the uncertainties and potential outcomes of the situation.


Passage number 53.
MR. PARTEE. Well, Steve, we could have a big decline in CDs.That is, I would think that a well funded bank would simply let itslarge CDs run off. Now, maybe you need to include Federal Home LoanBank borrowing in the adjustment there too, because some of it hasgone to savings and loans. And they may be letting their own HomeLoan Bank borrowings go down pretty fast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their thoughts and suggesting a possible course of action. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflict mentioned.


Passage number 54.
MR. GRAMLEY. But you can't adjust CDs that rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact or opinion without any conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 55.
 Atleast it seems to me that if they are not maturing right away--MR. PARTEE. But usually the maturity schedules have shownquite a concentration in short maturities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "But usually the maturity schedules have shown quite a concentration in short maturities" suggests disagreement or contention with the previous statement that they are not maturing right away.


Passage number 56.
MR. AXILROD. Well, in the week of December 22nd, the rate ofdecline in large CDs in the net component of the money stock, after itabstracts from the money market fund holdings, was $6 billion. Well,when we started this in the week of December 15th, it was $1.7billion; then the [first] full-week effect was $6 billion; then in theweek of the 29th it dropped to $3.1 billion; in the week of January5th it dropped to $1 billion. We have a much bigger drop coming up;we estimate a drop of $7 billion in the week of the 12th and then westay with declines of $3 billion. We're not really out of the patternhere at all, so it could drop sensationally more but it would have tobe quite a sensational drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the data and trends regarding the decline in large CDs in the net component of the money stock.


Passage number 57.
MR. BALLES. Steve, John Balles. I have a bit of anecdotalevidence from a California bank president's group that I am meetingwith and talked to last night. A number of banks on the West Coastand maybe around the rest of the country, as you know, have beenoffering premium rates on their MMDAs. As a result, they're havingtrouble [lending out] that money profitably, so they have plenty ofincentive for the moment to let their big CDs run off. They aretrying to find ways to put all this money in the MMDAs to work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing information about banks offering premium rates on MMDAs and their struggle to lend out the money they receive.


Passage number 58.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. There could be a much morerapid runoff than we've had, which would lower the growth of M3 some.But I think we'd still have a fairly big M3 growth here--bigger thanDecember for sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation and stating their view on the growth of M3.


Passage number 59.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see why they are having anytrouble making money, John, when they're offering 11-1/4 percent and abonus and the prime rate is 11 percent. You just do enough of thatand you make a lot of money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the speaker's confusion regarding a situation involving making money.


Passage number 60.
MR. BALLES. Not according to them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any indication of contention or disagreement. The statement "Not according to them" simply states that the claim being discussed is not supported by the individuals mentioned, but it does not imply any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 61.
MR. PARTEE. What, on the compensating balance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a dialogue between individuals discussing the topic of compensating balances.


Passage number 62.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question. You probably don'thave any feel for this, but one of the unknowns here is that weexpected some limited but still significant portion of these MMDAs tocome out of NOW accounts or demand deposits. On the face of it, the1/14/83figures don't seem to suggest that. Does anybody have a feel forthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is merely describing a question or inquiry and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 63.
MR. TIMLEN. Paul, in New York we only have information from2 or 3 banks and it's all switching basically within the M2 category,with very little from the Ml. That is just from 2 or 3 specific banksthat have told us what their situation is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Timlen is simply providing information about the banks in New York without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 64.
MR. BLACK. Paul, Bob Black. We have [responses] from only17 banks so far on our survey, but it appears that 13 percent came outof old Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of information regarding a survey.


Passage number 65.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My word. If it was that much, it could bea huge amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is more of a remark or exclamation about the potential size of something.


Passage number 66.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The word "Yes" suggests that there is contention or disagreement in the passage, but it does not provide any specific information about the nature or details of the contention. Further context is needed to determine the specific disagreement being discussed.


Passage number 67.
MR. BLACK. Yes, that's right. It's only 17 banks, but we doknow--don't we Steve.--that the shift-adjusted rate was probably wellin excess of 9.1 percent in December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 68.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it's very sensitive to these percentages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MR. AXILROD is simply stating that the situation is sensitive to percentages, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 69.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you assumed any of it came out of Ml,you would get "shift adjustment" of more than what the actual figurewas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a hypothetical scenario without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 70.
MR. AXILROD. Do you mean on Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 71.
MR. BLACK. I'm just saying M1 was somewhere in the double-digit range for December. How high, nobody knows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply stating that the M1 range for December was in the double digits, but no specific number is mentioned.


Passage number 72.
 If any change--MR. AXILROD. Yes, probably. We have assumed very littleshift, but I'm sure whatever little shift there was could push itcloser to the double-digits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by MR. AXILROD is an agreement or affirmation of the previous statement.


Passage number 73.
MR. BLACK. We just did some figures on this and [I don'tknow] if they amount to anything, but we came up with some shift-adjusted figures that were way up in the double-digit range dependingon what assumptions we used. One came out 25 percent and one came out28 percent. But I wouldn't put much credence in those because this isa very small sample.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Black, is simply presenting some figures and expressing uncertainty about their accuracy or significance. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 74.
MR. AXILROD. Our figures on the shift out of Ml came nowherenear yours, Bob. Our estimate is really below 5 percent; it's morelike 2 or 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod's statement is simply providing additional information in response to Bob's figures on the shift out of Ml.


Passage number 75.
MR. BLACK. You have more data; that's probably morerealistic. But [unintelligible] on the shift-adjusted rate forDecember, unfortunately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black simply acknowledges that having more data is probably more realistic but mentions an issue with the shift-adjusted rate for December.


Passage number 76.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any more enlightening comments on thesefigures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply asking if there are any additional insightful comments about the figures.


Passage number 77.
MR. BALLES. Well, Paul, just a reaction to these figuresSteve has been reporting: The one that surprised me, at least basedon what we thought might happen when we were looking forward at theDecember FOMC meeting, is how much M2 seems to have been impacted1/14/83here. It's certainly more than I had expected. I find that Steve'sevidence, which is admittedly and necessarily somewhat rough, isfairly persuasive in the sense that certainly to some extent M2 hasbeen impacted and that, therefore, the target that we had set for theDecember-to-March period probably needs some upward adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply reacting to some figures and expressing surprise at the impact on M2. They acknowledge that the evidence is rough but find it persuasive, indicating agreement with the speaker who presented the evidence. They also suggest that the target set for the December-to-March period may need adjustment due to this impact.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 78.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't disagree with that as aqualitative conclusion. I don't quite know what to do about itbecause I don't have any confidence whatsoever about what other numberwe would put down. What I would suggest in that connection is that welook at this for another week and see whether we can make any moresense out of it. I'm not terribly sanguine in that respect but[suppose] we just sit here and not do much; we're not taking anyaction to ease beyond what we discussed at the last Committee meeting.I don't know whether we [should] take some moderate action in theother direction, but I'd just be inclined to sit here for another weekand see whether we can make any sense out of this instead of thinkingof revising a directive in our ignorant state at the moment. Let's atleast wait another week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses uncertainty and lack of confidence in what actions to take and suggests waiting for another week to gather more information and make a decision. This contrasts with the idea of taking moderate action or revising a directive immediately.


Passage number 79.
MR. BALLES. Well, Paul, I would certainly agree with that.I guess where I would come out--to put it a bit differently--is that Iwould be reluctant to act too quickly here to clamp down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they agree with the previous statement and provides a slightly different perspective.


Passage number 80.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I certainly share that view. And that'sequivalent, or the substantive result, of what I'm suggesting for thenext week anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not appear to be contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they share the view being discussed and that their suggestion aligns with that view.


Passage number 81.
MS. TEETERS. What does this imply for the operation of theDesk, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is simply asking a question about the implication of something for the operation of theDesk.


Passage number 82.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we have been going along with the $200million assumption that the Committee had set on borrowing. So, we'vebeen accommodating the nonborrowed to whatever changes in reserverequirements and aggregates have been involved in these figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have been accommodating the nonborrowed to changes in reserve requirements and aggregates based on the assumption set by the Committee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 83.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Altmann has to interrupt again forsome reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. It is implied that there is a disagreement or contention in the passage because Mr. Altmann needs to interrupt again, suggesting that there is a conflict or differing opinions causing the interruption.


Passage number 84.
MR. ALTMANN. Yes, President Horn.OPERATOR. Did she get through to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange where Mr. Altmann confirms that he can hear President Horn and the operator asks if the connection was successful.


Passage number 85.
MR. ALTMANN. No, sorry.OPERATOR. She's going to dial you directly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The conversation is simply providing information and coordinating a phone call.


Passage number 86.
MR. ALTMANN. Well, I think it's a bit late now, anyway.OPERATOR. All right, I'll tell her.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. Mr. Altmann's statement expresses resignation and the operator's response indicates understanding.


Passage number 87.
MR. ALTMANN. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates that Mr. Altmann is expressing gratitude, which does not suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 88.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether it's late ornot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This statement is expressing uncertainty about the time without any conflicting views or opposing opinions.


Passage number 89.
MR. ALTMANN. All right, have her dial.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a request or instruction being given by Mr. Altmann for someone to dial a number.


Passage number 90.
1/14/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want to raise another matter.OPERATOR. All right, she'll be calling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 91.
MR. ALTMANN. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a polite response expressing gratitude.


Passage number 92.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We did, of course, contemplate thissituation in the directive. I don't think we contemplated it in quitethe degree to which it exists, but there is an escape clause in thedirective for the moment. If that's the general view, I would not doanything at the moment, but continue to look at this. I have to begone the first part of the week, in Europe, but maybe we should bethinking about having a further conversation next Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and plans, without any conflicting views or arguments present.


Passage number 93.
MR. PARTEE. I think that's certainly the right course, Paul.We can't make heads or tails out of these figures. There's a bigshift adjustment occurring because the institutions have chosen to getback their rightful share of the market. It's impossible to see whatthe stock adjustment is and it's certainly incorrect to annualize it,whatever it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 94.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever you say, even if we could makeout these numbers, my suspicion is they're going to look high. As Isaid before, they've been running high for some months. Put thattogether with economic activity and it looks to me like we are goingto get, even on an adjusted basis, a further decline in velocity whichwill make the sixth consecutive quarter--I guess not technicallyconsecutive because there's one quarter that interrupted it slightly--of a downward trend of some size in velocity. That is unprecedentedand brings me back to our yearly problem as opposed to our weeklyproblem. I don't know whether anybody has any bright new ideas onthat. Steve did write something, which I have seen. The course thathe chose, maybe sensibly, was writing something that isn't quite adirective, but a basic summary as nearly as he judged any consensus ofwhat our conclusion might be on this matter. I think it's areasonable sense of what that discussion was. Whether it's reasonablein face of the problems that we have for 1983 in judging precisely howwe want to approach this, I don't know, considering what is going on.But it may be worthwhile, if you agree, just to send out somethinglike this to you. It's not a draft of anything, really, although italmost sounds that way. But I don't consider it a draft of anything.I'd like to see to what degree this captures the spirit of what peoplewere talking about as a focus for making any other telephonic commentsthat people want to make before we meet again. Does that sound like auseful or a counterproductive idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's thoughts and opinions.


Passage number 95.
MR. BLACK. It sounds useful to me, Mr. Chairman.SPEAKER(.). I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Black and the Speaker express agreement and find the idea useful.


Passage number 96.
MS. TEETERS. May I ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if they can ask a question.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 98.
MS. TEETERS. I'm just curious whether any of you havenoticed any problems in the money market mutual funds as they unwindand disinvest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a simple question to gather information and is not expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 99.
1/14/83MR. STERNLIGHT. Peter Sternlight on this. We've beentalking to some of them, especially in that first week or two whenthey had heavy outflows, and it looked like they were coping with itpretty well through having positioned themselves to have greater-than-normal liquidity. And in the last couple of weeks, as you have seen,those outflows have tapered off a good bit. And we even hear from themarket that some of the funds are beginning to reach out a little, ina gingerly way, to get somewhat longer maturities. So, they seem tofeel that the worst of their hemorrhaging is over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their observations about the funds' coping mechanisms and the improvement in their situation.


Passage number 100.
MS. TEETERS. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given statement.


Passage number 101.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether anybody wasscratching their heads over the holiday season and beyond and whetheranybody has anything they want to comment on in terms of our generalproblem for 1983. Let me ask that general kind of structural approachquestion. And if anybody also wants to make any comments about whatthey see going on in the economy, this is the appropriate time to doit. [Secretary's note: Silence.] I see you all were working verydiligently and were filled with new ideas during Christmas and NewYear's and beyond. I draw a complete blank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by the speaker reflecting on the lack of response or comments from others.


Passage number 102.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Paul, this is Frank Morris. I don't haveany new ideas but I have some old ones to state.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Morris simply states that he does not have any new ideas but has some old ones to share.


Passage number 103.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's fair enough. Do you want to repeatan old one with greater intensity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting the option to repeat an old experience with greater intensity, indicating a willingness to accommodate the other person's preferences.


Passage number 104.
MR. MORRIS. Very simply, what we're doing here in trying toassess the significance of these numbers as they come in continues tosuggest to me that M1 and M2 are no longer going to be reliableyardsticks for monetary policy, not only now but in the future. Inaddition to these new accounts, we're seeing the money market mutualfunds begin to respond--and I think that response will broaden--byoffering unlimited checking on money market funds. So, this willfurther confuse the situation. I think we should not assume that oncethese new accounts settle down all further innovation in the waypeople manage their cash balances is going to come to a screaming haltand that, therefore, M1 and M2 will be useful guidelines for thefuture. I think until we face up to that fact, we're going to havecontinued trouble.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is expressing his own opinion and raising concerns about the reliability of M1 and M2 as yardsticks for monetary policy. He also suggests that further innovation in the way people manage their cash balances may impact the usefulness of M1 and M2 as guidelines in the future.


Passage number 105.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But is the operational conclusion you drawfrom that more emphasis on M3 and C and L or something different fromthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply posing a question and asking for clarification on the suggested operational conclusion.


Passage number 106.
MR. MORRIS. I would say "yes" with regard to M3, which Ithink is the only reasonably unimpaired monetary aggregate that wehave left, although it is subject to shifts out of market instrumentsinto the new accounts as well as the other aggregates. But adding tothat some measure of total liquid assets or total debt will get usaway from these enormous shifts due to financial innovation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is expressing his opinion about the usefulness of M3 as a monetary aggregate and suggesting adding other measures to avoid shifts caused by financial innovation.


Passage number 107.
MR. WALLICH. Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot see the passage you are referring to. Can you please provide more details or share the passage?


Passage number 108.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 109.
1/14/83MR. WALLICH. You remember that the textbook says that whenthere's a shock to the money supply side, go with interest rates. Ina way this is what has been happening. Now, the shock may settle downat the new higher level and then one can demonstrate that the demandfor money has increased, everything else constant. One can go on fromthere and go back to the aggregates. If it turns out that the demandfor money comes down again from this shock level, then one would haveto take account of that and settle on new aggregate targets at a lowerlevel. It would be very difficult to diagnose. But right now we'reclearly in a situation of a money supply shock situation, which weshouldn't allow to feed through to the real sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing the current situation of a money supply shock and how it may affect the demand for money. There is no explicit contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 110.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody want to make any comments onthe business situation. Does anybody see any signs of change therefrom what they thought before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for comments or observations on the business situation.


Passage number 111.
MR. BOEHNE. I'm seeing more of what I saw before Christmas--very slight improvement in the tone. I think it's mostly at thepsychological level yet. Nobody has a lot of hard evidence thatbusiness is picking up, but there's a feeling that things probablywill get a little better and the reports from the field seem to lookup. But it's a very tenuous type of thing and it wouldn't take muchto upset it. And I think any kind of significant backup in rates orany sense that the Fed may be tightening would kill it in its tracksbecause I don't think it's that strong yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their observation and perspective on the current state of the economy.


Passage number 112.
MR. MORRIS. This is Frank Morris. I would second EdBoehne's diagnosis. I think the economy is turning around here.We're seeing a pretty widespread improvement in the leading indicatorsand, of course, continued strength in the housing sector. But we'renot going to get, at least on the basis of present evidence, the sortof strong cyclical upturn that we've seen in typical past recessions.And I think it would be vulnerable to any backing up in rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, agrees with Ed Boehne's diagnosis and expresses a positive outlook on the economy.


Passage number 113.
MR. BALLES. John Balles. I agree with what has just beensaid both by Ed and Frank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, explicitly states that he agrees with what has just been said by Ed and Frank.


Passage number 114.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody have any sense of anyconviction on the inventory situation. We've seen some reductionsrecently, obviously. And production has clearly been running belowconsumption just recently. But we could still be a long way from aturnaround there or we could not be. I just don't have any strongfeel one way or the other. I don't know whether anybody has anyconviction on that score.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows uncertainty and lack of strong conviction. There is no clear contention or disagreement between different points of view.


Passage number 115.
MR. KEEHN. This is Si Keehn. The people I talk with saythat they have their inventories down at such a very, very low levelthat any increase in final demand at all would result in a pickup intheir production. On the capital goods side, they don't yet see that[pickup].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the views of the people Mr. Keehn talks with regarding the impact of an increase in final demand on production.


Passage number 116.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was talking to a lot of capital goodsmanufacturers the other day and none of them said they saw an increasein orders at this point. Does anybody have any questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply relaying information about the lack of an increase in orders from capital goods manufacturers.


Passage number 117.
MR. FORD. This is Bill Ford in Atlanta. I'm in the middleof a board meeting right now that I had to step out of, and ourdirectors just reported that in the Southeast we are starting to see-11 -1/14/83some pickup in forest products and that in certain regions around herethere are some very sharp improvements in housing conditions and soon. But I guess I'd go along with the consensus that says any sharptightening in response to these money numbers would certainly bequestionable policy. On the other hand, looking at what is happeningto sensitive commodity prices, including gold, silver, copper, andvarious other things, and the dollar against certain currencies, Ithink it would also be a serious blunder at this point to give anysign of pushing rates down further in the context of the uncertaintythat we're facing as to what's happening both in the real economy andwith the money numbers. So where I'd come out would be to even keelit for awhile until we have better information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


