Passage number 1.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any comments or questions onhow these people see things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply asking if there are any comments or questions regarding how these people see things. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 2.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have a question. I understand thatin most or all of these new wage agreements that are coming in at muchlower levels, such as the Teamsters and others, there is for the firsttime a clause indicating that labor can reopen the contracts ifconditions improve in the industry. Do you know more about this. Andto what extent is that likely, when recovery starts, to bring about avery sharp reversal in the downward trend in labor costs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement present in this passage. It is simply a question seeking clarification and information.


Passage number 3.
MR. ZEISEL. Yes, it is apparently a fairly common part of alimited number of such agreements so far, and one can understand why.In a sense it's one of the things the union is trading away; that is,the union is willing to accept a generally reduced fixed rate ofincrease in wages leaning heavily, let's say, on cost of livingadjustments. But they want the opportunity to come back in to takeadvantage of any improved profit position of corporations. And Ithink your point is well taken that it creates greater flexibility anda more rapid response of wages to any change in demand. Usually thereis a lag situation with 3-year contracts; it takes a while for anytightening of the labor market to be evident in a wage adjustment. Ithink this will occur more rapidly but, of course, it depends in asense on how tight labor markets get. Our forecast certainly does notsuggest an environment that would be conducive to very effectivebargaining on the part of labor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the rationale behind a specific aspect of labor agreements.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have the line for compensation perhour going down pretty steeply; it's all in the future. What givesyou that great confidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply describing a situation or trend without expressing any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 5.
MR. ZEISEL. Well, it's not entirely in the future, butyou're perfectly right that in large degree it is. We did have areduction in compensation over this past year. As I noted in mypresentation, I think one has to look through that compensation figurea little to the wage figures behind it. The wage rate figuresimproved somewhat more than compensation last year. We had an $18billion social security tax increase that raised compensation costs byabout 3/4 of a point; and if we adjust for that, we have a betterperformance of compensation. Beyond that, we expect furtherimprovements in the rate of increase in wages. We have an extremelypoor labor market projected: 9 percent unemployment persistingthrough another couple of years. This will have been, by the end ofthe projection period, about 4 years in which the unemployment ratewas higher than anybody's [estimate of the] natural rate that I'maware of in any event. And the logic leads us to feel that this isgoing to result in further easing in wages. [Looking ahead,] we have2/1-2/82as well less of the self-inflicted damage that occurs when socialsecurity taxes are raised. We have a relatively small tax increase ofabout $5 billion this year as opposed to last year's $18 billion and arelatively small increase next year as well. So, we think things areworking in our favor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is mainly providing information and the speaker's perspective on compensation and wage rates.


Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Federal Reserve had a bigger increasein compensation [and is] looking forward to a bigger increase incompensation on some catch-up theory. How many other people areengaged in that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the Federal Reserve had a bigger increase in compensation and is anticipating a bigger increase in compensation. There is no indication of conflicting opinions or differing perspectives.


Passage number 7.
MR. ZEISEL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "MR. ZEISEL." The passage only provides the name "MR. ZEISEL," and does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 8.
 Well, it's hard to know, but one can--MR. GRAMLEY. The Federal Reserve's recession hasn't hit yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing uncertainty about the timing of the Federal Reserve's recession.


Passage number 9.
MR. ZEISEL. The kinds of adjustments that President Solomonmentioned a few minutes ago suggest that we finally are getting thewage adjustments that we were really hoping for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Zeisel acknowledges and agrees with the adjustments mentioned by President Solomon.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we see some signs of this, and somewage agreements that are reported in the newspapers suggest that someindustries are under very heavy pressure. But I do hear a lot aboutother industries that in the total I'm sure are much more important.I'm just wondering what other people hear. Banks in particular tellme they are raising salaries by 11, 12, 13, 14 percent this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are some signs of pressure in certain industries but also mentions that they hear about other industries that are more important. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity about what others hear and shares information about salary raises in banks.


Passage number 11.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'm delighted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Schultz expresses his delight, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You'll have to explain that comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that clarification is needed for a comment made.


Passage number 13.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, we do studies to see what the comparablesalaries are out there. And when comparable salaries go up, why it'sconsistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that studies are done to determine comparable salaries and that when those salaries increase, it is consistent.


Passage number 14.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They will be looking at ours and then wewill be in the hole next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence states a sequence of events, without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 15.
MR. ZEISEL. You're perfectly right. In analyzing thoseindustries where institutional wage adjustments remain [to be made],they did tend to be characterized--in industries that were under verysubstantial pressure--by market pressure of one sort of another.There are other sectors, for example petroleum, where a wageadjustment apparently occurred which was in line with the kinds ofinflationary wage increases that have been occurring in recent years.But we expect spillover effects from this [pressure]. It creates anatmosphere in which bargaining is done against standards that are lessinflationary than in the past. And we feel this will have an effect.In addition, of course, we have had a cost-of-living pattern recentlythat has been somewhat less inflationary; it has been rising somewhatless rapidly. That has a feedback effect as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing explanations and discussing different sectors without expressing any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 16.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to offer a thesis. As I seethe data, the services sector part of the economy is likely tocontinue to be characterized by relatively high wage settlements andprices. The divergence in the price trend between the services sectorand the rest of the economy in the last year is remarkable. In fact,in the second half of 1981, prices of services went up again at a 10percent rate whereas [other] prices continued to come down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating an observation about the divergence in price trends between the services sector and the rest of the economy.


Passage number 17.
2/1-2/82MR. ZEISEL. That's generally true of wages as well. Theyhave held up really quite well in the services sector. We feel thatmarket considerations will be operating there; that is, the generallyslack product and services markets and relatively slow growth in realincome will be operating to damp prices somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about wages in the services sector and the factors that may affect prices in that market.


Passage number 18.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They don't seem to operate very well inthat sector. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact or opinion about the performance of an unspecified entity in a certain sector. The mention of Governor Wallich does not introduce any conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 19.
MR. WALLICH. Aren't we somewhat in a minority in regard to ahopeful outlook for inflation in '83 and beyond. I see that outsidemodels we review seem to feel that in '83 inflation will pick up againwith recovery. I look at our own alternative long-run strategies andthe easy strategy, number 2, has inflation virtually leveling off in'84. It still goes down in '83. Now, is all this due simply todifferences in assumptions on monetary policy or are there more realsector things built into these estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the statement that "outside models we review seem to feel that in '83 inflation will pick up again with recovery," which suggests that there is a difference in opinion regarding the outlook for inflation.


Passage number 20.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I'm not sure. We have not examinedoutside forecasts in detail. We have a running tally of fourcommercial forecasters and, in looking at those, I would judge thatmonetary policy differences have a great deal to do with that. A meanof four commercial services has M1 growth of something like 6-1/2percent in 1982 and 5-3/4 to 6 percent in 1983. That's two years ofreally quite a bit more money growth as compared to the Board'snumbers. In addition, they have alternative fiscal policies. The netresult is that they have a much stronger recovery in activity; theyhave something like a 4 percent rate of increase in real GNP in 1983compared to our forecast of 2-1/4 percent. So, all of those things dohave an impact on the price side. And you're quite correct: Relativeto outside forecasts, we have a fairly optimistic price projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different forecasts and their monetary policy differences, without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 21.
MR. WALLICH. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. "Thank you" is a polite response, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 22.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 23.
MR. PARTEE. To pick up on your comment, Mr. Chairman, I didget the impression as we went through the chart show and discussed theoutlook [at the Board briefing] this morning that this is not aforecast that emphasizes the negative. Everything's possible, but youhave a really remarkable decline, as the Chairman said, incompensation per hour. It could occur. But, as you know, it's towardthe extreme of what one might think could happen. I must say thatyour output per hour forecast strikes me as being pretty strong, giventhe fact that there won't be much recovery in the economy under yourprojection. As a matter of fact, for the period from the latter halfof 1982 to 1983 you have the longest sustained increase in output perhour that we've had since 1977. When you look at prices relative tounit labor costs on the next page, the price index goes down nicely,mirroring the decline in unit labor costs. There apparently isn'tanything that occurs in food or anything else that tends to [push]prices up.On the real side of the economy, it seems to me that you havean extraordinarily optimistic projection for plant and equipment[spending] given the capacity utilization chart shown and also thefinancial factors that are on the page previous to that. And finally,you have consumption really doing pretty well. Apparently, none of2/1-2/82the alleged effects of cuts in tax rates is working in terms ofstimulating savings. So, therefore, consumption remains high relativeto after-tax income. The general impression I get is that this is apretty upbeat forecast that you're giving us, under the circumstances.Would you like to comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their skepticism and disagreement with the forecast, stating that it is too optimistic given the current economic conditions. They highlight various aspects of the forecast that they find questionable or unlikely.


Passage number 24.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes. It depends in part on whether you'reemployed or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that the answer depends on whether the person is employed or not.


Passage number 25.
MR. CORRIGAN. Is that a personal reference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a question being posed by someone named Mr. Corrigan.


Passage number 26.
MR. KICHLINE. Not yet. In any event, you're quite correctthat, looking at the assumptions we have, we do foresee some realgrowth. It's small relative to past cycles, but it's an extraordinaryperiod, given our monetary assumptions. We have what I believe to bea realistic price forecast, given the assumptions, and I view that asquite optimistic. I think something very important is happening onthe price side, and 1982 is a key year. I'm fairly optimistic on theprice outlook. There very clearly are downside risks in the forecast.Mike pointed to some on the financial side; things can go wrong.Jerry pointed to business fixed investment, which is a sector wherethere are clear downside risks. I would only say that we are sure tobe surprised by some bobbles in the numbers over the two-year timehorizon that we're forecasting. But on average, this is our bestview, given the assumptions, and I think it's realistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are some downside risks and potential surprises in the forecast, but overall believes that the outlook is realistic and optimistic.


Passage number 27.
MR. PARTEE. Well, as a matter of personal preference, wouldyou say that there are more downside risks or upside risks in yourprojections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for a personal preference or opinion.


Passage number 28.
MR. KICHLINE. Given the assumptions, I think there are moredownside risks, particularly in the shorter term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses their opinion about the potential risks in the shorter term, given certain assumptions.


Passage number 29.
MR. PARTEE. That's my impression too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 30.
MR. SCHULTZ. Can we pursue that for just a minute. Ibelieve it is of some importance to think about the possibility of areal shock, a break of some kind. It is difficult for me at thispoint in time to see a single domestic shock to the system--the kindof thing that really sends a big tremor through the system--of thesize of Penn Central in '70 or Bank Herstatt in '74. If InternationalHarvester or if Chrysler goes [belly up], I don't think those wouldcreate that kind of shock in the system. The paper market seems to bein so much better shape. Now, if Ford goes, that would give usconsiderably more to be concerned about. One worries in theinternational area about all the East European loans and about thecondition of the German banks. And yet whenever one asks the questionthe answer always is that [the German authorities] would keep anymajor German banks from going under. They may have a problem. So, itcertainly is worthwhile to think about where the shocks could be. Wehad, what--about 43,000 corporate bankruptcies in 1981. It seemsclear that the number is going to be larger [this] year. The order ofmagnitude is very difficult to forecast, but one would think that theerosion of those balance sheets would cause more difficulties.However, it doesn't seem logical that that would provide a shock tothe system of the kind that a single traumatic event would. Or wouldyou disagree with that. Do you think that the number of bankruptcies2/1-2/82could reach such proportions that it could provide major problems tothe financial system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and asking for the opinion of the other person, but there is no disagreement between them.


Passage number 31.
MR. KICHLINE. Oh, I think it clearly could. I don't thinkthat's the most likely forecast one would want to run with at thistime. I very much agree with your assessment early on that thefailure of Chrysler or of International Harvester probably wouldn'tprovide the kind of shockwaves that a large corporate bankruptcy mightif it were totally unanticipated. I wouldn't rule that out. Thingsthat are unanticipated are precisely that; we can't predict them.What we do know from looking at some of the individual cases as wellas the aggregate numbers is that a large number of corporations appearto be [financially] strained. And part of the outcome, in fact,hinges on what happens to the economy. If cash flows were to erode orstay depressed for a longer period of time than we have in ourforecast, then those pressures would tend to build.In the numbers you cited on corporate bankruptcies are a lotof smaller enterprises that have gone out of business. Some of thatis related to the federal bankruptcy laws and it can be a misleadingguide as to the pressures on the system. But our perception is thatthere are many corporations, and probably individuals, that over thenext year or two could find themselves under severe financial straingiven the nature of this forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement and providing additional information to support their viewpoint.


Passage number 32.
MR. BOEHNE. Just to add to what you were talking about,Fred, I agree that it's hard to see the sequence of events or the bigshock that would cause a real bust. But I must say that in recentweeks I've heard the term "depression" used by businessmen andordinary people more than I can ever recall. It just keeps coming up.It's not that it's on everybody's lips, but the term or the conceptseems to be bubbling up more than I would have expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne agrees with Fred's point about it being hard to see a big shock or sequence of events that would cause a real bust. He then adds his own observation about the term "depression" being used more frequently by businessmen and ordinary people.


Passage number 33.
MR. FORD. It has a lot to do with the FDR television show.It has been on every channel and everybody is reading about it orlooking at it every night.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the popularity and widespread attention the FDR television show has been receiving. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 34.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, but that was just a few days ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply confirming that the event in question occurred a few days ago.


Passage number 35.
MR. BOEHNE. That was just a few days ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about an event that occurred a few days ago.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
 I'm talkingabout--MR. BLACK. We always hear more of these things when theeconomy is near the bottom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "We always hear more of these things when the economy is near the bottom" suggests that there is a difference in opinion or perspective regarding the frequency of hearing about certain things in relation to the economy.


Passage number 37.
MR. SCHULTZ. Are you hearing as much of that as you did inlate 1974 and early 1975. I'm not, but maybe it's because I stillonly get a parochial point of view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is simply stating his personal observation and asking for clarification.


Passage number 38.
MR. BOEHNE. No, I wouldn't say it's more. But I just getasked the question: Are we in a depression or are we going into adepression. I have found the frequency of that question picking up inthe last few weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is simply stating his observation about the frequency of a certain question being asked.


Passage number 39.
MR. KEEHN. I think there's more comment along that line,Fred, than there has been before. When you stop to think about it,Penn Central was an isolated incident. It was a tremendous shock, butit did occur all by itself. Herstatt, while a tremendous shock,2/1-2/82occurred all by itself. But a whole series of companies now aremoving toward this line, along with the S&Ls. One does worry that theclock is running on all these companies and that if there isn't somerelief soon, it could begin to get ahead of itself and a lot couldoccur all of a sudden.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and concerns about a potential future situation.


Passage number 40.
MR. FORD. May I ask what the staff does know on thatsubject. I have the same feeling impressionistically--that there aretwo or three of the major airlines, a substantial number of thrifts,Chrysler,--SPEAKER(.). International Harvester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 41.
MR. FORD. Yes, at least two of the major farm machinerymanufacturers. So right there, just based on impressions, I can comeup with over a half dozen big corporations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 42.
 But has anyone looked atthe so-called raw z-scores, the predictors of bankruptcy, as towhether the actual number of firms that in all probability are closeto bankruptcy is rising sharply or--MR. KICHLINE. I'm not aware of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they are not aware of the information being referred to.


Passage number 43.
 Mike or--MR. FORD. Would that be interesting do you think, Mike.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 44.
MR. PRELL. Well, I don't know how large and how reliable thecurrent data base is that we have access to. I know much of theindividual firm data that are available are dated and not veryreliable. But it might well be worth looking at. Of course, as youmentioned, there are large companies in the agricultural machinerybusiness and strings of suppliers to the automobile industry as wellas strings of suppliers in the aerospace industry who are affected,given that commercial aviation is off. So, there may be hard timesfor many industries. What is different about this period versus 1974is that we have very high real rates of interest as best we canmeasure them. And that does have an eroding effect on corporate cashflows. I think that's one of the fundamental differences in thepicture now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting information and discussing the current situation without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 45.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to answer the question without the complete passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 46.
MR. WINN. Well, the thing that troubles me most in yourforecast is the level of unemployment. There is very little progressmade during the period of the next couple years. With thesupplemental unemployment benefits starting to disappear and with thesituation in the states being worse than projected--I think you getyour totals because of Alaska and Texas, which are in very strongpositions--we have a widespread absence of support for the [affected]population group, in light of the reduction in some of the federalprograms in this area. And I think the FDR [television series] is nothelping us much in terms of a background on that. I sense in thelabor movement and in the political movement a stirring that I don'tthink is going to let this thing grind out in the kind of sequencethat we see. Then supplement that with further bankruptcies in someof these sectors, and it seems to me that we haven't factored intothis [forecast] a scenario that could be quite explosive. This levelof unemployment is quite different than in previous [recessions] interms of the hard core element. And we're removing support [byscaling down] some of the programs that perform the cushioning effects2/1-2/82there. So, I think there is more explosiveness in these numbers thanis apparent in the actual figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Winn, expresses his disagreement with the forecast and raises concerns about the level of unemployment. He argues that the forecast does not consider the potential for a more explosive scenario with widespread unemployment and the absence of support programs for affected populations.


Passage number 47.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given passage only mentions "Mr. Ford" without providing any further information or context. Without any additional context, it is not possible to determine if there is any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 48.
MR. FORD. May I ask if, as I take it, this chart show iscorrelated with the projections in the Bluebook. It is. There'ssomething very interesting in the chart of long-range projections thatI think is wonderful, but I don't understand how it can happen. Thatis, on strategy 2 you have the fastest money growth associated withthe lowest interest rates and the highest inflation. How did thatwork out. Do you see what I mean. On the strategy 2 you have thehighest inflation with the highest money growth, which I would expect.But then you also somehow get the lowest interest rates out of it;that's the part that puzzles me. How would you explain that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford expresses confusion and seeks an explanation for how strategy 2 can have both the highest inflation and the lowest interest rates. This suggests that there is an inconsistency or contradiction that needs clarification.


Passage number 49.
MR. PRELL. Well, there are lags in these relationships, ofcourse. And within the time period, in essence we're getting amovement down the demand for money curve. There is more money andpeople hold it only at lower interest rates. So, within this timespan, that does hold interest rates down. And that also produces thestronger performance of the economy, the tighter labor markets, andthe greater cost pressures on prices. I think there is a clearconsistency. Now, perhaps someone who believes in rationalexpectations and is of a monetarist persuasion would say: Well, if weknow that the money stock is going to be growing 1-1/2 percentagepoints faster forever, then under the base forecast here, interestrates would adjust instantaneously. That's conceivably an outcome.But as we model short-term interest rates primarily through atransactions demand for money [approach], this is the outcome we get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own perspective and explaining their reasoning, without mentioning any opposing views or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 50.
MR. WALLICH. Could I pick up on that. We often findourselves saying that we cannot control interest rates except maybevery temporarily at the short end. And here we see that apparentlywe're supposed to be able to bring down Treasury bill rates for threeyears and make that stick. I find it hard to see the consistency ofwhat one finds oneself saying about the difficulty of providinginterest rate relief and these numbers here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: Mr. Wallich expresses disagreement or disbelief about the apparent inconsistency between the difficulty of providing interest rate relief and the numbers presented. He finds it hard to see the consistency in the situation.


Passage number 51.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get out of the model what the modelsays. And what the model says is the more money, the lower theinterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a cause and effect relationship, indicating that according to the model, more money leads to lower interest rates. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 52.
MR. KICHLINE. In the short run. I would say you can argueabout the lag because if we had 1985 on the chart, you'd find interestrates under that strategy rising sharply. And maybe it wouldn't takeuntil 1985. But that very strategy would provide higher interestrates in the long run than any of the other strategies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement made by Mr. Kichline about the potential impact of a certain strategy on interest rates in the short and long run.


Passage number 53.
MR. PARTEE. Is that really true. It wouldn't equilibrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely expressing doubt or questioning the veracity of a statement.


Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless you provide more money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply suggests that more money needs to be provided in order to achieve a certain outcome, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting statements.


Passage number 55.
MR. PARTEE. I'm struck by the fact that your chart show hasreal GNP relative to potential dropping to the lowest level since1960. That is a fairly long time period. If you were to raise thatlevel relative to potential by a point or two--from 91 to 92 or 93--Iwouldn't think it would do an awful lot for inflation or interest2/1-2/82rates because that would only produce a somewhat [higher] lowest levelsince 1960 in the GNP relative to potential.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply commenting on the fact that real GNP relative to potential has dropped to its lowest level since 1960 and speculating on the potential impact of raising that level slightly.


Passage number 56.
MR. KICHLINE. All I can say is that the way this modelworks, as I think many others do, is that if you raise the moneystock, it just takes a matter of time--and one can quibble about thetime--but over the longer run, it's reflected in prices and notoutput.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Kichline about the model.


Passage number 57.
MR. PRELL. You can see that just in that table for '83 and'84 on the high money alternative. The 5-1/2 percent does have abottoming out of the bill rate in the second year. It's a perceptiblydifferent pattern from the others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating an observation about the table.


Passage number 58.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it ends after "Mr. Balles" without providing any further information or context that could indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 59.
MR. BALLES. I'd just like to ask Jim a question on thesefiscal policy assumptions. In the Bluebook, of course, a discreterange of alternatives was set forth--strategies one, two, and three,depending on whether we follow the high end, the midpoint, or the lowend of the specified monetary growth ranges. On the fiscal policyside, Jim, I wouldn't know of more plausible assumptions to make thanthose you have made here. But having said that, how the federalbudget will really turn out is in my view one of the big uncertaintiesnow. I'm just wondering whether you experimented with any alternativescenarios on the budget and how sensitive real growth, theunemployment rate, and inflation are to different scenarios.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles is simply stating that he agrees with Jim's fiscal policy assumptions but expresses uncertainty about how the federal budget will actually turn out. He then asks if Jim experimented with any alternative scenarios and how sensitive certain economic factors are to different scenarios.


Passage number 60.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, we did, and we had so many alternativesthat it was a question of which one to present or what to talk about.It was a real problem. We did try something that was a much tighterfiscal policy by getting rid of the 1983 personal tax cut, forexample, and the 1985 indexing. We stripped that out and assumed moreexpenditure cuts, and in that process we found that in 1983 when thestimulus of the budget was taken away, output dropped and theunemployment rate rose. That was the short-run effect; but the long-run effect gives you a much better posture with much lower interestrates and a better inflation performance. There is this output costin the short run but that fiscal alternative of a tighter posture doesin fact provide a good deal of relief on the interest rate front,according to the model, and does provide opportunities over the longerrun for improved inflation performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different fiscal alternatives and their effects, but there is no argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 61.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How much relief for interest rates doyou get in your model with a tighter fiscal policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage is asking for factual information about the potential effects of a specific policy on interest rates. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 62.
MR. KICHLINE. With this fiscal alternative and thejudgmental money assumptions, the model reduced the bill rate in 1983by some 2-1/2 percentage points; the bill rate was a little under 10percent versus 12-1/2 percent. So, it's 250-300 basis points. But Imust say that was a package of about $50 billion on the tax andexpenditure sides. It's a big fiscal change from what we have here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 63.
MS. TEETERS. This was with no change in monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the monetary policy did not change.


Passage number 64.
MR. KICHLINE. That's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of agreement.


Passage number 65.
2/1-2/82MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The text "2/1-2/82MS. TEETERS" does not contain any specific information or statements that would indicate contention or disagreement. It appears to be a reference or identifier, such as a date or a name. Without further context, it is difficult to determine if there is any contention or disagreement associated with it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 66.
 You didn't postulate that if we had a [tighter]fiscal policy we might have a more--MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we did. Fiscal alternative[unintelligible] higher money. In 1983, we'd get a 6-1/2 percent billrate instead of 12-1/2 percent. One can get all sorts of things, butthat was an outcome that at least in the first 3 years produces a muchbetter performance on most of the variables you might be interestedin. Then it begins to get worse as you go out further in time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident in the response of "Yes, we did" by Mr. Kichline to the statement "You didn't postulate that if we had a [tighter] fiscal policy we might have a more-" Furthermore, Mr. Kichline presents an alternative and opposing view by suggesting that a tighter fiscal policy would have resulted in better performance in most variables initially but would worsen over time.


Passage number 67.
MS. TEETERS. Does that give you an increase in businessfixed investment and housing and so forth. It must.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement/question posed by Ms. Teeters and does not involve any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 68.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is "Yes". The presence of the word "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming here on the budget.You're assuming a higher level of expenditures than the Administrationis going to project by a considerable margin, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage includes contention because one person is suggesting that the assumptions being made about the budget's expenditures are higher than what the Administration will project.


Passage number 70.
MR. KICHLINE. I presume so. Those numbers were still beingchanged, I am told, even as of this last weekend. I really lost trackseveral weeks ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 71.
 I think we are higher because of the economy aswell as--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I was going to ask. How muchis the economy and how much is a difference in [the fiscalassumptions].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a continuation of a conversation where one person is stating their opinion and the other person is expressing agreement or similarity in their line of thinking.


Passage number 72.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, in fiscal '83, they have an unemploymentrate of around 8 percent or so and we have a little over 9 percent;that alone probably is worth roughly $30 billion on the deficit.Also, I'm told that for fiscal '83 they have something like $15 to $20billion of tax raising measures and $30 billion of expenditurereductions, and we've taken about half on those sorts of things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information about the differences in unemployment rates and fiscal measures between two parties.


Passage number 73.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've taken half of what you expect themto propose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply acknowledges that the reader has already taken half of what they expected the other party to propose. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 74.
MR. KICHLINE. Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Kichline's statement is correct.


Passage number 75.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's probably as good a guess asany because they certainly don't expect to get all of that out of theCongress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing agreement and acknowledging that the guess is the best one available because the expectations from Congress are unlikely to be fulfilled.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 76.
MR. WALLICH. Jim, isn't your model in a sense vitiated bythe fact that you have data going way back into the '50s wheninflation wasn't very important but fairly sizable actions were takenboth to curb inflation and to get the economy going. So, you have ahistory of large actions, large swings in the economy, and modestreactions on inflation. The model then gives you these same answersfor the present period when it would seem to me that large swings inthe economy would also have large effects on inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. 

The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is suggesting that the model being discussed is flawed because it is based on data from a time when inflation was not a significant concern. He argues that the model assumes that large actions and swings in the economy would have the same effects on inflation in the present period, which he disagrees with.


Passage number 77.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think that's possible. When talkingabout long-run forecasts I'd be very cautious simply because for mostof the very important variables we're out of the range of historicalexperience. So, I wouldn't disagree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is agreeing with the statement and expressing caution regarding long-run forecasts due to the lack of historical experience.


Passage number 78.
2/1-2/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I find it interesting that theinterest rate projections in the bond market that are consistent withyour GNP scenario show virtually no change. [The bond rate] isprojected to be between 15 and 16 percent over a 2-year period. Whatdoes that say about inflationary expectations and investors affectingthe bond market at a time when you're showing such a sharp drop inactual inflation. How do you tie this whole thing together. Are youin effect saying that bond market investors are going to continue tohave a fairly high level of inflationary expectations notwithstandingthe major progress that you're assuming in '83 and '84.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 79.
MR. SCHULTZ. But think of the deficit that they're assuming[in their forecast].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Schultz is simply stating a point about the deficit that is being assumed in a forecast.


Passage number 80.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not disagreeing. I just want tobe sure that I understand what the man said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing a desire for clarification or further understanding.


Passage number 81.
MR. KICHLINE. I think that's right. Our forecast would beone of continued high or, in fact, rising real rates given that wehave inflation coming down. So you'd have to be thinking in terms ofdisbelievers in the market; that's certainly a possible way ofreconciling these differences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their forecast and suggests that the market may have individuals who do not believe in it.


Passage number 82.
MR. PARTEE. You're talking about real rates building to 10percent or thereabouts, aren't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 83.
MR. KICHLINE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I need more context or the passage itself to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Please provide the full passage.


Passage number 84.
 Well, as Governor Wallich would say, beforetaxes--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply mentioning Governor Wallich's perspective on a certain topic.


Passage number 85.
 Just a little on the economy--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is. if there is any tax left.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement about the economy and tax.


Passage number 86.
MR. BALLES. Another question on your tighter fiscal policyassumption: How did that translate, if you did this, with MikePrell's chart on the Treasury borrowings and the percent of totalfunds raised. The chart shows that percentage shooting up to 40percent by 1983. Would we get any significant relief under thattighter scenario from the crowding-out phenomenon that I'm quiteafraid of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is asking a question and expressing his concerns about the potential crowding-out phenomenon.


Passage number 87.
MR. KICHLINE. The borrowing that we have with that tighteralternative would drop about $45 billion, which is about 10 percent oftotal funds raised. So it would make a substantial difference interms of the federal borrowing as a share of total funds available.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the potential impact of a specific alternative on federal borrowing.


Passage number 88.
MR. CORRIGAN. Let me pick up, John, if I may, on the pointthat Tony started to get at. I think there's a natural coincidence ofconversation about the downside phenomenon here, but this real/nominalinterest rate issue strikes me as something that really may cut theother way, even if it's only in the realm of possibility. As I lookat all of the numbers here, basically, you have nominal interest ratesunchanged between 1981 out to 1983. And that's true whether it'smortgage rates or bill rates. But at the same time, you do have inthat time frame a very sharp change in the measured rate of inflation,ending up with 5.7 percent or something like that in 1983. Myquestion is: Isn't it at least conceivable, everything else equal,that you could end up with quite different nominal interest rates,2/1-2/82particularly when you're also talking about higher savings. In Mike'sflow-of-funds tables, I must say I am struck by the fact that evenwith the deficits the way you have them, total funds raised as apercentage of GNP is down fairly sharply from where it was as recentlyas 1980. Now, I wouldn't project it, but isn't there clearly some[possibility that], if things worked a little differently, we could belooking at something much more favorable in terms of nominal and realinterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 89.
MR. PRELL. I'd make a couple of observations. One is that,of course, that outcome on flows is the outcome of supply and demand.And one of the things holding that flow down is our basicinterpretation of the monetary target and the constraint it places onthe supply of funds. The other thing is that, indeed, if one adheresto this policy and sees the progress on the inflation front and aslowing of all the underlying indicators of inflationary trends, thenone might anticipate some improvement in nominal interest ratesreflecting a decreased inflation premium. We've been cautious inthat. Given the short-term interest rates we see as in essenceclearing the money market, we've been hesitant to put in a big drop inlong rates at the same time that short rates are pretty much stableand at some points higher than they are now. It's just totallyagainst all history to have a pronounced drop in long rates when shortrates are under this kind of pressure. But it's not inconceivable inthis kind of environment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering their observations and explaining their hesitations and considerations regarding the policy and its effect on interest rates. There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement presented.


Passage number 90.
MR. FORD. Well, if I may, again on the same question thatthe rest are asking: If you do calculations on trends in real ratesand compare them under the three strategies--strategy 1 being the onethat I assume starts with 4 percent growth--the way it seems to workout is that by 1984 under strategy 3, which is really tight money, thereal rate of interest is 8.6 percent versus 3.1 percent under the mostexpansionary monetary policy. And if you give any credence at all tothe expectations notion, it would seem to me that after 3 years in arow of tight money and dramatic reductions in inflation down to 3percent, the real rate of interest would be smaller under thatstrategy than the others--certainly not 3 times as high as it is understrategy 2 by 1984.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a calculation and expressing their interpretation of the results. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 91.
MR. PRELL. Well, this is a short-term rate of interest. AndI don't think there's any clear evidence that as one models the demandfor money one can find clearly a separate influence of the expectedinflation rate. In essence, the nominal interest rate captures theopportunity cost of holding cash balances and, therefore, there's notan obvious place for inflation expectations per se to enter into that.But the farther out you get on the maturity spectrum, the moreplausible it becomes that this kind of inflation expectations effectwill have a significant impact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Prell is stating his opinion about the influence of expected inflation rate on the demand for money. He doesn't believe that one can clearly separate the influence of expected inflation rate when modeling the demand for money. However, he does acknowledge that as you go farther out on the maturity spectrum, the impact of inflation expectations becomes more plausible. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 92.
MR. FORD. In other words, if instead of just the T-billrates shown here you also had shown, say, rates on 5- or 10-year notesor bonds, the apparent inconsistency there would be less apparent.That is, you could have the [lowest] long-term rates under thetightest monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "the apparent inconsistency there would be less apparent" suggests that there is a conflicting view or interpretation of the situation. It implies that including rates on longer-term notes or bonds could change the perception of inconsistency.


Passage number 93.
MR. PRELL. Not necessarily, using a traditional model. Thatprobably would tend to show rising long-term rates because short-termrates are rising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a statement without any contradictory opinions or conflicting information.


Passage number 94.
-11-2/1-2/82 -12-MR. FORD. Does your model put out a long-term rate or a 5-or 10-year rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply asks whether a certain model outputs a long-term rate or a 5- or 10-year rate.


Passage number 95.
MR. PRELL. It [does use a long-term rate], but it has notbeen especially reliable. That's one of the reasons we have not usedit very much. In fact, it has been underpredicting long rates overthe past year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the long-term rate has not been reliable and has underpredicted long rates over the past year. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 96.
MR. CORRIGAN. You have mortgage rates on there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are mortgage rates listed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 97.
MR. BOEHNE. Getting at this real rate effect: Don't youhave to trade off the effects of the inflationary expectations, whichhave become commonplace, versus the demand effect that comes from thisvery large deficit. It seems to me that it's the demand side that isdriving up the real rate and more than offsetting the positive effectsyou're getting from inflationary expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, is suggesting that the demand side is driving up the real rate, while the other party, who is not mentioned, may have a different opinion regarding the impact of inflationary expectations.


Passage number 98.
MR. KICHLINE. That's right. And I wanted to mention that Ithink it's both the federal side as well as the private sector. Onthese tight money alternatives, essentially the economy very muchwants to grow more rapidly in nominal terms than monetary policy ispermitting it. And it's that kind of squeeze in the short end that isdriving these rates up. So, I'd say it's both the federal governmentsector as well as the private sector; even though we have a fairlysluggish private sector, in our view there are still demands thatwould be satisfied at these rate levels. And you need those sorts ofrates to restrain the economy over this time horizon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 99.
MS. TEETERS. You still have a fairly substantial shift inthe demand for money in 1982, don't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact and asks for confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 100.
MR. KICHLINE. We have assumed about 2-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or assumption.


Passage number 101.
MS. TEETERS. How does that compare to what happened in 1981.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply mentioning a comparison between two events.


Passage number 102.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, 1981 is bordering on 6 percent, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact or assumption about the interest rate in 1981.


Passage number 103.
MR. PRELL. About 5-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement of a percentage and does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 104.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any context or information to suggest that there is contention or disagreement. The response "Yes" is unrelated to the passage itself.


Passage number 105.
MR. PRELL. And we have greater drift in later quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward observation about increasing drift in later quarters.


Passage number 106.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It seems to me, notwithstanding therapid decline in the actual rate of inflation that you are projecting,that inflationary expectations will stay high for two reasons: (1)the short-term volatility of rates; and (2) as two years go by, if westay at 9 percent unemployment and very depressed housing conditions,etc., notwithstanding the progress on inflation, there will be lessand less patience with that situation in the political arena. If youadd to that some changes in the election in '82 or changes in thepolls of public opinion, then I think there is going to be pressurefor reversing some of the spending cuts. On the other hand, there maybe some willingness to do something on the revenue side, so I'm notsure what the net effect on the deficit would be. But I don't see anyrealistic scenario that assumes that the country will simply stay withthis situation for two years, notwithstanding the very attractivedrops in the rate of inflation. I don't know what follows from that2/1-2/82because there are so many different possibilities as to what form thereaction would take.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and uncertainties about inflationary expectations and the potential reactions to the situation. They are laying out different possibilities without taking a clear stance on any particular viewpoint.


Passage number 107.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage as there is no provided passage or context.


Passage number 108.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we had very little in the way ofdifferences in the forecast for '82, although a slight difference inquarter-to-quarter performance. The main difference we had was theone that Jerry elaborated on more than anyone else. With theprojected decline in inflation, I think rates have to come down morethan what we see projected here. And on the point that Mike Prelldeveloped a while ago: If long-term rates did come down, I wouldexpect short-term rates also to follow as people use the proceeds ofthat long-term borrowing to liquidate some of their short-term debt.So, our guess would be that we are underestimating the amount of realgrowth and overestimating the amount of unemployment that we wouldhave in '83.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is simply expressing his opinion and adding to the discussion.


Passage number 109.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On that happy note, Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions the title and name of Governor Gramley, without presenting any conflicting ideas or perspectives.


Passage number 110.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think one of the answers to why realrates are so high is contained in one of the charts that the staff hadin its briefing [to the Board] this morning. I don't happen to haveit with me, but it showed the components of GNP and the trends inthose components over time. It had consumption going up like [arocket] to 65 percent [of GNP], the highest ratio since 1948; it haddefense expenditures going up from something like 4 percent to 6percent, as I remember the numbers, and investment dropping out ofbed. In effect, what is happening is that when we have a fiscalpolicy that stimulates consumption and is designed to increase defenseexpenditures, real interest rates have to go high enough to hold downthe rate of business fixed investment to the point where it will fitwithin the monetary growth assumptions provided. If you look at thenumbers for monetary growth and nominal GNP, you find that strategyone provides for an increase in velocity of roughly 4 percent in 1982,3 percent in 1983, and 3.8 percent in 1984; it's 3.3 percent onaverage. And what has to happen, if we're going to get a bettereconomic performance than what the staff has provided here, is that wehave to get awfully lucky and have another one of those big downwardshifts in money demand. That may happen, but I think the staff isquite right in saying one can't be sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is simply explaining his views on the relationship between fiscal policy, interest rates, and investment.


Passage number 111.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you saying anything different--in anelegant way--than that the deficit is pushing interest rates higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply seeking confirmation or clarification of a statement, there is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 112.
MR. GRAMLEY. It looks at it in a different way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement simply states that something is being viewed from a different perspective, there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 113.
 It sayswhen we have a combination of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you're going to get those samevelocity shifts regardless of what the deficit is, on one theoryanyway. Well, you get it at lower interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact and presenting a theory.


Passage number 114.
MR. GRAMLEY. I wouldn't subscribe to that theory at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not agree with a certain theory without providing any argument or conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you get the same velocity but atlower interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact without any conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 116.
2/1-2/82MR. GRAMLEY. I don't subscribe to the theory that you getthe same nominal GNP no matter what fiscal policy does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, MR. GRAMLEY disagrees with the theory that fiscal policy has no effect on the nominal GNP.


Passage number 117.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get a lower nominal GNP; you get moreunemployment, too.SPEAKER(.). That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The second statement simply reinforces or agrees with the first statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 118.
MR. GRAMLEY. A lower nominal GNP with a smaller deficit,right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The statement presents two contrasting ideas: a lower nominal GNP and a smaller deficit. This implies that there may be a disagreement or debate about which approach is better for the economy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And you get lower [employment] and lessgrowth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is a negative relationship between employment and growth, indicating a disagreement with the idea that employment leads to more growth.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 120.
MR. GRAMLEY. You get more unemployment and somewhat lessgrowth. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "You get more unemployment and somewhat less growth" suggests that the speaker disagrees with another person or viewpoint, as they are presenting opposing outcomes or consequences.


Passage number 121.
MR. PARTEE. In the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply stating something about the short run.


Passage number 122.
MR. GRAMLEY. In the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 123.
 But you'll get an economy--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why is it only in the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact and there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 124.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, over the long run--and by long run I meanover the next 20 years--if you believe that prices are sufficientlyflexible, then the real GNP will be related to productivity and realresource use.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the relationship between real GNP, productivity, and real resource use in the long run.


Passage number 125.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Eventually prices will go up, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply predicts that prices will increase in the future.


Passage number 126.
MR. PARTEE. I guess what you're saying is that that big hunkof 42 percent of the demand for funds is not interest sensitive atall. Therefore, you have to force the real rate up on the residual inorder to keep the total down to the point that it fits within yourmonetary assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee, expressing his understanding of the situation.


Passage number 127.
MR. BLACK. To the extent that inflation comes down, thatnominal rate does not have to go up as high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement about the relationship between inflation and the nominal interest rate.


Passage number 128.
MR. CORRIGAN. But Chuck, under that argument, if you didn'thave the 42 percent, you could end up with the best of both worlds inthe sense that all credit demands were interest sensitive and the realeconomy could be stronger even though you had lower deficits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario and discusses its potential effects.


Passage number 129.
MR. PARTEE. Well, the first effect would be lower GNPbecause you have the reduced federal spending; but the second effectwould be the impact lower interest rates would have on expanding totaldemands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential effects of reduced federal spending and lower interest rates on the economy.


Passage number 130.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have any comments. Howfull is the strategic oil reserve these days, Mr. Truman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for comments about the strategic oil reserve.


Passage number 131.
MR. TRUMAN. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Truman, states that he doesn't know something. There is no opposing opinion or conflicting statement that indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 132.
 My memory is that it's about--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much are we putting in it now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question to inquire about the current amount being put into something.


Passage number 133.
MR. TRUMAN. We're putting in about--. Let's see, I do havethat figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Truman regarding a figure that he needs to recall.


Passage number 134.
-14-2/1-2/82 -15-MR. SCHULTZ. We were putting in 100,000 [barrels] a day.And then didn't they raise it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a conversation between two individuals discussing a specific topic without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 135.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, it was moved up, I think, to 1/4 millionbarrels a day. If you hold on a minute, I'll tell you what they didlast year, at least. Last year it was 340,000 barrels per day onaverage. And that was high relative to the previous periods. We havein the forecast something only on the order of a little over 100,000barrels per day. They put a lot in over the last three quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information and statistics about the oil production levels.


Passage number 136.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have it going down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "You have it going down" is a statement with no clear indication of contention or disagreement. It can be interpreted as a neutral statement about a certain situation or trend.


Passage number 137.
MR. TRUMAN. The rate of fill has gone down. I think that isone of those things that is locked up in the budget financingsituation with Mr. Stockman. It's no more certain than some of theseother factors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the fact that the rate of fill has gone down and speculating that it may be connected to budget financing issues with Mr. Stockman. There is no conflicting viewpoint or opposing opinion presented.


Passage number 138.
MR. SCHULTZ. Is 120 billion what they're trying for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about the amount of money someone is trying to achieve.


Passage number 139.
MR. TRUMAN. 120 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not contain any statements or information that can be classified as contention or disagreement. It simply presents a numerical value of "120 billion".


Passage number 140.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not providing any information that would indicate contention or disagreement between different viewpoints or individuals.


Passage number 141.
MR. SCHULTZ. I mean million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit disagreement or contention in the given passage as it is incomplete and does not contain any conflicting statements or arguments.


Passage number 142.
MR. TRUMAN. As of the middle of 1980, it was 91 millionbarrels and they've been putting more in at the rate of about 100,000[per day]--I'd have to multiply that out--for the past two years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the amount of barrels being put in and the rate at which it has been increasing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 143.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This last compensation figure--I keepstaring at Mr. Zeisel--you have plotted: Is that the third quarter orthe fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning or challenging the compensation figure by asking for clarification on whether it is for the third quarter or the fourth quarter.


Passage number 144.
MR. ZEISEL. The last real figure would be the fourthquarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about the fourth quarter.


Passage number 145.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states "The fourth quarter," without any additional information or context that would indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 146.
MR. SCHULTZ. Was it 5.7 percent in the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a fact, specifically asking about a percentage.


Passage number 147.
MR. GRAMLEY. This is year-over-year as the chart reads.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 148.
MR. ZEISEL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states "Mr. Zeisel. Yes." This indicates agreement or confirmation rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 149.
MR. SCHULTZ. What was that figure for compensation in thefourth quarter--5.7 percent or something like that. It was prettylow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact or observation about a figure for compensation in the fourth quarter being pretty low.


Passage number 150.
MR. KICHLINE. For total private business it was 5.7 percent;for total private business for the full year 1981 it was 9.3 percent,and that was down a percentage point from the year earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing factual information about the percentage of total private business in the years 1981 and the year before. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 151.
MR. SCHULTZ. I never did get to ask the question. Why wasit so low. I recognize that there's a lot of volatility in thosequarterly figures, but that 5.7 percent did seem to be quite low. Doyou think that's an aberration or was that indeed indicative of somereal progress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a single statement made by Mr. Schultz expressing his opinion on the low figure of 5.7 percent. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 152.
2/1-2/82MR. ZEISEL. I would think it's an aberration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement based on the speaker's opinion or interpretation.


Passage number 153.
 There's acertain amount of--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. For the first three quarters, theaverage earnings per hour figure was coming way down while thecompensation index was not. And then finally in the fourth quarter,there was this delayed parallel trend movement in the compensationindex. For the first 9 months of the year, as I remember, we had asignificant drop in average earnings that we did not have incompensation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a sequence of events regarding average earnings per hour and the compensation index. There is no conflicting information or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's take a couple of minutes [on recentdevelopments in the aggregates], since it bears upon what people thinkabout the long run--or at least what I do. Although I don't know theanswer on what has been going on in the money supply in the last 2 or3 months, maybe you can say something, Mr. Axilrod, in terms of thecomposition and the surveying that your people have been doing and soforth. Then let's get comments from around the table on how everyoneis looking at this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that they should discuss recent developments in aggregates and their potential impact on long-term thinking. They also express uncertainty about the money supply and invite Mr. Axilrod to provide insights. The speaker then suggests getting comments from others at the table for different perspectives. The passage focuses on gathering information and opinions rather than presenting conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 155.
MR. AXILROD. Well, so far as we could tell, in the last 2 or3 months we have had this very sharp run-up in the money supply, whichpartly was expected, given interest rates, and partly unexpected. Ican't divide it very easily between the expected and unexpected parts,but I would point out, as many of you have heard, of course, that wehave had a fairly sharp turnaround in all of the components of money;but in particular the turnaround in other checkable deposits seems tobe correlated with a turnaround in savings deposits. For example, thesavings deposit component of M2 declined over the 6-month period fromApril to October '81 at about a 21 percent annual rate at a time whenother checkable deposits were growing at around a 15 percent annualrate. I picked that period because that is after the bulk of theshifting into other checkable deposits was finished in the first 4months of the year. Since October--in the last 3 months--savingsdeposits on the new seasonals have increased at a 12 percent annualrate, compared with this 21 percent decline, and other checkabledeposits have moved from a 15 percent annual rate of increase to a 53percent annual rate of increase. At the same time, of course, demanddeposits have turned around. They had been declining at a 6 percentannual rate and are now expanding at a 6-1/2 percent rate throughJanuary. But the bulk of that expansion in January occurred in thefirst week and is now ending, whereas the expansion in other checkabledeposits has remained strong through the balance of January. So, Ithink the demand deposit expansion is working its way out whereas asyet we have not seen the NOW account and savings deposit expansionworking its way out.We've tried to investigate the various reasons for theincrease in savings and in demand deposits. We have surveyed thebanks and we have not gotten very satisfactory replies. In my viewsome of it is related to nonconsumption, just savings resulting from afailure to consume [and funds] flowing into the easiest alternativesfor a while--demand deposits, NOW accounts, and savings deposits.Some of it is related to actual financial uncertainties. We see thatin time certificates; small time certificate growth slowed verynoticeably in December and January, and that money is being placedelsewhere, at least temporarily, in more protected forms. And we haveheard bits and pieces of evidence that corporate demand deposits were-16-2/1-2/82rising toward year-end and early in the year, partly for corporatewindow-dressing and partly for compensation balances. However, thosewere bits and pieces of evidence and they were not very clear-cut.This rapid expansion has tended to exhaust much of the growthfor the year [allowed for] in the tentative targets, as the Committeecan see by observing chart 1, following page 11 in the Bluebook. Thatrange of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent is plotted from the actual level forM1 in the fourth quarter of 1981. As you can see, the Januaryexpansion has brought growth well above the range; growth is wellabove the parallel dashed lines [unintelligible]. In effect, much ofthe expansion for the year has been used up. It is quite possiblethat we could get negative numbers in February and March. As theBluebook points out, we had that in 1981 following the April bulge ata time when short rates rose very sharply. And that has occurred onrare occasions at other times. But absent such a sharp drop, theamount of monetary expansion [that could occur] over the balance ofthe year is relatively limited [if money growth is to be] within thetentative range adopted by the Committee. That, of course, Mr.Chairman, brings up questions about the range and its basing andwhether it should be raised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the rapid expansion of money supply has exceeded the range set by the Committee, suggesting that there is a disagreement about whether the range should be raised or if the expansion should be limited.


Passage number 156.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't quite want to get to those[issues] now. But, obviously, what you think is going to happen inthe next few months makes quite a difference in how you look at a lotof things. Everybody has been looking at this to some extent. Wehave this phenomenon of big NOW accounts in particular, although otherthings are mixed in with it. We don't even know whether the seasonalsare any good, and they may well not be. Does anybody feel that theyhave any stronger insights into what is going on here. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and seeking input or insights from others.


Passage number 157.
MR. MORRIS. I may have a feeble one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Morris, indicating that he may have a feeble opinion or viewpoint. There is no suggestion of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 158.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We want a strong one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement expresses a desire for something to be strong, but does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 159.
MR. MORRIS. I think one of our problems is the assumptionthat we made at the last meeting--that the adjustment to NOW accountsnationally was over. The New England data lead me to suspect thatthat may not be the case--New England being the only section [of thecountry] with mature NOW accounts. I looked it up to see if we havehad any bulge in NOW accounts and we have not. They have been quiteflat. So, that at least is a little evidence that perhaps the problemis that the national NOW account adjustment is going to take longerthan we had assumed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and observations about the assumption made at the last meeting and the evidence they have found.


Passage number 160.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions the person named "Ms. Teeters" and does not provide any information or statement that suggests any kind of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 161.
 Do your back data show anything on--MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking about someone's back data.


Passage number 162.
 The data we got show that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just pursue that for a second as apossible explanation. My understanding was that very few of you, ifany, found much of the explanation in the opening of new accountsinstead of [an increase in] existing accounts. Is that true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and confirmation of their understanding based on the data they have received.


Passage number 163.
MR. AXILROD. That's right. This was all [accounted for by]existing accounts going up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that the increase in accounts was accounted for by existing accounts.


Passage number 164.
2/1-2/82 -18-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There seems to be a little inconsistencywith that explanation, but that's an interesting phenomenon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is expressing curiosity and interest in a phenomenon they find intriguing, without any contradictory or conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 165.
MR. MORRIS. Well, maybe it's not the right explanation. Ithought it might be because it's not clear to me why New Englandersshould feel more secure and not need to put more money into NOWaccounts than people in the rest of the country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris simply expresses his own confusion or lack of understanding regarding the topic being discussed.


Passage number 166.
MS. TEETERS. In the past have you had increases in NOWaccounts in the first part of January. You've had NOW accounts forwhat, five years now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about the past increases in NOW accounts.


Passage number 167.
MR. MORRIS. They go back to the middle of 1972.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement of fact and does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that "they" go back to the middle of 1972 without any conflicting viewpoints being expressed.


Passage number 168.
MS. TEETERS. But do you show in those early years a suddenjump in January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of a question or inquiry.


Passage number 169.
MR. MORRIS. No, I don't think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is demonstrated by Mr. Morris simply stating his opinion without any opposing viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 170.
MR. RICE. Did your demand deposits increase along with therest of the country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question about whether demand deposits increased along with the rest of the country.


Passage number 171.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, our demand deposits were up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that demand deposits were up without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements being presented.


Passage number 172.
MR. RICE. Have they fallen off recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about whether something has happened recently.


Passage number 173.
MR. MORRIS. I haven't seen [data for] the latest week whenthey apparently have fallen off nationally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely mentions that the speaker, Mr. Morris, hasn't seen the latest data for the week when there has been a national decline.


Passage number 174.
MR. BOEHNE. The demand deposit [increases] have been more onthe corporate side, not the personal side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the increase in demand deposits being more on the corporate side rather than the personal side.


Passage number 175.
MR. PARTEE. What kind of seasonal do you have on the NOWaccounts. Are you using your own seasonal because you have this--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is a question being asked by Mr. Partee, so it does not involve any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 176.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage is incomplete, and it does not mention any specific information or opinion of Mr. Morris. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 177.
 We've just been comparing our nonseasonallyadjusted data to the national--MR. PARTEE. Unadjusted data, I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 178.
MR. MORRIS. The unadjusted data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker is referred to as "Mr. Morris," indicating that there may be an ongoing conversation or debate where different opinions or perspectives are being expressed.


Passage number 179.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided the full passage. Could you please provide the entire passage so I can accurately determine whether there is contention or disagreement?


Passage number 180.
MR. BALLES. Well, I don't really have any answer, Mr.Chairman. I do have a couple of questions that I thought I might tryon Steve. We couldn't find any good reasons for this explosion we'vehad in NOW accounts in the Twelfth District. Our banks weren't veryhelpful in throwing any light on why it has occurred; it just seems tobe happening. Maybe it goes back to the thought that you expressed;it could be a belated reaction to interest rates having fallen latelast fall. It could be increased liquidity preference in a period ofuncertainty. The more I mull over why it's going on, the more I justhave a hunch that we may be asking the wrong question in a sense. Irecall a debate around this table some years ago in the mid-1970s--Ican't remember exactly when it was, perhaps 1976 or 1977--when we wereagonizing over an excessively rapid and unexpected rate of monetarygrowth and why it was occurring. I think it was Chairman Burns who2/1-2/82said at that time: Well, it's very simple; we've been putting toomany reserves into the market. And I wonder if that isn't really thebasic answer when everything is said and done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply consists of Mr. Balles expressing his thoughts and asking questions about the increase in NOW accounts in the Twelfth District. There is no mention of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 181.
MR. AXILROD. Well, there's a correlation, obviously. Itwouldn't be there if we hadn't put the reserves in. The question onehas to ask oneself is: Why this much money at current interest ratesor rising interest rates. That is the question, mostly, that we aretrying to answer. Why has the demand for money at current interestrates expanded. If we had somehow managed to get all those reservesout and not permitted this much money in these NOW accounts and demanddeposits and currency, then it's our thought that, of course, interestrates would have been a lot higher. So we'd have to ask if you'dstill be wanting to know the answer to the question at that point. Ifwe had succeeded in doing that and had these high interest rates, youwould want to know why interest rates were so high in the middle of arecession and we'd be trying to explain why the demand for money wasstrong. That's what we're looking for, those kinds of explanations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their thoughts and asking rhetorical questions to try and answer a larger question about the demand for money at current interest rates.


Passage number 182.
MR. BALLES. Well, taking the whole period of Novemberthrough January, Steve, when we had this very rapid growth, net, doyou have an impression of how much of it was due to changes inmultiplier relationships. Does that explain very much of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 183.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I'd have to go back and review. We triedto [determine] the extent to which we might have been off on themultiplier relationships that we put in the reserves to money path.Of course, we change these each week as we get data, and with laggedreserve accounting in some sense we are always perfect on it. But thecurrent relationship doesn't mean anything and the lagged one does. Idon't recall to what extent we've had to change them. We've madeconsiderable changes, but I don't recall that as being a big source oferror with the lagged reserve accounting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their process of reviewing and changing the multiplier relationships in their reserve accounting.


Passage number 184.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with that explanation is thatwe've been putting in reserves since July or so and it has only beenin November, December, and January that money growth suddenly tookoff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is providing information about the timing of when money growth began to increase.


Passage number 185.
MR. BALLES. It suddenly grabbed and the question is why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or arguments. It simply poses a question about the sudden grabbing and asks for an explanation.


Passage number 186.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 187.
MR. FORD. As you requested, we did a survey. And if it'sbad to contribute, then we're guilty, because our growth in the lastmonth has been distinctly above the [national] average both in demanddeposits and other checkable deposits. We've had a particularlystrong kick in terms of percentage growth in NOW accounts, the areathat you expressed an interest in. There was virtually no change inATS-type accounts. I asked my staff to take a sample of the banksaround the District that were contributing particularly to this growthabove the trend growth for the whole nation and, like the others whocommented, we could not find any clear, simple, new explanation. Thefacts we came up with were that virtually all of it was in existingaccounts--to address the possibility that you raised, Frank. We didnot see any surge in the number of new NOW account openings; growthwas in existing accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting the findings of a survey and providing information about the growth of various types of deposits in their bank.


Passage number 188.
2/1-2/82MR. MORRIS. Is there any evidence of higher minimum balancesbeing imposed now that might have led to a change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about the possibility of higher minimum balances being imposed and does not provide any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 189.
MR. FORD. We didn't pick that up. There's a drift higher.Right now in our District there's very heavy competition among[financial institutions] on pricing of all types of deposits,particularly the IRAs. And the terms and conditions for IRAs seem tobe getting more and more competitive from the consumer standpoint. Ididn't check any trend on NOWs, but I haven't noticed it. I justdon't know. So, we didn't get any strong indication of any surge innew NOW account openings. It's just the existing accounts that arebuilding up.As far as the speculation as to why, a couple of bankers saidthat they think people are holding off, waiting to see what developsin IRAs, and are just parking money in these NOW accounts until theyfigure out the best IRA deal, at which point they will switch to anIRA. The IRA deals are still being unveiled in our District. Anotherexplanation is the simple old one that people are just saving more andspending less. It seems consistent with other information we have.There's nothing really exciting, though, on the demand deposit side;we don't see anything particularly interesting there. We looked at itand considered it normal corporate window-dressing during this year-end period; nobody believes it's an unusual amount of corporatewindow-dressing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the competition among financial institutions in pricing deposits and the trends they have noticed in IRAs and NOW accounts. They also offer possible explanations for the behavior they are observing.


Passage number 190.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos, as I remember, money growthwasn't very big in your District. It probably means you have bettermonetary policy out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a positive observation about the monetary policy in Mr. Roos' District.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 191.
MR. ROOS. I asked our staff to see if they could churn upsome figures that perhaps would explain not the IRA thing but why M1acted as it did. And they did come up with some interesting figuresthat I'll be brief in touching on. The bottom line of the figuresthey gave me indicated that we were somewhat slow in our willingnessto change our nonborrowed reserve path under certain circumstances.They looked at four periods. One, for example, was the 3 weeks endingAugust 19 and, Steve, let me see if I can explain what I'm trying tosay. In those 3 weeks, the projected deficiency of total reservesrelative to path averaged about $152 million, according to ourrecords, and in that period we did not change our nonborrowed reservepath nor did we change the discount rate. The average in the 4 weeksending September 15--and this was when the aggregates wereundershooting--was about $244 million. The deficiency in the 3 weeksending October 7 was about $405 million. And in each of thoseperiods, if my staff's figures are correct, we apparently did notchange our nonborrowed reserve path nor did we change the discountrate. Now, back in May of [last] year, when total reserves wereprojected to be about $500 million above path, we increased thediscount rate and we reduced the supply of nonborrowed reserves byabout $375 million. And as a result of those actions, Ml begandeclining immediately and we did avoid a continuation of that. We, ineffect, interrupted the bulge that occurred then. Is there any logicin their conclusion, based on that type of evidence, that one of theproblems has been a problem of our not moving our nonborrowed reservesas quickly as we should.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is discussing the possibility that the problem lies with the Federal Reserve's slow response in changing their nonborrowed reserve path, while the staff's figures indicate that no changes were made in response to certain circumstances. This suggests a disagreement about the appropriateness and effectiveness of the Federal Reserve's actions.


Passage number 192.
2/1-2/82MR. AXILROD. Well, President Roos, maybe to put a littleperspective on this--I don't know about those figures but I'm surethey're accurate--from September to December of [last] year theCommittee originally wanted M1-B growth, shift adjusted, of around 7percent. They changed it a bit in mid-course. By the time Septemberto December was over, we had [M1-B] growth on the order of 8-1/4percent. I haven't checked the most recent seasonal figures, butthese are the figures before they were adjusted. That's not far offfrom what the Committee found perfectly acceptable and is probably onthe order of what the Committee would find generally acceptable givenwhat happened. What then occurred was that January growth wasunusually high, going into a period when the Committee wanted growthto phase down into the longer-run range. It was made unusually highby a bulge in demand deposits early in the month, which I believe isin process of working its way out, though not entirely. And it hasbeen maintained at a high rate by NOW accounts not quite working theirway out so far but, in fact, growing faster in January on average thanin the preceding two months. In light of all that and with totalreserves running strong, of course, a downward adjustment of around$190 million was made in the nonborrowed path midway through thisperiod. We put additional pressure on the funds rate. There's no wayin a period as short as a month, given lagged reserve accounting orpossibly even given contemporaneous reserve accounting, to have gottenthat growth of 20 percent down to, say, 5 or 6 percent or whatever theCommittee would have felt comfortable with, short of a funds ratemoving up I would guess into the 27, 28 percent area, withcontemporaneous accounting. I made a theoretical calculation at onepoint, which would not have changed the basic question that theChairman raised as to why money demand was so strong in this veryshort-run period. One would have had to answer that question eitherway. But I think the actions taken with regard to the reserve pathwere such as to work in a constraining direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of the growth of M1-B and the actions taken by the Committee.


Passage number 193.
MR. ROOS. In other words, that's the answer: That youwithdrew reserves by about $190 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a fact about the withdrawal of reserves by a specific amount.


Passage number 194.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 195.
MR. ROOS. The excess of the total reserves was up in the$300 or $400 to $500 million area. You say that if you had pulled allof those out, it would have had a dramatic upward influence oninterest rates. And that's the reason you didn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement made by Mr. Roos and then discusses the potential consequences of a specific action. There is no conflicting or contradictory information presented.


Passage number 196.
MR. AXILROD. If we had pulled out $400 million, we wouldhave had more borrowing, of course. But all the research I've seensuggests that to pull out $400 million of total reserves in a month--under contemporaneous reserve accounting, let's say, not under lagged--we would have to reduce nonborrowed reserves by something like $3billion because the banks are going to offset that with borrowing.And if we reduced nonborrowed reserves by about $3 billion, the bankswould borrow $2.6 billion to get the total down $400 million, andinterest rates would go up extraordinarily high. That's how themechanism would work in the short run. You might conceivably getJanuary down, assuming contemporaneous reserve accounting, but theninterest rates would be so high that February would be plungingnegative. Then interest rates would have to drop very sharply toinduce banks to expand again and get the February growth up. That'show the process seems to work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there is a discussion of different numbers and scenarios, there is no clear contention or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 197.
2/1-2/82MR. ROOS. Steve, our experience in May, though, when we hada similar bulge and when you did take strong action to reducenonborrowed reserves--I think by about $370 million, if my numbers arecorrect--was that it did cause the fed funds rate temporarily to go toabout 19 percent, but then it receded, didn't it. In other words, Iwonder if we are exaggerating the possible volatility of those fedfunds rates and whether we're not in the long pull affecting interestrates more meaningfully than if we really bit the bullet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement and question about the potential volatility of fed funds rates and the long-term effect of taking strong action to reduce nonborrowed reserves.


Passage number 198.
MR. AXILROD. Well, in my judgment, President Roos, lastApril that bulge probably would have come out to some degree withoutour doing anything--that is, with interest rates unchanged. And therise in rates that occurred--because it was just [due to] temporaryfactors--of course encouraged it to come out more. It may even havecontributed to money running low for the rest of the month. So, I'mnot sure how the variability would have worked out in that respect.You can make the case that you could get less variability in moneygrowth with less variability in interest rates if you examine thesethings carefully through a different procedure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply an analysis and explanation of the potential relationship between interest rates and the variability in money growth.


Passage number 199.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot determine without additional context.


Passage number 200.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, we tried to look at thisquestion of the money supply both analytically and by relying onanecdotal information as well. Let me just touch on each of thesebriefly. On the analytical side, we really looked at two things. Onewas the seasonal adjustment, and there I guess what we found is a bitof good news and bad news. There was good news in the sense thatusing a different procedure than X-11 one could point to a pattern ofweekly movements in January that is quite different from the one thatthe official numbers suggest. Now, I don't mean to imply that onemethod is better than the other. But it really tends to underscorehow extremely volatile these seasonal factors are and how badly theycan lead us astray in a given period of time. The second thing we didis probably more important. We tried to take a quick and dirty lookat this question of how the measured money supply responds to changesin interest rates, recognizing that there are at least some people onthe staff--it's not many--who argue that if you go back and look atdeclines in interest rates in the late summer and fall of 1981, maybewhat we have been seeing over the last 3 months isn't all thatunusual. We tried to look at that and found at least in a verytentative way that perhaps more of what we've seen can in fact beexplained by declines in interest rates earlier on. Indeed, whilethis work is very tentative since it has been done in only about 8days, it does suggest that the response in money to changes ininterest rates or shocks in the federal funds rate is a lot greaterthan I thought possible. And it may well argue that the problem isn'tso much too quick a response on the part of policy but the other wayaround: That the harder we hit the short-run blip in the money supplyby jiggling reserve paths or whatever the more we may be creating aworse problem for ourselves a little further down the road in thesense that by hitting it hard it builds in this perpetuating cyclethat we've seen a little of over the past 2-1/2 years or so. Ofcourse, the argument could be made the other way as well. I don'tknow the answer yet, but certainly this work does suggest that more ofthe increase in money than I thought possible can be explained, atleast by this exercise, by what happened to interest rates earlier.And to my way of thinking that's not inconsistent with the argument2/1-2/82that we ought to respond more slowly rather than faster to some ofthese temporary blips in the money supply.But even under the best of circumstances, I don't thinkeither of those factors can fully explain the more recent developmentsin January. And there we did try to develop some anecdotalinformation. Certainly in our case we were able to find on thebusiness side patterns of window-dressing by large corporations thatinvolved larger amounts of money than both they and their bankers saidhad been typical in earlier years. And that phenomenon was veryshort-lived, which of course is compatible with the idea of that bigbulge in business-type checking accounts in the first week withwashouts in the next two weeks. On the household-type checkingaccounts, NOWs and so on, we really don't have much to add. In ourarea, in terms of Frank's point, we too didn't see many new accounts.It was all existing accounts. The bankers and others we talked tobasically made the argument that we have some kind of precautionaryphenomenon here, some of it related to the economy and unemployment,some of it related to uncertainties about the interest rate outlook,some of it maybe related to savings flows themselves, and some of it--at least in the case of our own employees in the Bank, based on alittle informal survey we did--related just to a desire to build uplarger balances to pay off bills incurred in December faster than theymight ordinarily do. That's about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 201.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, President Corrigan mentioned theeffect of interest rates and I probably should point out to theCommittee that our monthly money market model, which is very oftenwrong and is sometimes right, would have projected very sharp growthin the money supply. That is one of the reasons we thought [M1] wouldgrow in November and December, way back when. And [the model] wouldproject that growth continuing on, given interest rate moves that hadalready occurred, into January--but not at this rate--and February andMarch and petering out after that. On the other hand, if you look atour quarterly model, it would suggest that the money growth we'vegotten in January is more than enough to finance the quarter's income,given interest rates. And to get what it says we would have for thequarter, then we would have to expect [M1 in] February and March todrop at around a 13 or 14 percent annual rate. That's just about whatthe money model says it is going to increase. So, the models tend togive varying results.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that their monthly money market model and quarterly model provide different projections for the growth of the money supply.


Passage number 202.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We get explanations and counter-explanations for every phenomenon. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage states that we get explanations and counter-explanations for every phenomenon, which suggests that there is a range of explanations provided. However, it does not indicate any direct contention or disagreement between these explanations.


Passage number 203.
MR. PARTEE. The only trouble is that we don't know if it'stemporary or permanent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact or a concern without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 204.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. That's all I want to know.Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement and stating that they have no further questions or concerns.


Passage number 205.
MR. KEEHN. In the surveys that we did with the banks in ourarea, we were impressed by the consistency of the compensating balancecomment. Apparently corporations allowed their compensating balancesto fall during the latter part of the year. We were surprised by howmany banks commented on that and by how many companies apparently drewon their lines of credit to build up their [cash] balances, even theircompensating balances, over the year-end period. Secondly, IRAs have2/1-2/82been receiving a lot of publicity in the Midwest, and one institutionthat we talked with in January has accumulated $60 million in IRAaccounts. They conjectured that if they were any sample at all, thisis going to be a very big program. And there has been a lot of moneyparked in various NOW accounts waiting for the IRA programs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 206.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They had $60 million already in the IRAs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the amount of money already in the IRAs.


Passage number 207.
MR. KEEHN. One bank had $60 million in IRA accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about the balance of one bank's IRA accounts.


Passage number 208.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The provided passage does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 209.
 Which ones have the--MR. SCHULTZ. That was First Chicago, though, and that wasbecause they put that 2-point bonus on, wasn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for clarification about which banks were involved in a certain action, and there is no evident disagreement or contention.


Passage number 210.
MR. KEEHN. Yes, and they are a very major savings bank, sothey have a big base. The program was very big and they conjecturethat if they are symptomatic--and perhaps [their flows] are heavierthan most--there are a lot of people who had money saved up waitingfor January and the opportunity to begin to open these IRAs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing the size of the savings bank and speculating on the reasons for heavy flows.


Passage number 211.
MR. SCHULTZ. Did you find any other bank that had that kindof percentage increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a question and does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 212.
MR. KEEHN. No, this was heavier than typical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 213.
MR. BOEHNE. In fact, most of our bankers were ratherdisappointed about the IRAs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker simply states that most bankers were disappointed about IRAs.


Passage number 214.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anything else, Si. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a response to a question or request, so there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 215.
MR. BOEHNE. The only thing I can add that hasn't been saidabout the bulge in January is that we've found one of our large banksengaged in what I would call a reverse sweep--a sweeping out ofinterest-bearing assets as of [December] 31st and into demand depositsand then out of demand deposits back [into interest-bearing assets] inJanuary. This was to take advantage of the Pennsylvania personal taxlaw on personal assets, and it was done this year more than any otheryear for some reason. And because of a long holiday weekend, this didcause an unusual bulge in demand deposits during that week of January6th. That's just local in Pennsylvania, but perhaps other states havepersonal property tax laws that may have contributed to the bulge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing additional information about a specific situation regarding the bulge in January.


Passage number 216.
MS. TEETERS. Doesn't Illinois have something like that butthe date is in March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement or question about whether Illinois has something similar to what is being discussed, but with a different date.


Passage number 217.
MR. PARTEE. It's April 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It simply states that it is April 1.


Passage number 218.
MR. KEEHN. They used to but they've done away with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of fact about a past practice being discontinued.


Passage number 219.
MS. TEETERS. They've done away with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 220.
MR. BOEHNE. Just one other comment. There may be someflight from other checkable deposits. As I left the Bank this morningthe lines were unusually long for the Treasury auction. The lobby wasjust full of people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply describes the observations made by Mr. Boehne about the long lines for the Treasury auction at the Bank.


Passage number 221.
MR. PARTEE. One of their last chances to get a free one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement about an opportunity.


Passage number 222.
2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the provided passage without further context. The passage simply states a date range and the name "Mr. Guffey," which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 223.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our survey didn't turnup anything that hasn't already been noted to this point. But thereis a bit of work that was done by our staff that may be of someinterest to you. It relates to a float factor that might be being[double] counted. It's principally perhaps a reporting problem.Since we started charging for servicing checks, more and more of thechecks have been collected through the correspondent system ratherthan through the Federal Reserve. And we have some indication thatthere's a bit of double counting in the correspondent system. Thatis, the collecting bank will record the checks in "due from" balancesas opposed to checks in the process of collection. As a result it's adouble counting in the demand deposit that they pass along to thecustomer and thus could affect M1, for example. And that would bemagnified in terms of the checks drawn on NOW accounts simply becausethey start from a very small base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply describing the findings of a survey and discussing a potential reporting issue.


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is known as the Auerbach theory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This sentence simply states the existence of a theory known as the "Auerbach theory" without presenting any opposing viewpoints or disagreements.


Passage number 225.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, he started at our Bank. I'd prefer toname it something else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their preference for naming something differently without any argument or conflict.


Passage number 226.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Irv Auerbach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or opinions that could spark contention or disagreement. It merely presents the name "Irv Auerbach" without providing any additional information.


Passage number 227.
MR. PARTEE. This is a different Auerbach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that the mentioned Auerbach is different from the previous one, without expressing any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 228.
MR. GUFFEY. Oh, okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 229.
MR. AXILROD. We looked into that, President Guffey. TheBach Committee a long time ago recommended an alternative measure ofthe money supply which grosses up the demand deposits side by adding"due to" [balances] and grosses up the subtraction by adding "duefrom" [balances]. Presumably, then, we would not have this bias youare talking about. We keep track of that series seasonally adjustedand compare it with our current series seasonally adjusted. And theyhave shown similar patterns; that is, they both showed this sharpbulge in early January and they showed subsequent weeks about thesame. Actually, the alternative series showed larger growthunadjusted in November and December than did the present series. So,we have used that as the basis for checking. We are well aware thatthis bias could arise and could get worse. It's there, but it couldget worse. But it doesn't seem to be getting worse and making ourpresent measure more biased in terms of growth rates at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. In fact, it seems like the speaker agrees with the point that there could be bias in the current measure of money supply.


Passage number 230.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Another theory dashed, presumably. Mr.Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states that another theory has been dashed without any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 231.
MR. BALLES. Well, in searching for possible answers here, Ihave another question I'd like to raise with Steve. In each of thetwo years, Steve--in 1980 and 1981--when we have had a convergence ofthe federal funds rate and the discount rate, and the funds rate evenhas gotten down to a bit below the discount rate, that was followed bysome very rapid monetary expansion, as we all know. With the benefitof hindsight, looking back on that period between the November andDecember FOMC meetings last year, total reserves were almost ontarget. They were a little above. But the nonborrowed reserve levelwas raised quite sharply, by almost $200 million. And that-25-2/1-2/82undoubtedly had the effect of keeping the interest rates down becauseif we hadn't raised that, borrowings would have gone up. And Isuspect, as I look back on our feelings in December, that most of uswould have viewed that as not a very opportune time to be letting thefederal funds rate rise, which would have been the result if we hadnot increased the nonborrowed reserve path. I'm just wondering ifmaybe we aren't falling back into the trap of intuitively trying tokeep interest rates down at a time when it seems logical to do thatand then paying the price for it later on when we get this delayedreaction of sudden very sharp expansions in monetary growth, as we gotin both '80 and '81. A companion question would be: With respect tothat major study of our operating procedures that you headed up, as Irecall there was a recommendation for more frequent changes in thediscount rate. As I look back on it, we haven't really done thateither. Well, those are just a couple of thoughts as to some deeperfactors that might be at work here in these sudden surges of monetarygrowth. I'd like your reaction to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Balles is questioning the decision to keep interest rates low, suggesting that it may have led to sudden expansions in monetary growth. He also questions the implementation of recommendations for more frequent changes in the discount rate.


Passage number 232.
MR. AXILROD. Well, there is nothing in any evidence we'veever looked at or in any experience certainly in the past two or threeyears and earlier that says that money demand is naturally smooth. Inthis large an economy, it seems to me that money demand is naturallyvolatile. And we're annualizing, and the numbers look terrible. A1.5 percent change in a level looks like 20 percent because we'reannualizing it. We probably shouldn't be annualizing those monthlyfigures. It gives a wrong impression.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and sharing their analysis of the situation.


Passage number 233.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Hear, hear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Hear, hear" is an expression used to show agreement or support for what has just been said. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 234.
MR. BALLES. Yes, that's a point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple affirmation response by Mr. Balles.


Passage number 235.
MR. AXILROD. So, I don't think that policy is ever going toget away from the question of: Do you want to try for a smooth growthpath with what every bit of evidence anyone has dug up says will besharp variations in interest rates--and you can only do that withcontemporaneous reserve accounting, if then--or are you going to tryfor a path over a more sustained period of time and live with theshort-run variations in money demand that seem to be built into thekind of economy we have. We have this huge economy with severalhundreds of billions of dollars of money flowing daily, some of whichhappens to sit in demand deposits on top of which--and I don't meanthis to sound preachy--we now have a narrow money supply that hassavings in it. They are not being paid a very high rate, but they arewhat many people consider savings. When these NOW accounts wereinstalled, people in many cases just transferred what were savingsaccounts into NOW accounts. So, for whatever reason, people decidedto increase their savings, and it flowed into these accounts. You andI know they have very low rates of interest, but many people feel theyare safe. And people are willing to take that [low rate] for a veryshort period. So, we have a mix that is changing over time, making iteven more complicated to evaluate money movements, which to me meansthat one has to have a longer-term horizon to come to some judgment.Sure, we could begin to constrain it faster by letting interest ratesrise faster, lowering nonborrowed reserves faster, raising thediscount rate. But that again gets into areas of policy judgment forthe Committee as to whether it wishes to put those kinds of interestrate variations in the economy or live with the potential for a littlemore money volatility or whatever trade-offs it can think of there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 236.
2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd be more impressed by these theoriesabout reserves and all the rest if the increase in the money supplywere not so divergent between the different components of the moneysupply. That doesn't prove that it's wrong, but it's just a littlesuspicious when the NOW accounts are going up at the same time thesavings accounts are going up. And that's a sharp change in trend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage expresses skepticism about the theories regarding reserves and the increase in the money supply. The author finds it suspicious that different components of the money supply, such as NOW accounts and savings accounts, are both increasing at the same time. This indicates a disagreement or doubt about the validity of the theories.


Passage number 237.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Could we get an explanation fromSteve on the seasonal adjustment. As I understand it, starting in '82we're doing a common seasonal adjustment for demand deposits and NOWaccounts. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and confirmation of their understanding.


Passage number 238.
MR. AXILROD. We're trying. That's right. Last year we didsome very complicated [calculations] by assuming that part of the NOWaccounts were demand deposits and part of them were savings deposits.In concept, that's right, but it strikes me as a distinction that isgoing to be impossible to [judge] in terms of whether [the actualproportion] is 2/3 or 3/4 or 1/2. So, we felt that as time went on weshould simply begin constructing a seasonal for total demand and NOWaccounts based on the movement of the total and that whateverdifference there is in the movement, with the increasing compositionof NOW accounts, it gradually will be worked out in the seasonals.And that's how we have begun to proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a decision they made and their reasoning behind it. There is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 239.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. May I ask you a hypotheticalquestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if they can pose a hypothetical question.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ten years from now we'll have a goodseasonal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a prediction or expectation for the future without any indication of opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 241.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My hypothetical question is: If youwould apply to the NOW accounts the same seasonal correction that youapplied to the savings, would you have had less of a bulge in January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply asking a hypothetical question.


Passage number 242.
MR. AXILROD. I'd have to look up the answer to that. We'llcheck that out. I don't know, but I doubt it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have the answer but express doubt about the possibility.


Passage number 243.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage is incomplete and does not provide any content to analyze or determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 244.
MR. WINN. This is purely a technical change, but a couple ofbanks with the largest increases in NOWs closed out their ATSaccounts, so it was just a transfer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a technical change regarding the closure of accounts.


Passage number 245.
 And that would still--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that would have been in the sametotal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply interrupts themselves to acknowledge a point or potentially provide further clarification.


Passage number 246.
MR. WINN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The phrase "MR. WINN" is not enough to make a determination about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 247.
 [The total would] still be the same, but just forthe NOW account category--MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's an OCD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 248.
MR. BLACK. Well, the [reserve] requirements were not yetphased in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply stating a fact about the reserve requirements that have not been fully implemented yet.


Passage number 249.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other comments on this orany other insights, which seem to add up to not very much. Did youwant to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 250.
2/1-2/82MR. BOYKIN. I was just going to say, but I really can't addanything, that we tested the corporate balance sheet question and therepresentations were that there was nothing unusual, just thetraditional [window-dressing]. The only thing I did find, which Idon't think has any bearing at all, was a relatively small bank thathad a very large upswing. Inquiring about it, we were told it wassimply the liquidation of a very sizable estate; temporarily severalmillion dollars were put in, but the funds were being distributed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about the speaker's findings during a test.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 251.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, the only thing I'd like to add,since it has been mentioned and I think it's significant, is that thebulk of Christmas sales came much later this year than in previousyears. And the bad weather in January also caused extremely weaksales. Credit card companies with whom we checked emphasized that thesales were very weak. That tends to give some logical common sensesupport to the view of various bankers that these are temporaryincreases. Add to that the precautionary reasons that call forsomewhat larger balances. I don't have any hard proof, but my feelingis that a substantial part of this increase will be washed out over aperiod of time. I do not believe that we could begin to attributesuch a sharp increase to economic reasons--advance indicators of avery strong economic recovery. There may be many factors involved;there probably are to get such a sharp increase. But I think it'shard to conclude that a substantial part is not temporary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention and disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the Christmas sales and bad weather caused weak sales, while credit card companies emphasize the weak sales. However, the speaker's feeling is that a substantial part of the increase will be washed out over time and that it cannot be attributed to economic reasons. This contradicts the view of various bankers who believe these increases are temporary.


Passage number 252.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the full passage, it is difficult to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in this statement. This is because the phrase "Mr. Black" does not provide enough context to judge whether there is any conflict or disagreement involved.


Passage number 253.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, before we leave this, I wonder if Icould ask Steve if he could give us any further explanation on theprojection for the week of February 3rd, which shows a further rise.New York shows a decline from the previous week on M1 and you show apretty significant increase there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is simply asking Steve for further explanation about the projection for the week of February 3rd.


Passage number 254.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Neither of them knows anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a neutral, factual statement indicating that neither person has any knowledge about something. It does not express any disagreement or contention between the individuals.


Passage number 255.
MR. AXILROD. That's right; that's pure projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "that's right; that's pure projection" is a statement of agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 256.
MR. BLACK. Well, if that's his answer, then that leads me tomy final point. No matter how much we rationalize, I don't think wecan explain all this away. And if we can't explain it away, we hadbetter assume that there's some reality to it and act accordingly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement by Mr. Black without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 257.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's a certain reality in thatsome of it seems to have gone up quite rapidly, whatever seasonaladjustment factor one uses. But what is causing this is interesting,not just because of the short-run significance. If we knew theanswer, it would tell us something about whether money is too tight ornot. We have a system where the money supply balloons every timeinterest rates go [down] to 11 or 12 percent in the short run and theeconomy goes into the tank; when interest rates are 11 and 12 percent,we have problems at some point and it says the money supply is toolow. I don't know how or when we will arrive at that conclusion, andI'm not arriving at it now, but I think that's what we are discussinghere under the cover of what causes a blip--or more than a blip--inthe short run. Does the economy want more money than we are allowingin order to grow in line, let's say, with the projections that Mr.Kichline presented. You are saying, okay, the economy will make thatprojection anyway even with the interest rates that we have. Now,-28-2/1-2/82that remains to be seen, but it all bears on where the targets shouldbe. And I don't think we have much evidence to reach any sweepingconclusions on that point at this time.The worst kind of result would be if people had a biggerliquidity preference in some sense, particularly in NOW accounts, thanwe assume and interest rates were to go [down] to 10 percent [andthose accounts] began ballooning. What would they do if rates went to8 percent even if the economy were shooting way down. And, of course,we would have this problem with NOW account interest rates at 5-1/2percent. If you dream of that day when interest rates get down to5-1/2 percent, the money supply is going to balloon. There is noquestion about it the way we now define [the money supply] with that[NOW account] component in there. Now, when we reach that point--andI would have thought we were nowhere near it with market interestrates at 10, 11, 12 percent, but surely that would happen some day ifinterest rates got low enough--are we going to say there's an enormousincrease in NOW accounts because we are now under the NOW accountceiling and that's an excuse for tightening up money with anunemployment rate of 32 percent, just to exaggerate a bit. We'd havea problem, right. I don't think we're there and I don't mean tosuggest that. But what is behind these forces is an interesting areaabout which we do not know enough. I'm struck by the lack of theexplanation that I would have thought would be the most common one:That a lot of money is being parked temporarily not because interestrates are necessarily so low, but just because of uncertainty aboutinterest rates and the fear--or not necessarily the fear on the partof the depositors but the hope--that rates will go up again and peoplecould make a better deal on a money market certificate or something amonth or two from now than they could in December or January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any direct contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses the potential causes and effects of changes in the money supply and interest rates.


Passage number 258.
 I heara little anecdotal evidence myself on that point, but I won't--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's all part of the temporarything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker has heard some anecdotal evidence on a certain point but does not provide further information or opinions.


Passage number 259.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with that much background andelucidation or lack thereof, [we will proceed]. We had a discussionof long-range targets at the last meeting. I guess it's appropriatenow to ask whether anybody has changed his or her mind or wants tomake further observations on that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply mentioning a previous discussion and asking if anyone has changed their opinion or has further observations to make.


Passage number 260.
MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have had a few secondthoughts since both our July '81 meeting and also our preliminarydiscussion of this in December. And at the risk of being atroublemaker, I do feel fairly strongly that we ought to bite thebullet on the inconsistencies among the M1, M2, and M3 ranges,specifically by increasing the M2 range by a full percentage pointover what it was last year and the M3 range by a point and a half.I've set forth in a brief memo the rationale and the advantages thatwould have, along with upping a bit the lower end of the M1 range.With your permission, I would like to have it distributed so thatpeople could see what it's all about and see what the ranges looklike. But that is the bottom line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and suggesting a specific course of action, but there is no indication of disagreement or debate with others.


Passage number 261.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't want to do anything about Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing a lack of desire or intention to take action regarding Ml.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 262.
MR. BALLES. Yes, I'm suggesting, for reasons set forth inthis very brief memo, that we ought to increase the lower end of the2/1-2/82[tentative M1] range to 3 percent instead of 2-1/2 percent, keepingthe upper end at 5-1/2 percent. Very briefly, the reason is that, asI looked back to last July, we hadn't known about the weakness nowemerging in the economy. We had expected--I think more than we donow--the prospect of a further downward shift in the demand for money,and that downward shift seems to have slowed pretty considerably.Whether it will resume and go on in 1982 remains to be seen. Butgiven the fact that we now are in a fairly serious recession that wehadn't really anticipated in July, and given the fact that the demandfor money is no longer shifting downward as much--and maybe not atall--as compared to last summer, and given the fact that a 2-1/2percent lower band would seem pretty Draconian right in the middle ofa recession in terms of public announcement effects, I believe wewould be better advised to use a 3 to 5-1/2 percent range. That wouldhave the virtue of being uniform across the board; the upper end, thelower end, and the midpoint [of the M1 range] would all be 1/2 pointlower than our 1981 range. And this would continue some credibilityin our longer-run anti-inflation approach of gradually cranking downthe growth ranges every year. If we were to hit the midpoint of the 3to 5-1/2 percent range that I'm proposing, which is only apresumption, the growth would be 4-1/4 percent. And 4-1/4 percent isa pretty healthy decline from the actual observed M1-B growth of 5percent last year. So, although I supported the tentative decisionlast July for the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range, I've changed my mindfor reasons I've just set forth on M1.On M2, it gets a little more complicated. The composition ofthe M2 and M3 aggregates, in terms of the portion that is sensitive tointerest rates, has really changed dramatically, as we all know. Mystaff calculates that as recently as the end of 1978 assets yieldingmoney market rates of interest comprised only 8 percent of M2 and thatthat's up to 45 percent now. The interest-sensitive portion of M3 atthe end of 1978 was calculated at 21 percent and it's now up to 54percent. We knew this last year, but we didn't really do anythingabout it. We decided for reasons the Committee felt satisfied with--and I didn't object because I thought it was a good idea--to keepthose ranges down more or less for public reaction purposes. Wedidn't want to be in the posture of raising the M2 and M3 ranges. Butas we all know, the actual [growth] last year, certainly not to mysurprise, was considerably over the ranges that we set forth for theyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Balles is suggesting increasing the lower end of the M1 range to 3 percent instead of 2-1/2 percent, while also discussing the changing composition of the M2 and M3 aggregates. This suggests that there is disagreement or differing viewpoints on how to handle monetary policy and economic conditions.


Passage number 263.
 A final word--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For M2. M2 did not go considerably overthe range last year. [It was over by] 0.3 of a percentage point as Irecall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about M2's performance from the previous year.


Passage number 264.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, it was 0.4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact without presenting any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 265.
MR. PARTEE. Only a half point over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Party, is stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 266.
MR. BALLES. It just seems to me--if we're willing to bitethe bullet in terms of what might be a reaction among the generalpublic or superficial observers of our policy that we are going to beaccelerating monetary growth--that a range for M2 of 7 to 10 percentversus the 6 to 9 percent we've been talking about tentatively and arange of 8 to 11 percent for M3 instead of the 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percentwe've been talking about would simply be more realistic. I personally2/1-2/82consider the likelihood of strong inflows into these interest-sensitive broader aggregates to be great in a year when there's a goodprospect, as we've heard from the staff today, that interest rates aregoing to continue at pretty high levels throughout the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is expressing his personal opinion and suggestion for adjusting the ranges for monetary growth (M2 and M3). There is no indication of any conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 267.
 I'd justhate to get in the middle of the year and then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I understand the reasoninghere. Let me explore it. You say there is a lot more interest-sensitive money; that is certainly true. Why do you expect that to bemore pronounced in terms of influence this year than last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification.


Passage number 268.
MR. BALLES. I don't necessarily think it will be morepronounced, Paul, but I don't think it could be diminished any interms of rates of increase in these aggregates. Some of us broughtthis point up at the meeting the last time. If the staff forecast iscorrect, as I understand it, it implies a continuation of pretty highinterest rates throughout 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing his opinion and there is no indication of any disagreement or contention from others in the passage.


Passage number 269.
 And that's why I would just--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but what do you expect could happen.If interest rates come down, what would happen to M2 all else equal.Or if they went up, what would happen to M2, all other things equal.Why is there a presumption one way or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking questions and expressing curiosity about the potential effects of changes in interest rates on M2, without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or engaging in a debate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 270.
MR. BALLES. The presumption is that M2 and M3 in the futurewill continue to be more sensitive to interest rates than they wereunder the old definition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Balles suggests that M2 and M3 will be more sensitive to interest rates in the future compared to the old definition. This statement could be seen as contentious because it implies a difference of opinion or argument about the future behavior of M2 and M3.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 271.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That means that M2 will go down ifinterest rates go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement suggests that there is a causal relationship between interest rates going down and M2 going down. However, this may not always be the case, as other factors can also influence the movement of M2. Therefore, there may be disagreement or differing perspectives on this assertion.


Passage number 272.
MR. BALLES. Yes, the growth rate would go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement in the passage is not a point of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the growth rate would go down without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 273.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why. What's the mechanism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing ideas. It simply asks for clarification on the mechanism behind a certain phenomenon.


Passage number 274.
MR. BALLES. Well, it's simply the huge proportion that isinterest sensitive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about interest sensitivity without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 275.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but where else are people going toput their money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 276.
MR. BALLES. Well, there are some things that aren't ineither M2 or M3 such as Treasury securities.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles is stating a fact that Treasury securities are not included in either M2 or M3. The speaker's response is unknown and therefore does not indicate any disagreement either.


Passage number 277.
 But those rates are--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But what if those rates go down just likethe certificate rates go down. Now, if people put funds in long-termsecurities, that will make a difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But those rates are" is simply introducing a hypothetical scenario, and the following sentence is stating a consequence of that hypothetical scenario without any explicit disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 278.
 But I--MS. TEETERS. They could move them out just for[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The mention of "I" followed by "But" suggests a difference of opinion or perspective. The interruption with "[unintelligible]" indicates a potential argument or disagreement that is not fully clarified.


Passage number 279.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's also in M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "But that's also in M2" is a continuation or further elaboration on a previous point, rather than a disagreement or conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 280.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 281.
 One can make a clear case if you think aboutrising rates back when we had ceilings on some of those items in M2---31-2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know what happened when there wereceilings on them, but the point is made that there aren't ceilings. Idon't know what will happen now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that in the past, when there were ceilings on certain items in M2, there were clear consequences. However, the author is unsure of what will happen now that there are no longer ceilings on those items.


Passage number 282.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "MR. BLACK." It is simply stating a name without providing any context or information that would indicate disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 283.
 Well, it clearly slowed down then and there areno ceilings now, so--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no question that when we hadceilings, [M2 growth] slowed when rates rose and increased when ratesfell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The author begins by stating that there is no question that M2 growth slowed when rates rose and increased when rates fell. However, by using the phrases "Well, it clearly slowed down then" and "there are no ceilings now", it suggests that there might be a different perspective or argument being presented.


Passage number 284.
MR. BLACK. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 285.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not clear to me why it would do theopposite now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion or uncertainty about a certain situation or action.


Passage number 286.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We did not find when we analyzed M2into those components that pay market rates and those that are belowmarket rates--and we analyzed the movements in these two [components]--that we could arrive at any better correlation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that, after analyzing M2 into different components, they were unable to find a better correlation.


Passage number 287.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the answer to thisquestion is. We have had 3 years since the market rate issue becameimportant and in all of those 3 years the velocity change in M2 hasbeen very close to zero. That's not a long enough period of time toconclude too much on that, but the evidence that we have since thattime is zero [velocity change].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides information about the velocity change in M2 over a period of 3 years. It does not present any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 288.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And last year [M2 growth] was 9percent, virtually the same. Nominal GNP was also up in a range ofabout 9.4 or 9.3 percent, as compared to M2. And I noticed thateverybody's projections were in the 8 to 9 percent range for nominalGNP. If that's one to two percent real growth, plus about 7 percentinflation, then one would think that we would come comfortably withinthe tentative M2 targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating facts and observations about the growth of M2 and nominal GNP.


Passage number 289.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, can the staff help here. Is thereany evidence that they know about that says what the interestsensitivity on M2 is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply posing a question and seeking information about whether the staff has any evidence or knowledge regarding the interest sensitivity on M2.


Passage number 290.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it's getting much less sensitive tomarket rates. So, we wouldn't think it's [going to be] as volatile as[those] rates change. The conclusion we came to in evaluating thiswas that with more and more instruments in M2 having market rates, forany given reserve target aimed at we'd get more rate movement inholding money growth and prompter income movements, so to speak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Axilrod's statement about the sensitivity of market rates and the potential effects on reserves, money growth, and income movements. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 291.
 Thatis, you hold if there's a money demand of so much--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're losing me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing confusion and not presenting any contradictory or opposing views.


Passage number 292.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is not clear from the given information. The passage only mentions Ms. Teeters, but there is no information provided about any contention or disagreement involving her.


Passage number 293.
MR. AXILROD. There is a money demand of so much. Marketrates tend to rise. In the old days, people would shift out of M2-type instruments into market instruments. Now, instead of thathappening, the institutions mark up the offering rates so people don'tshift out. So, if you insist on holding [M2 growth down], theninterest rates rise even more on both instruments until income falls2/1-2/82back to where you're producing only enough savings to be consistentwith your monetary targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply describing a cause and effect relationship between the money demand, market rates, and the behavior of institutions. There is no explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 294.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you saying: that M2 is justgoing to reflect nominal GNP, period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a question but does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 295.
MR. AXILROD. In the limit, not totally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But just to state the converse of that,would you or would you not make a presumption other than through theeffect of interest rates on GNP that the interest rate level itself isgoing to affect M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 297.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I don't think the institutions will movetheir rates quite as fast as the market rates. So, I think it wouldhave some effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their personal belief about the potential effect on institutions' rates in comparison to market rates.


Passage number 298.
MS. TEETERS. But it will have an effect of making M1 and M2diverge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by Ms. Teeters simply presents a cause-and-effect relationship between two variables, M1 and M2.


Passage number 299.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Reducing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the phrase "Reducing it." It is a fragment and does not provide enough information to determine if there is any disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 300.
MR. FORD. When the rates rise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about rates rising.


Passage number 301.
MS. TEETERS. When the [market] rates rise over and above thestatutory ceilings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 302.
MR. FORD. When they drop, you would expect them to converge,wouldn't you, because of this other phenomenon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question and seeks confirmation or agreement from the respondent.


Passage number 303.
MS. TEETERS. Not at the level the NOWs are at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is not as much disagreement as the NOWs have.


Passage number 304.
MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, I think Steve has addressed thequestion, "If you're trying to control M2, what would happen." Tofocus on the simpler question--the interest elasticity of M2--the workwe've done indicates that it still has a negative elasticity of aminor dimension. When interest rates fall, it grows a little faster.The redefinition, taking out the institutional money market funds,should probably make it even less interest elastic because the lag inthe money fund yields stimulated this kind of shifting of funds byinstitutions into M2 and out of M2. So, we say there's a very smallnegative elasticity on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation based on their research and findings.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 305.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, now you're saying there is avery small negative elasticity; as near as we can say it's declining.If I understand this correctly, that's the opposite of the presumptionthat Mr. Balles is making.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "that's the opposite of the presumption that Mr. Balles is making" implies that there is a difference of opinion or disagreement between the speaker and Mr. Balles regarding the declining negative elasticity.


Passage number 306.
MR. PRELL. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 307.
MR. BALLES. Well, I'd like to ask you, Mike, you are takingout the institution only money market funds but aren't you putting inthe retail RPs. What about their elasticities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for information and clarification from someone named Mike about their actions related to money market funds and retail RPs.


Passage number 308.
MR. PRELL. Well, as for the retail RPs, once again theycarry a current market yield. So, there are unlikely to besubstitutions--a great shifting of funds from outside of M2 into M2--when interest rates change. Our supposition at least has been that2/1-2/82most of the money in retail RPs has been diverted from small timedeposits. Indeed, that's one of the rationales for putting retail RPsinto M2: they are a close substitute for those things that alreadywere in M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their supposition about the money in retail RPs and their rationale for including them in M2.


Passage number 309.
MR. BALLES. Coming back just for a minute to the facts, wedo know for a fact that M3 grew by 11.4 percent last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is stating a fact without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 310.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M3, I think, is a different animal. Thatshows you how fast bank credit is going up and how much financing isbeing pushed into banks, as one influence anyway. The more financingthat is pushed into the banks, the higher M3 will be. If we didn'texpect much bond financing, we'd expect high M3 growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an explanation for the relationship between bank credit and M3 growth. There is no disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 311.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, it's very difficult to isolatethe structural changes as they're occurring now, operating with aninstrument that pretty much has market rates in it. For example, Iwould not argue that M1 was weak last year because in a sense M2 wasstrong. There was a partial element of that but there was a downwardshift in the demand for M1, where people were taking money out ofcurrency and demand deposits and putting it into a lot of otherassets, some of which were in M2. But that was a substitution thatdidn't affect M2 itself. So actually, on the level of M1, thedownward adjustment in M1 that occurred was a structural change thatwas evolving. When we get away from that structural change, it'squite possible that M1 and M2 will move closer together as we areprojecting that they will this year. We really have a slower growthin the nontransactions component of M2 this year than last year,largely because income is growing more slowly and we expect M1 to growa little more normally in relation to income than it did last year.With that combination we still would have M2 slowing in this comingyear. We don't have a reason to think the nontransactions componentof M2 will grow substantially faster in 1982 than it did in 1981 witha sharp slowing in income in prospect, regardless of the interestrates that they're offering on those [deposits].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an analysis and explanation of the relationship between M1 and M2 money measures, relating to the structural changes that occurred in the past and projections for the future. They are not presenting any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 312.
MR. CORRIGAN. Is that another way of saying, Steve, that youview the midpoints of the tentative ranges for M1 and M2 for '82 asconsistent with each other in a structural sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply seeking clarification from Steve about his views on the midpoints of the tentative ranges for M1 and M2 for '82.


Passage number 313.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. We have growth a little above themidpoint for M2 but, rather than put our neck out on the line, I thinkthe safer way to put it is that it's a lot more consistent than it waslast year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that the growth of M2 is consistent and safer than the previous year without disagreeing with anyone or presenting conflicting views.


Passage number 314.
MR. CORRIGAN. May I ask one other definitional question. Isaw the comment in the Bluebook about retail repos. Has a decisionbeen made to take the IRAs out of M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 315.
MR. AXILROD. No. We are just going to be getting the firstcomplete data at the end of February. We may not make [the decision]then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about when the first complete data will be available and when a decision may be made.


Passage number 316.
MR. CORRIGAN. What about the ones that are already there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking about the status of something without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 317.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we haven't done anything about the IRAsin M2. We're waiting to see what we're dealing with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and expressing a wait-and-see approach without expressing any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 318.
2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just one more point on M2. I don't knowhow strong a case one can make in practice because I don't know howmuch of this is mostly individual money and how much of that would golong term. But if you have a shift in preference toward longer-termsecurities, then I would think M2 would be depressed somewhat or viceversa.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is speculation and uncertainty expressed in the passage, but there is no clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 319.
MR. AXILROD. [From] the money market funds they can go intobonds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is providing information about where money can go from money market funds.


Passage number 320.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And if people really went out and boughtbonds--but not many individuals buy bonds anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 321.
 I don't know howmuch else is in there that's not--MR. PRELL. The more attractive time deposit instruments thathave been created will tend to limit that effect [on M2] in any event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about the content of a certain thing, and another speaker is providing additional information that agrees with the uncertainty expressed.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Governor Schultz" alone. Additional context is needed to determine if there is any disagreement or contention related to Governor Schultz.


Passage number 323.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I argued last time for retaining the sametargets that we had adopted tentatively. I want to come out the sameplace, having gone through a [lengthy] thinking process in themeantime because of the big jump [in monetary growth] that we got inJanuary. Obviously, the question was why and one got very nervousabout whether these targets were going to allow us to have anythinglike the leeway we might need. So, I went through the process oftaking a long look at what would happen if we shifted the base:Should we go to [the average for] December or even the end of Decemberor use November-December-January instead of October-November-Decemberand all that kind of thing. I might tend to opt for some change inthe ranges for the aggregates if I had a little stronger feeling thatwe knew precisely what all these relationships were. But it does seemthat we have been a bit off in these from time to time in the past.All of which seems to me to argue very strongly for a broad family ofaggregates and for some fairly wide ranges in each of the aggregates.If I had to make a bet, I would bet that whatever we come out withwe're going to miss something along the line. And, therefore, if Ifelt it was really critical that we set these targets very preciselyand say that absolutely we're going to stay within these ranges forthe aggregates in every case, I might feel a little differently. ButI have some considerable doubts on that score. The other side of itis: What do we give up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is just one person discussing their thoughts and opinions.


Passage number 324.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may do that every now and then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement indicating that the action mentioned may happen occasionally.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 325.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, there's no question about that. That's adifferent subject. You know, there is some very good news. This isthe last time I'm going to be with you and it's very clear that when Icame on board things got worse and now that I'm leaving things arebound to get better. So you're going to do better this time than youhave before. But even under those circumstances, it strikes me thatthere are some costs in making any changes. How big are those costs.I have talked to a lot of market participants and I can't find asingle market participant who doesn't feel that it's going to havesome impact if we change these targets. They will argue differentlyon how big that impact is going to be. But I think that's a vitalquestion here. It's not only what we do that's critical but whatpeople think we're doing and what we say we're doing, and that's going2/1-2/82to make a heck of a big difference through the year. So, I would beperfectly willing to see us take our time getting back to the targets.I have a feeling that we probably are going to end up in the upperpart of the range for M1, but I really do believe that if we changethose targets, there is going to be a cost and I urge you to thinkcarefully about that cost.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, expresses his belief that changing the targets will come at a cost, while also acknowledging that some people may argue differently on the size of that impact. This suggests a difference in opinions about the potential consequences of changing the targets.


Passage number 326.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information for us to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 327.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I have several things on my mind. One isthat I think we're in a real box and we have a way to go with themonetary aggregates in 1982, M1 in particular. Given what hashappened so far, if we were to reach the midpoint of the range by thefourth quarter, we would end up permitting an increase in M1 of all of1.55 percent from January to November. And I just don't think we canlive with that. With M2 I haven't made the calculation, but taking arough ruler and laying it out and comparing it with this 6 percentgrowth triangle, to get to the midpoint must imply a growth ofsomething like 6-1/2 percent from January to November. I don't thinkwe can live with that either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, expresses his opinion that the monetary aggregates, particularly M1 and M2, should not be allowed to increase by such percentages. He states that he does not think they can live with those levels of growth.


Passage number 328.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did we have last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply asking a question about what the speaker had last time.


Passage number 329.
MR. GRAMLEY. If we want to get to the midpoint of a 6 to 9percent range, starting with where we are in January, a rough guess isthat it must be around 6-1/2 percent. Have you made that calculation,Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 330.
MR. AXILROD. No, but it doesn't sound wrong. It soundsabout right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is expressing agreement with the statement, indicating that it does not sound wrong to him.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 331.
MR. GRAMLEY. Unless we're awfully lucky, I'm afraid thosegrowth rates are not going to permit the economy anything like thekind of progress this year that the staff is projecting. We need tothink seriously about doing something that will give the economy somebreathing room. Also, I think this year we ought to start out givingmore weight to M2 than we have. We ought to express that publicly sothat the focus of attention is not all on M1 as it has tended to berecently. And I think there's a way to rationalize John Balles'suggestion that we raise the target range for M2 that's different fromthe rationale he uses, and that is that the increasing interest-sensitive component of M2 has probably raised the income elasticity ofdemand for M2. If you look back at history, the studies of demand forM1 and demand for M2 have always come out that M2, the luxury good,has an income elasticity that is bigger than 1 and M1 has an incomeelasticity of considerably less than 1. The main reason was that M1didn't have interest payments on it and M2 did. But as more and moreassets that are interest sensitive are shifted into M2, the chancesare that its income elasticity has grown. And I [considered] the factthat Fred Schultz has said we will have some adverse reaction in termsof loss of credibility if we adjust our targets. But I said at eitherthe last meeting or the previous one, I don't remember which, that Ithink our credibility basically doesn't depend so much on thesetargets and whether we stay within the ranges from one month to thenext as it does on the basic fact that we've been following a verytough and tight monetary policy since October of 1979. That is whathas gained us our credibility. If we stick with that basic posture,we will still have credibility. I think we ought to give serious-36-2/1-2/82thought to the suggestion of raising the M2 target range to 7 to 10percent. And I think we ought to go further than just raising thebottom edge of the M1 target. I would prefer to do something likeusing a different base--starting out with the lower end of the rangefor 1981 as the base figure rather than starting from the actual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. MR. GRAMLEY expresses disagreement with the staff's projections and suggests taking a different approach to monetary policy by focusing on M2 and raising the target range.


Passage number 332.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make just one observation on yourobservation about how little room we'd have for M1 in particular togrow between now and the end of the year if we're going to stick tothe midpoint. Your arithmetic is undoubtedly correct. It makes a bigdifference what you assume will happen, let's say, in February orMarch. If M1 comes down, we will have quite a different picture thanif it doesn't. If it doesn't come down, it certainly will look as ifwe are too tight by every evidence, but it's just hard to make thatjudgment right now. That's where this explanation of the short rungets pretty critical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an explanation and discussion of different scenarios, but there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 333.
MR. GRAMLEY. Unfortunately, we have to make the judgment interms of what we decide for the long-run ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating a fact about having to make a judgment based on long-run ranges. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 334.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to do something. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no direct expression of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "We have to do something" suggests a sense of urgency or a call to action, but does not present any conflicting opinions or viewpoints. The mention of "Governor Partee" does not necessarily indicate disagreement either, as it does not provide any context or details about Governor Partee's stance on the matter.


Passage number 335.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I would support John Balles and hisproposals. I would prefer not to fiddle with the base because that'sgoing to be so hard to explain and so difficult to deal with. I wouldrather consider the possibility that M1 growth is going to be high inthe range because we had a shortfall of size last year that was justbeing made up toward the very end of the year and into January. I dothink, though, that the fact that we have had a shortfall and that weobviously have a very weak economy is a pretty good reason for sayingthat on reconsideration we think a number as low as 2-1/2 percent for1982 would be too low, and therefore we're going to nudge the lowerend up to 3 percent and make the range 3 to 5-1/2 percent, which isour typical 2-1/2 point range [for M1].On M2, I do believe that there are things that have tended toadd to its growth relative to the economy over time. They keephappening. We had a number of them last year. Some, like the allsavers certificates, didn't really work out, though it could come backthis year if interest rates at some point rose to a high enough level.Others involve considerable lead times and change gradually, such asthe IRAs and the Keoghs, some considerable part of which is going tobe showing up. Maybe we can make some kind of adjustment for it but Ireally don't think we're going to have the figures to adjust M2 bytaking out all IRA and Keogh accounts, which tend to be spread throughthe deposit instruments in the banks; they are not just in one depositinstrument. That's the terrible problem, I believe. Then we havethings like the Treasury's proposal to start charging a fee [fornoncompetitive tenders] or to shut off altogether the lines of peopleat the Federal Reserve Banks and at the main Treasury [building]. Theeffect of that will tend to be--and it is intended--to push money intodeposits that are in M2 form rather than to open market instruments.So, there is a whole series of these things. It's not totally withoutreflection in the numbers. If you look back, you'll find that in 1980nominal GNP rose 9.4 percent with a 9.1 percent growth in M2. Then in1981, GNP rose 9.3 percent with 9.4 percent M2 growth. There is 0.1less GNP with a 0.3 larger increase in M2. Most people are looking atsomething in the area of 8-1/2 to 9 percent for nominal GNP growth2/1-2/82this year. That certainly is where the whole focus of the range ofexpectations for both voting presidents and nonvoting presidents andBoard members is. And that suggests to me very strongly that we'regoing to have an M2 growth of 9 percent or above, maybe 9-1/2 percent.Therefore, I see no great reason for starting out with a range, whichis supposed to give us some flexibility, in which we expect to come inat the very top right from the word go. So, I think it would be bestto recognize that there has been a tendency for the kinds ofinstruments included in M2 to increase in popularity and also atendency for the number to be high relative to our ranges and,therefore, to say that we're raising the range. And I think 7 to 10percent is about right. So, I guess for somewhat different reasons,I'd come down with John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his support for John Balles' proposals and providing his own thoughts and justifications for his suggested ranges for M1 and M2 growth.


Passage number 336.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 337.
MR. WALLICH. I think what is happening to the variability ofmoney suggests that our ranges in a sense are narrower than thisvariability. And the variability is also greater than the differencebetween expansion and contraction in the economy, so that interestrates really become the one meaningful check on what the aggregatesare doing. Another possible but not very reliable check would be tosay "Let's go to a single number for the target, which would be themidpoint of what we've had so far." Then we'd get rid of the problemof having a wide target and still missing even that. But the basicproblem is to make a decision as to whether this January number ismeaningful or not. We do not have worthwhile guidance on that. Thatleads me to the conclusion that we ought to do something about thebase. I listened to Chuck and I listened to Fred; I can see thedanger of manipulating these things. I think it is perhaps lessdangerous to manipulate the base than to manipulate the ranges,because we've always accepted base drift. We had upward base drift in'80 and we're going to have downward base drift now if we're acceptingwhere we came out. Therefore, I don't feel that the base is verysacred. I think there's something to be said for the Bluebook versionof basing it on the lower edge of the band that we had because thatwas, after all, one end of our target. We're not going to have thebase drift that events gave us but we'll take advantage of that much.That seems to me acceptable. Another acceptable rationale, it seemsto me, is to say we will go back to July of 1981 when we set thesetargets and use where we thought we were then. We've shifted in aprobably fortuitous manner since then and if we go back to where weset the tentative targets and reaffirm them on that basis, I think wehave the rationale. I looked at the possibility of going even furtherback in order to eliminate past base drift, as it were. If we go backto late 1980 as a base, of course, we have to accept that we don't getthe benefit of the upward drift that occurred during 1980. If we goeven further back to 1978 and follow all the midpoints of the variousranges we've had, we are now within $100 million of the target. It'sreally quite a success.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different options and rationales for making a decision regarding the base for setting targets.


Passage number 338.
MR. MORRIS. There's nothing like compensating errors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement made by Mr. Morris is stating a general belief or opinion without challenging or conflicting with any opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 339.
MR. WALLICH. Of all these various devices, the Bluebookversion strikes me as the most plausible. We do accept that somethinghas happened. We don't take it fully into account. We have areasonable rationale. I think on that base we can probably live with2/1-2/82the [tentative] targets that we have and that's the [lesser]sensitivity than having to face a change in these targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich acknowledges that something has happened, expresses acceptance of a reasonable rationale, and indicates that he can live with the given targets.


Passage number 340.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What Bluebook alternative are you talkingabout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks for clarification on a specific topic. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 341.
MR. WALLICH. The Bluebook alternative for the short-termranges where the base takes off--. Where is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the location of something, without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 342.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For a short-term target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there is a short-term target without presenting any contradicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 343.
MR. AXILROD. There's a discussion in the Bluebook ofshifting the base, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It mentions a discussion that took place without suggesting any disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 344.
MR. WALLICH. Which page is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Although it does not provide enough context to pinpoint the exact source of disagreement, the mention of "which page" suggests there is a disagreement regarding specific information or a reference within the text.


Passage number 345.
MR. CORRIGAN. There's a footnote on page 12.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply mentions the presence of a footnote on page 12. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 346.
MR. AXILROD. There's a text discussion in paragraph 14.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Explanation: The presence of a text discussion suggests the possibility of differing opinions or conflicting perspectives on a certain topic within paragraph 14.


Passage number 347.
MR. PARTEE. I would be inclined to be sympathetic to that,except that as I understand it we were targeting in terms of M1-Bshift adjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not show any form of contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Partee's perspective and understanding without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 348.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, you have to adjust M1 the same way. Youjust take the difference--the amount of shift adjusted in that period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.  It simply states a fact about how to adjust M1.


Passage number 349.
MR. PARTEE. I read that footnote on page 12 and that's whatled me not to want to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement made by Mr. Partee expressing his personal decision based on his interpretation of a footnote on page 12.


Passage number 350.
MR. GRAMLEY. It sounds too messy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about something being messy.


Passage number 351.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. The presence of the word "yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 352.
MR. WALLICH. The arithmetic is messy, but the concept is areasonable one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement acknowledges that the arithmetic may be messy but still agrees with the concept.


Passage number 353.
MR. FORD. Would you also shift to the lower end of the M2band. Henry, to at least be consistent between M1 and M2. I'mserious: I'm not kidding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a request or suggestion made by MR. FORD to Henry for consistency between M1 and M2.


Passage number 354.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about MR. WALLICH, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 355.
 That doesn't sound--MR. FORD. How can you rationalize shifting M1 up from theactuals to the bottom of the band unless you also do the same thing byshifting [M2] on some end of the band.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning the rationalization behind shifting M1 up from the actuals to the bottom of the band without also doing the same for M2.


Passage number 356.
MS. TEETERS. You ought to shoot to the top of the M2 band.SPEAKER(.). Oh, come on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is expressing her belief or opinion that the person addressed should aim to achieve a high position in the M2 band. The speaker's response, "Oh, come on," could be interpreted as either expressing doubt or skepticism, but it does not explicitly disagree with Ms. Teeters' statement.


Passage number 357.
MS. TEETERS. Well, it's the same thing as widening therelationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or observation without any conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 358.
MR. WALLICH. I don't think there's an absolute logic that wehave to do the same thing for the two aggregates, particularly whenthey clearly have been moving in opposite directions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is expressing his opinion that there is no absolute logic requiring the same action for both aggregates, given that they have been moving in opposite directions.


Passage number 359.
2/1-2/82MR. GRAMLEY. If you want consistency, you follow GovernorTeeters' suggestion: Use the upper end of the band for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that if consistency is desired, Governor Teeters' suggestion of using the upper end of the band for M2 should be followed.


Passage number 360.
MS. TEETERS. That's exactly the same thing that John issuggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement between Ms. Teeters and John. Both parties are suggesting the same thing.


Passage number 361.
MR. GRAMLEY. The base drift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "The base drift" is a simple noun phrase with no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 362.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In the given passage, there is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 363.
 When my turn comes up, I'll--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply mentions that when the speaker's turn comes up, they will perform an action.


Passage number 364.
MR. BOYKIN. I want to align myself with Fred Schultz. Ialso am very impressed with the perception, based on what I'm hearingfrom everyone I've talked to, that if we make any changes in theranges, it could be misinterpreted. I would much prefer to see ushold with the tentative ranges that we have set. One thing that has alittle appeal to me--we're not sure what is happening right now andyou mentioned that things might look differently in March and April--is the thought that was expressed at the last meeting I think by TonySolomon, who made some reference to the midyear review. That is anopportunity to reassess and take a look. It seems to me, if we'regoing to make a change [in the 1982 ranges], that rather than doing itnow we ought to defer it for 4 or 5 months at least and we would havemore information on all these changes that are occurring. Certainly,we might have a better explanation of what is happening to the moneysupply. So, given my perception of how [a change] would beinterpreted, I would prefer to leave the tentative ranges and thenhave some kind of caveat that we could make a fairly serious[adjustment at our] midyear review.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boykin is simply expressing his preference to align himself with Fred Schultz and maintain the tentative ranges that have been set, rather than making any changes at the current time. He also suggests deferring any changes for a few months to gather more information and reassess the situation.


Passage number 365.
MR. PARTEE. We said at midyear that we would look at itseriously in January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a previous agreement to look at something seriously in January.


Passage number 366.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 367.
MR. FORD. I have some sympathy with Fred's view, too, givenall that has been discussed, that we should stay basically with thelonger-run targets that we already set but [I would] pay a lot moreattention to trying to get back into the ranges on both if we can.With regard to base drift, I'm very concerned about how thisdiscussion is going. Look at the history of what we've done and thinkback to last year's big debate about what to do about base drift. Ithas been suggested, if I understand Henry right, that we not onlychange the way we handle base drift from last year by going to thelower end of the M1 band instead of the actual [outcome] but that onM2 we do yet another thing. My feeling is that the market people willtake this to say that we're just fooling around so much that we'repurposely trying to manipulate the game so that it will come out theway we want it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Ford expresses concern about the discussion on base drift and disagrees with Henry's suggestion to change the way they handle it. He believes that such changes may give the impression that they are manipulating the market.


Passage number 368.
 If we go with the established procedure, as Iunderstand it, of not drifting the base a new way but the way it hasbeen drifting--MR. WALLICH. Which is a bigger drift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply describing the established procedure and questioning the extent of the drift.


Passage number 369.
MR. FORD. Yes, so. If we stayed with it on M2, it probablywould solve the problem of having to adjust the M2 band upward becausewe would be starting way up there and will in effect have incorporated2/1-2/82 -41-some of the past problems. We'd be able to project the existing bandoff the higher [base]. The real problem comes on M1. I think we willaddress that tomorrow morning when we get around to the question ofhow fast we will try to get back into the band. That's the place todiscuss that problem. So, I would say, for the sake of the appearanceof consistency certainly and to avoid the appearance of purposelymanipulating the base drift issue, let's stick with the ranges thatwere already announced and then concentrate tomorrow on trying to getdown to the question of how hard we should try to adjust to what hashappened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a course of action, but there is no conflict or disagreement with others.


Passage number 370.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as the text is incomplete. It only mentions "Mr. Corrigan" without providing any further information or dialogue that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 371.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I too have been around this alot of different ways, and basically I come out to the view that weought to maintain the targets that were adopted tentatively last July,in part for the reasons that Governor Schultz articulated and for afew others as well. I wouldn't be allergic to trying to do somethingwith this base issue, but I've looked at that a number of ways and I'mnot sure how to do it in a way that doesn't add more confusion ratherthan less. I am still a little concerned that any change we make hereamong the ranges that are being discussed is going to be perceived astinkering that won't materially influence where things come outanyway. And I think we have to give some consideration one way oranother to changing the targets at a point in time when some peopleare telling us to change them as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with maintaining the targets that were adopted and expresses concerns about making changes that could add confusion without substantial impact.


Passage number 372.
 To me at least all of thosethings point to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you amplify that last comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 373.
MR. CORRIGAN. Basically, the way I read the newspapers andthings like that, the message that seems to be coming through bothfrom the Hill and the Administration is that it's time to change thismonetary policy in some [way]. The money supply has to be allowed togrow faster and it will grow faster even with the existing targets.But my point is that if we change the targets, the risk we run is alittle different than just the risk Governor Schultz was referring to.I think we run the risk that credibility will be affected in a moreamplified way because of the perception that the Fed has buckled underagain; they always have and they always will. And that just elevatesthe concern that Governor Schultz spoke of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, disagrees with the idea of changing monetary policy targets because it could potentially harm the credibility of the Federal Reserve, as people may perceive it as "buckling under" and being inconsistent.


Passage number 374.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You remind me--and I will insert this inour consideration now, if you will permit me--that when I wastestifying before Mr. Reuss the other day he wanted me specifically tobring to your attention his recommendation that the M1 band be madethe same as last year which was 3-1/2 to 6 percent. He wanted thatconsidered as a proposal from himself and maybe some of hiscolleagues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement relaying a recommendation from Mr. Reuss to be considered.


Passage number 375.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, that's the kind of thing I had in mindwhen I mentioned this point. Now, I know it can cut either way interms of being responsive on the one hand or being whipsawed on theother hand. As I look at it, particularly in the context of M1, whichis the measure most people seem to want to look at, no matter what wedo to the targets we're going to be looking at a rate of growth on acomparable basis that is going to be above last year. Indeed, if weended up at the midpoint of the current range, M1 growth would be2/1-2/82roughly 2 percentage points above last year's growth even though it isstill within the tentative targets. I do recognize, as I said, thatmaybe something can be done with the base, although I'm not sure howto do it. Personally, I would have sympathy for the notion that maybeM2 is a little incompatible with M1 or from a presentational point ofview maybe talking about an M1 range of 3-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent. Justchanging the bottom and not changing anything else doesn't matter, andI wouldn't fight that to death. But anything that comes across as asystematic raising of these targets--raising them all, for example,instead of maybe raising the bottom end of just one--will cause us torun into some problems.On this question of what growth is left for the [remainder ofthe] year, I am very sensitive to that as well. I would just observethat all these lines in the Bluebook are drawn more or less on theassumption that we will go through the year without having anynegative months. I don't know when we're going to have them, whetherit will be February or July or whatever, but the one thing I am sureof is that we will have some negative months. So, I don't think thesituation is quite as bleak as the pattern one gets just by drawingthose straight lines off of that January number. In a nutshell, I'dlike to see us retain the targets either at or pretty close to wherethey are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 376.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more context. The passage provided is incomplete and does not contain any clear statements or arguments that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 377.
MR. KEEHN. Having established the preliminary targets thatwe did last July, I'd be very reluctant to make a change at this timeunless there are good supportable reasons for so doing. And I'munpersuaded by what I've heard today that, with regard to M1, a changewould be in order. It seems to me that we are in an environment whereabsolutely everything we do is so carefully scrutinized that we'd haveto have very supportable reasons for making a change. A change upwardwould be inappropriate, particularly given the economic forecast wehave for 1982. Therefore, I'd be in favor of leaving the M1 target aswe had established it. But with M2 it does seem to me that there aresome supportable reasons for a change, namely, that we did not come inwithin that range last year and that from the figures that we have forthis year [an unchanged range] would be very tight at best. And Ithink it would be too bad to go through the year having to explainconstantly why we are out of the range on M2. Therefore, I would bein favor of making a change upward with regard to that target to, say,a 7 to 10 percent range, to give us a little room to operate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of one person's opinion and their reasoning behind it.


Passage number 378.
MR. FORD. What base would you go for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford simply asks a question.


Passage number 379.
MR. KEEHN. Where we are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their current location, providing a straightforward statement without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 380.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. There is not enough information to make a judgment on this.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 381.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have three points, probably noneof which will prevail. The first is that I would raise the lowerlimit of M1 to 3 percent and I would put the top at 5 percent. Ithink 2-1/2 percent is too low and I have long favored narrowing thatspread because I think doing so would give additional credibility towhat we say we're going to do. But I sense that we'll go for 2-1/2 to5-1/2 percent, so I would suggest that we ought to aim definitely at 4percent regardless of which of those two routes we follow. The second2/1-2/82point is that I wouldn't favor what the Bluebook called rebasing. Ihad some sympathy for it back when we had overshot our targets, butthen I started trying to contemplate how difficult it would be toexplain to the market how an aggregate was going to grow at a certainpercentage rate from where it really wasn't at the moment and Idecided that it was best just to adjust the rates. And now, sincewe've come in on the low side in the case of M1, I think we'd reallycatch a lot of flak if we tried to do that. Furthermore, with ourshifting from M1-B to M1, which is going to be very difficult toexplain, if we had to explain rebasing on that, too, I just don'tthink anybody would really understand what we're trying to do. Myfinal point is that I'd really rather solve this problem of runningover on M2 and M3 by not setting ranges for them. I realize we don'tknow all we would like to know about M1, but I think we know moreabout it than we do about M2 and M3. So, I'd get rid of thesemultiple targets and focus primarily on M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. 

The speaker, Mr. Black, expresses his disagreement with the current lower limit of M1 at 2-1/2 percent and suggests raising it to 3 percent. He also disagrees with the idea of "rebasing" and believes it would be difficult to explain to the market. Additionally, he suggests getting rid of multiple targets and focusing primarily on M1. These disagreements indicate contention within the passage.


Passage number 382.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is missing, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 383.
MR. ROOS. I think it's important that we stick with ourpresent targets. If we were able to achieve precise gradations, Iwould think that M1 should grow as in the strategy [2] scenario atsomething like 5, 5-1/2 percent. I'm not sure, with our presentprocedures, that we can hit our targets anyway much less achievesubtle differences between 4 and 5 percent. I would agree with [BobBlack] in that I'm not disturbed about [the behavior of] M2 or M3.Except for the cosmetic aspect of it, the defensive end, I think we'dclear the air by not setting M2 or M3 targets because they don'taffect output or prices as effectively as M1, and I think it would bedisastrous to start horsing around with the base again. People knowwhat we're doing; they watch us like hawks. And I think it'simportant for us to say what we're going to do and then try our levelbest to improve procedures to accomplish our targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, is expressing his opinion and agreeing with the views of another person named Bob Black. He is advocating for sticking with the current targets and expressing doubts about the effectiveness of making subtle differences in the targets for M1. There is no indication of any conflict or disagreement with other individuals in the passage.


Passage number 384.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without a passage provided, I cannot determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage you would like me to analyze.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 385.
MS. TEETERS. Well, my problem is that I'm not satisfied withthe forecast. If we stick to these targets, we end up with virtuallyno growth for the fourth year in a row and unemployment of 9 percentor above. I think that's politically very dangerous. We're courtinga lot of trouble for the Congress, the Administration, and theAmerican people [if we try] to hold unemployment at 9-1/2 percent. Wesaid we were going to review these targets. We set tentative targetsand that has turned out in my mind to be a major mistake because weare setting targets for the subsequent year when we're right in themidst of the formulation of fiscal policy for that year on the Hill.And then we don't have the courage to change them. I don't want toplay around with the base because I think that is too difficult toexplain.We ought to look at this and ask: What gives us anacceptable level of real growth and some decline in the unemploymentrate next year. And that leads me to say that we should go at leastto last year's M1 target of 3 to 6 percent. The target proveddisastrous and we undershot it. Instead of doing all this horsingaround with the base, we should [set the ranges] straightforwardly theway John Balles has suggested and widen the difference between the M1and M2 ranges, and then try to stay with that. Even with 3 to 62/1-2/82percent, if we come out at the upper limit, we are not going to have arobust economy next year. But at least we might get some decline inthe unemployment rate and in interest rates and I think that's whatwe're here for. Our major responsibility is to provide a healthyeconomy. We are getting considerable forecasts, at least, of areduction in inflation; and if it turns out that we're wrong, maybe wecan change the ranges again in midyear and do it in an honest wayrather than just always have this problem of perception. One of theproblems with sticking with the ranges that we have is that if wedon't come within them, then we have an enormous credibility problemstarting the end of the year. We can push, but there's just so muchwe can do with this. Sooner or later we have to face up to whether wemade it within our ranges or we didn't. We go into an enormous amountof explanation to try to explain why we didn't. We may push off thatcredibility problem, but we don't avoid it. So, I would suggestraising the ranges on all of the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters expresses dissatisfaction with the forecast and believes that sticking to the current targets will lead to no growth and high unemployment, which she sees as politically dangerous. She believes that the targets should be reviewed and changed, suggesting a different approach to setting the ranges for monetary aggregates.


Passage number 386.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide an answer without the passage. Please provide the passage you are referring to.


Passage number 387.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think there is still a verygood chance that we will see in 1982 some of the downward shift indemand for holding M1 that we saw in 1981, and I don't think we shouldbe mesmerized by a January bulge. We also should not be the least bitunhappy about coming in anywhere within the range and we shouldn'teven be thinking in terms of midpoints given the shifting nature ofthese demands. We may very well come in at the upper end of the M1range if we don't get a significant or even partial repetition of whatwe saw in 1981. But I have no reason to assume that we won't getthat. In addition to money moving into money market funds and thesubstitution effect, we may also get a significant movement in thedevelopment of automatic sweep accounts, which also will tend toreduce the demand for M1 balances. Therefore, my instinct would be tostay with the ranges because it's not clear to me that we have aslittle room as the January bulge would indicate. Not only is therethe possibility that part of it is temporary but there's also thisother point that I just made. So, I'd be inclined to stick with [thetentative ranges].As far as M2 goes, even this last year I was a little unhappyabout the tightness of the M2 range. I pretty much come out the waySteve does in that I believe it's very likely that we are going tohave less of a problem coming within the 9 percent [upper limit],although I agree with Chuck that we're probably likely to be at thehigh end of that range. On the other hand, it wouldn't bother me atall if we came out at the low end of one range and the high end ofanother. I think the midpoint stuff is absolutely nonsense in thisimprecise world we're living in.So, on balance, if I were presenting the targets, I wouldpoint out to the Congress and the country that we may very well comein at the upper end of the range for M1, given the strong growth inJanuary, if that doesn't prove to be as temporary as it might be. Butit's also true that if we get the kind of innovation and structuralchanges that we got in 1981 in M1, we could very easily come in towardthe lower end of the range. And I think the M2 relationship tonominal GNP is close enough; I don't think one can read too much fromthat 0.3 percentage point movement. It's still very close and,2/1-2/82therefore, it seems to me that we could come in on that. So that'swhy I would stay [with the tentative ranges].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions on the matter, but there is no apparent difference of opinion or conflicting viewpoints among individuals.


Passage number 388.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're running late, but I think we are farenough advanced here that we may as well get this preliminary go-around out of the way. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are running late but believe they are advanced enough to proceed with a preliminary go-around.


Passage number 389.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I still feel that we're in aperiod now where we can no longer measure transactions accounts. Andthe problem, as Tony indicated, is going to get more difficult ratherthan less difficult in the future. If you look at what happened in'81, we had a reasonably predictable performance in terms of M2, M3,and bank credit relative to nominal GNP. But the real outlier was M1;the M1 number came in much lower than anyone would have forecast.It's very clear from the earlier discussion at this very meeting thatwe really don't understand what the devil is going on with M1. So, Istill feel that we should abandon the M1 target and go with M2, M3,and bank credit. Beyond that, we ought to take a fresh look at howwe're managing monetary policy because I think this whole concept of atransactions account, which is really the way the public focuses onwhat we're doing, is obsolete. The monetary aggregates are obsolete.We have to get some new models on the floor or the Japanese are goingto take us over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, expresses his personal opinion and belief that M1 should be abandoned as a target, and that new models need to be developed. There is no opposing viewpoint presented in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 390.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We seem to have contrasting views on whatto do with M1: Leave it alone or throw it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage as there are contrasting views on what to do with M1. One view is to leave it alone, while the other suggests throwing it out.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 391.
MR. SCHULTZ. We ought to put Messrs. Morris and Roos in thecenter of the table and let them go at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is a suggestion to put Messrs. Morris and Roos in the center of the table and let them argue or debate. This implies that there is a potential disagreement or contention between them that needs to be resolved.


Passage number 392.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any specific information or statements made by Mr. Guffey that could indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 393.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would agree withthose who have spoken about the uncertainty that might come about bytrying to rebase or to fool around otherwise with the numbers. As aresult, I come out on the side of taking the ranges as we set them inJuly and trying to decide whether or not we want to increase ordecrease those ranges, as the case may be. Let me just say that it'sstriking to me that one month's money growth--which we have talkedabout and the bulge that took place is totally unexplainable--hasprompted this Committee to talk for another hour and a half or so asto how we should change the ranges for the period. That's a dramaticchange, it seems to me, from what we talked about just one month agoat our December meeting. I mention that to make the point thatbecause of the uncertainty that I suspect rests within everybody'smind and the unexplanability of the January numbers it doesn't seem tome to be very logical to start talking about rebasing or doinganything else with those numbers. There's only one [month of data].As a result, I would reestablish what we set in July and agreed uponagain in December without taking any formal action on it.There's one potential [change] that has been mentioned beforethat might be acceptable as far as I'm concerned, and that is themovement of the lower end of M1 from the 2-1/2 percent that weoriginally set to 3 percent. And that is only because the Januarybulge probably has rendered that 2-1/2 percent lower limit ineffectiveunless we get some very big negative numbers in the next couple ofmonths. And if moving the lower band from 2-1/2 to 3 percent would2/1-2/82serve the Chairman's purpose when he testifies before theCongressional Committees to give a view that we are going to be a bitmore expansive in 1982 than what we achieved in 1981, then I would optto increase the bottom end of that M1 range from 2-1/2 to 3 percent.That produces a midpoint, if anybody worries about midpoints, of 4-1/4percent as opposed to 4 percent, and that's some 2 percentage pointsmore than we achieved in 1981. It tells a pretty good story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker agrees with those who speak about the uncertainty of trying to rebase or change the numbers, but also suggests a potential change in the lower end of the M1 range. This indicates a difference of opinion or disagreement about what action should be taken.


Passage number 394.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 395.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, it's getting on toward cocktail timewisdom and I wouldn't want to stand in the way of that, so I'll bebrief. Rebasing strikes me as gimmicky and I feel that we ought notdo that. I don't think we've done it in the past; we ought to driftup or down and go from the real base. I think we ought to stay withthe 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range for M1. Roger is probably right thatthe 2-1/2 percent end is obsolete but I don't see any reason to cutinto our flexibility. I think we ought to be happy to be anywherewithin that range, given the imprecision. There is a case ontechnical grounds to raise M2 for reasons we discussed last time.Some of the points that Chuck made are valid, so I would be amenableto that kind of adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their opinion and acknowledges some valid points made by others, but there is no conflict or argument.


Passage number 396.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice and Mr. Winn haven't saidanything. Do either of you want to add a quick word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking Mr. Rice and Mr. Winn if they would like to contribute something.


Passage number 397.
MR. RICE. Well, just quickly, my instinct is to agree withFred Schultz, largely on the basis that to change the targets for theaggregates at this point would probably damage our credibility. Irecognize the point that Nancy made that we have somewhat of aconflict here in that if we don't make the ranges again, that's abasis for reducing our credibility. But, on balance, I think we domore damage if we change the ranges or fiddle around with the base atthis point than we do if we just stick with the current ranges. Asyou know, I've been one of the people who have been worried about thefact that the money supply, up until this month, has not grown fastenough. To me the ranges are basically cosmetic. This is what wetell the public we want to do. If we come in at the upper end of therange for M1 and if we exceed the range for M2 slightly, I for onewill not be too worried about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges a potential conflict but ultimately agrees with Fred Schultz's perspective. They believe that changing the targets for the aggregates at this point would damage credibility and that sticking with the current ranges would do less harm.


Passage number 398.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 399.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, against the background of thebehavior [of M1] in January, I think any changes we make would besubject to a misinterpretation regarding what our intentions are.Second, I'm really concerned about the thing we call M1 because it'sgoing to become less and less of a measure of transaction balances. Iwatch [banks] in our District as they tool up for [changes in] cashmanagement, and there are big, big, numbers here that don't show up atall as M1 numbers. The sweep accounts also are being tooled up in abig way and that's going to affect behavior, so I think we have a realcase [for not changing the ranges] in terms of the changes that areoccurring in the aggregates themselves in this period alone. Ourconcern should be to get a better feel for what these numbers reallyare than on this [unintelligible] that we play out here. I'd alsofocus on the ranges and not the midpoints because the midpointoveremphasizes our precision and our ability to achieve these things.-46-2/1-2/82 -47-Third, it seems to me, with this uncertain economic background, thatwe can't just stay with this willy-nilly. And we ought to factor thatinto the report that is made at this time, saying that as thingschange, we too will reexamine what we're trying to achieve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns and opinions about the changes in M1 and the need to reexamine the objectives in light of the uncertain economic background.


Passage number 400.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am tempted to make some observations butI think I'll let them go until the morning, considering the hour.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's intention to delay making observations until the morning due to the late hour.


Passage number 401.
[Meeting recessed]2/1-2/82February 2, 1982--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had a considerable go-around yesterdayon the long-term ranges. There were some differences of viewexpressed, I think more on M2 than on M1. I don't believe we shouldtry to settle this issue right at the moment until after we look atthe short term because the two are interrelated in some respects.We'll go to the short-term [policy discussion] and then come back tothe long-term [decision].Let me just say in general terms, so far as the long term isconcerned, that I am aware of and sensitive to all the concerns aboutconfusion and market interpretations of what we say and of credibilityand all that. More basic than that is that we ought to be doing whatwe think is appropriate, and we can live through the credibilityproblems. In the end, our credibility will be related more to makingthe right decision than to worrying too much about what the marketsays about it in the short run. Having said all that, I think we'rein a peculiarly uncertain period simply because of this big jump [inM1 growth] in January. If this growth were going to carry through, itwould begin to suggest that something is going on here that we haven'tfully been aware of in NOW accounts or otherwise. If it were semi-permanent in some sense, given how little growth that leaves [withinthe tentative range] for the rest of the year, I would questionwhether we are not being too tight. But I think a very strong casecan be made that that judgment is premature; we just don't know.Things will look quite different if we get a decline in M1 inFebruary. My expectations are not the greatest in the world; I don'tthink anybody else's are. My [intuitive] expectations weren't verygood at the last meeting, I'm sure, and they may not be any better atthis meeting. But one would think with the kind of velocity decreaseswe're getting now, and particularly a velocity decrease with the kindof interest rate movement we have had very recently, that it justdoesn't seem to hang together all that well unless there is somethingvery peculiar occurring in NOW accounts. So, there's a pretty goodchance of some relapse from that January M1 movement. If there is arelapse, then this box that we appear to be in will disappear ordissipate--to a very considerably extent anyway.If we are going to change anything--and I thought about thisfor a considerable amount of time--I would argue that the advantagesof rebasing rather than changing the targets are quite clear. I saythat for two reasons. First of all, changing the targets in responseto a sudden jump of the kind we have experienced--a short-termdeviation or maybe a long-term deviation--may give the wrongimpression. It could be interpreted easily as our not beinginterested in bringing down the money supply growth over a period oftime and it could have implications for 1983 and 1984, which we do notwant. Somehow, just psychologically, [it would appear that] we wereoff on a course of increasing the money supply. More important thanthat, it doesn't really go to what I conceive of as the problem. Theproblem is that we have a bulge right at the moment, which puts M1above the target. We can change the target, but [under any reasonabletarget] we would still be above the target by a [considerable] amount,as we were before. And, if we leave the base the same, all thepsychological and market freight of being above the target will besitting there just as it is now, whether or not we change the rangefor the year as a whole.2/1-2/82If we move the base up, what we will be doing is recognizingthat we are starting from the higher point and we will be immediatelyback much more within the range of where we want to be in terms of thetargets without changing those numbers. I am constantly aggravated--maybe other people are less so--by the amount of importance put on thethree months that happen to be the final three months of the year. Ilook at what happens over a longer period of time. I meant to bringthe figures in, but Steve may have them. Starting where we'restarting, unless we get a very significant decline in February orMarch, we're going to have a higher year-to-year growth in the moneysupply than we had last year, certainly if you look at the shift-adjusted numbers. If you don't look at the shift-adjusted figures itwon't be true because we had a 7 percent growth I think year-to-yearon the non shift-adjusted last year. That growth reflected the bulgeof NOW accounts at the beginning of the year. So, if you look at thenonadjusted figures, we started high and that produced a high yearlyaverage growth of the money supply for the year as a whole even thoughthe fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter growth was not very high. Thecontour was a high [rate of growth] in the beginning of the year andthen it leveled off for the rest of the year. I think that gave afalse reading because of the shifts into NOW accounts that producedthe bulge. If you look at the shift-adjusted numbers, what was it ona yearly average basis last year, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is some disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker acknowledges differences of view expressed on the long-term ranges, particularly regarding M2. They state that they believe the issue shouldn't be settled immediately and that the short term and long term are interrelated.


Passage number 402.
MR. PARTEE. 4.7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states a percentage without any conflicting statements or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 403.
MR. AXILROD. 4.7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of a numerical figure.


Passage number 404.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks now that we would be no lowerthan 4.7 percent in 1982 and in all probability higher simply becausewe're starting high. Consistent with the present targets and growthanywhere in those targets except at the very low end and [in theabsence of] a sharp early decline, we are going to have more monetarygrowth this year, looking at the period as a whole with the presenttarget, than we had last year, if "reality" is a shift-adjustednumber, without changing the target. And, of course, we would havemore growth on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis, too. So, wehave [more growth] both ways.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating a series of facts and observations without any contradictory statements or disagreement with others.


Passage number 405.
MS. TEETERS. Are you assuming a decline at any point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asked by Ms. Teeters.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 406.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm assuming it doesn't go down verysharply. That comment may not be correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker begins by stating their assumption about something, but then immediately contradicts themselves by acknowledging that their assumption may not be correct. This contradiction shows a disagreement or contention with their own statement.


Passage number 407.
 If we had a very sharpdecline--and by very sharp I mean more than a $5 billion decline inFebruary--MS. TEETERS. Or over a couple of months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a hypothetical scenario without any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 408.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we would have to have a fairlysizable decline for a month or two for the yearly average to have anyreasonable chance of not being significantly higher than it was lastyear. I can't predict every month but, just [extrapolating] on astraight-line basis, which may be unfair, it is equivalent on allthese short-term alternatives except alternative A to ending up with 5to 6 percent growth--I'm just going by memory, Steve--in the yearlyaverage for 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and making predictions based on their memory and extrapolation.


Passage number 409.
2/1-2/82MR. AXILROD. That's right. If you hit the upper limit, itwould be around 6 percent; at the midpoint it would be around 5percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about numerical values without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 410.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That assumes that we don't have a greatbig decline in the short run. But, one of the peculiarities is this:Suppose October weren't there and suppose this increase had happenedone month earlier. The fourth quarter would be very close to thefourth-quarter base and nobody would be arguing that that wasn't theappropriate thing to start with. [The bulge] comes a month later andresults in a $5 billion difference in the base. Should that type ofthing affect us. That's the kind of consideration that I've beenstruggling with. I have gone up and down on this, not knowing what isgoing to happen in the next 6 weeks. My feeling is that we willpretty much know the story then, although we never know for surebecause there's always another week out there. But at least in 4 or 5or 6 weeks, we will have a much better feel as to whether some of thishas washed out or not. If it has, the current targets may not beperfect but, given the problems of fiddling around with them, theywould look entirely appropriate to me. If that did not happen, I'dhave a very serious question as to whether we were not being tootight--that something more basic and continuing may be going on here.That would imply, as a matter of judgment, given what is going on inthe economy, what is going on in interest rates, and what is going onin the money supply, that we would have to think seriously aboutproviding a little more relief. My tentative judgment is that that isa very hard decision to make right now and that maybe we should justsay we are not prepared to make that judgment but will keep the matterunder review and if we have to change it, we will change it. And wewill change it as soon as [the situation] becomes more solidlyapparent than it is today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is struggling with whether the current targets for the economy are appropriate or if they need to be adjusted. They are considering whether a decline in the short run and a $5 billion difference in the base should affect their decision. They are also contemplating whether more relief needs to be provided if there is something more basic and continuing happening in the economy. Overall, there is disagreement and uncertainty about what actions should be taken.


Passage number 411.
MR. ROOS. Do we assume that it is impossible to pinch offthis bulge through our open market operations. In other words, we didit in the middle of last year. What if we decided, instead of waitingto see what happens in a month or two or six weeks ahead, that we weregoing to instruct the Desk to sell securities out of our open marketaccount in the amount necessary to pull down this bulge that hasoccurred. And, if that goes too far, then we'd reverse thatperformance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage as it is a statement/suggestion made by one person.


Passage number 412.
 Can't we be the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you are raising the questiondirectly that I want to go to now Larry, and that is: What should wedo in the short run. The issue on the table is how aggressively wewant to move to, in effect, pinch the bulge off, as you put it. I'dlike to turn to that now, but before we do, let's ask Peter to give usthe normal background. But I think that is precisely the issue beforeus. The only thing I would note is that in the last week,inadvertently, we already have moved more strongly to pinch it offthan we really intended. We moved some distance in that direction.So, why don't you talk, Peter, and then we'll go right to that pointand then come back to the longer-run decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing a topic and seeking input from others.


Passage number 413.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only presents a statement by Mr. Sternlight, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 414.
]MR. ROOS. Peter, may I ask a question. In the Bluebook thestaff usually gives us several alternatives for the short-run targetsand also indicates an implied fed funds range for each of those2/1-2/82alternatives. If my memory serves me, in the past as well as in thiscurrent Bluebook the most expansive alternative usually reflects lowerfed funds rate projections and the more restrictive money growthprojections are accompanied by higher fed funds ranges. Now, at ourlast meeting, if we actually had set targets for money growth thatwere what has happened--money growth exploded--would you feel thatnormally that would have resulted in a lower fed funds rate or ahigher one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on the relationship between money growth projections and the fed funds rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 415.
 It seems--MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, if the Committee had set the kind ofmoney growth rates that actually transpired over the past month, itwould have accommodated what has happened without getting the rise inborrowing and the rise in the funds rate that has occurred.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests disagreement or contention. Mr. Sternlight is implying that the Committee did not set appropriate money growth rates, which led to undesired outcomes.


Passage number 416.
MR. ROOS. What I'm trying in a clumsy way to get to is this:Is it not possible that our whole concept of how the fed funds ratereacts to the aggregate targets we set is exactly the reverse of whatreally happens. When money explodes, it seems to me that the fedfunds rates and interest rates rise, as they are presently. Is thatnot true. And if that is true, why do you continue under thealternatives that are suggested to imply lower fed funds ranges withaggregates that show a higher money growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is asking a question and seeking clarification on the relationship between money growth and interest rates.


Passage number 417.
MR. PARTEE. Do you mean we ought to reduce the funds raterange in order to choke off the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Partee asking for clarification or confirmation about reducing the funds rate range to control the money supply. No opposing views or disagreement are mentioned.


Passage number 418.
MR. ROOS. No sir. I'm suggesting that the relationshipbetween money growth and the fed funds ranges is just the opposite ofwhat our Bluebook shows us. The Bluebook usually shows a lower rangeof fed funds when we opt for the more expansive alternative and ahigher fed funds range under the alternative where money grows moreslowly, implying that that will bring rates up. And that's exactlythe opposite of what happened, Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the relationship between money growth and the fed funds range is opposite to what is typically shown in the Bluebook.


Passage number 419.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 420.
 Yes, but I think--MR. WALLICH. It depends on supply and demand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement "It depends on supply and demand" suggests that there is a difference of opinion or disagreement about the topic being discussed.


Passage number 421.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Will you defend the Bluebook, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply asks Mr. Axilrod if he will defend the Bluebook.


Passage number 422.
MR. WALLICH. One has to distinguish whether a movement isthe result of a shift in the demand function or a shift in the supplyfunction. We assume the demand is constant and, therefore, anincrease in the supply of money--just as of potatoes--increases supplyand reduces the price. Now, if it's the demand function that changeswhile the supply function is constant, then price--that is, theinterest rate--and quantity move in the same direction. That is whatyou've observed and what you commented on. But the Bluebook targetsare based on the assumption of constant demand and a change in thesupply function.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining how changes in the demand and supply functions can affect price and quantity.


Passage number 423.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the passage.


Passage number 424.
 Regardless of the theory that relates one to theother, Henry, if we see over and over again that when money grows thefed funds rate moves up, we're getting our theory--MR. WALLICH. If the price of potatoes goes up and you knowthat there has been no change in supply, it must have been because ofa change in demand. These markets work just the same as every market-51-2/1-2/82in the economy and one has to distinguish what is the source of themovement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a conversation between two individuals discussing their theories and observations about the relationship between money growth and the fed funds rate, as well as the relationship between changes in price and supply/demand in markets.


Passage number 425.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The provided passage does not have enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 426.
MR. SCHULTZ. I don't quite understand this, but I gatherthat the argument is whether interest rates are the price of money orthe price of credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only represents Mr. Schultz's lack of understanding and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 427.
 You are arguing that it's the price of money,and I have to agree with that; I think Larry's Reserve Bank wouldargue that it's the price of credit that's--MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any argument or disagreement. The speaker simply agrees with someone's statement.


Passage number 428.
 Fred, all I'm trying to argue is that if--MR. WALLICH. Is that not accurate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply trying to clarify or confirm the accuracy of a statement made by Mr. Wallich.


Passage number 429.
MR. ROOS. If you look at what happens today when money growsmore rapidly than people anticipated, these rates move up. It's justexactly the opposite of the circumstances formerly, before we hadinflationary expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage describes a cause-effect relationship between money growth and interest rates without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 430.
MR. SCHULTZ. But what Henry is trying to say is that if thatis because the demand for money increased, then it takes place thatway. If it's because the supply of money increases, it has quite adifferent result.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 431.
MR. AXILROD. President Roos, may I just make a comment.When you observe in the market that there is an increase in money andshort-term rates go up, it is not in my opinion because people believethat there's going to be more inflation. In my opinion--and this iswhat is predicted in the Bluebook--it is because the market believesthat the Federal Reserve is going to hit its longer-run targets and,therefore, will take action to restrain the growth in money that hasbulged in the short run because of the [increased] demand. And withdemand high relative to the supply, the price, as Governor Wallichsays, goes up. And the price of money is the interest rate.Therefore, they realize that interest rates are going to go up in theshort run and short-term interest rates are what we're dealing with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, disagrees with the belief that an increase in money in the market and a rise in short-term rates are indications of increased inflation. He argues that the market believes the Federal Reserve will take action to restrain the growth of money and that is why interest rates are projected to go up.


Passage number 432.
MR. ROOS. But, Steve, regardless of what causes this--I'llbuy any theory and I know you're both right--when money grows, ratesgo up. So it is just the opposite of the way we project these thingsin our thinking in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Roos agrees with both Steve and the idea that when money grows, rates go up. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 433.
MR. WALLICH. Well, all that says is that supply is prettystable and demand is the source of most changes. This is what I andothers normally say about the money supply and money demand. It's thedemand that is the more unstable variable. And that's why we getmovement of prices and quantities in the same direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is simply stating his agreement with the idea that demand is the more unstable variable compared to supply when it comes to the money supply and money demand.


Passage number 434.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If one were putting this is non-jargon, the way to explain it was just the way I think Peter startedto do. When we project a more expansive money supply, the reason weproject that rates will go lower is that we are assuming we willsupply the reserves. But when it happens not because we're supplyingthe reserves but because the demand is going up, we don't supply thosereserves because it's not in our path. Then, of course, we get adifferent kind of reaction. The rates go up instead of down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining the reason behind projecting lower interest rates and how the situation changes when reserves are not supplied due to increased demand.


Passage number 435.
2/1-2/82MR. ROOS. But Tony if that's so--and I'll agree with youthat it may be--still if we have an alternative that implies a higherrate of money growth, then we should project, regardless of the reasonfor it, a higher range for fed funds than if we're setting a lowerrate of money growth. That is my point regardless of why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a hypothetical scenario and presenting a logical argument.


Passage number 436.
MR. WALLICH. But, Larry, we're the controllers of supply;we're not the controllers of the demand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is making a statement about their role as controllers of supply, distinguishing it from controlling demand.


Passage number 437.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think perhaps all of this will be made alittle more concrete by examining what we want to do in the short runagainst all these alternatives, which have various demand and supplyassumptions implicit in them. But we can have any questions about themarket and dispose of those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the need to examine different alternatives and address any questions or concerns regarding the market.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 438.
MS. TEETERS. I have a tentative question for Peter. I'm notsure I'm totally correct but if I add up roughly [the figures in] thefootnotes in appendix 2 [in the Bluebook], you took $540 million outin the multiplier adjustment, which is greater than I've ever seenbefore. That must mean that you had a very unstable multiplierrelationship in your initial projections that you were constantlyadjusting. That also suggests to me that reserves were shiftingbetween categories at a greater degree than is normal. When all thereserves went out last summer, they sort of disappeared. During thisperiod did you have a shift of reserves from low reserve depositcategories to high reserve deposit categories.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, suggests that the $540 million adjustment made by Peter indicates an unstable multiplier relationship and abnormal shifting of reserves. She is questioning Peter's actions and expressing her differing viewpoint.


Passage number 439.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't remember. It was a relatively largeamount; whether that was a record amount of those technicaladjustments. I'm just not sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply expressing uncertainty about whether the amount in question was a record amount for those technical adjustments.


Passage number 440.
MR. AXILROD. In large part, Governor Teeters, the [OCDs]were a lot weaker than we had allowed for in the path. So, if wehadn't taken out the reserves that had been allowed to support them,of course, they would have supported even more money growth. And forsimilar reasons, if we had left the reserves in, they would havesupported more total deposits. Those were the essential multiplieradjustments, and they were larger than they normally are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a factual observation about the strength of the [OCDs] and the potential impact of leaving reserves in.


Passage number 441.
MS. TEETERS. Essentially, we had a reverse of the situationthat prevailed over the summer. In a very technical sense, we had areversal of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing a situation and does not include any opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 442.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably right, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses agreement and seeks confirmation.


Passage number 443.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, we had to adjust upward, then, for the[OCD] growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It solely mentions a need for adjustment in response to growth.


Passage number 444.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 445.
MR. BLACK. I don't know for sure, Peter, whether you orSteve ought to handle this question. I just wondered if you had givenany thought to possibly changing this automatic reaction mechanism.The rule of thumb you have, when you force the banking system toborrow any total reserves above path, is on a one-to-one basis. Haveyou considered other combinations. Looking at this period, one wouldthink running borrowing up from $300 million to $1.7 billion [in themost recent week], with the target of $1.5 billion, would be a whale-53-2/1-2/82of a move. Still, the money supply did spurt. Have you monkeyed withthe idea of maybe changing that automatic part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning whether the current automatic reaction mechanism should be changed and suggesting alternative approaches.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 446.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as I said, some of the move up was amore or less automatic fallout of a strengthening in demand forreserves. We did, well along into the period, make a discretionarydownward adjustment in the nonborrowed path of $190 million, I thinkit was, which added to that borrowing gap. There is continualconsideration given to the size of those adjustments. And the factorsbearing on it on this occasion had to do partly with trying to reachjudgments about how lasting this bulge would be. If there had been asense that this bulge was likely to be more lasting, and particularlyif there had been a sense that it was occurring against a backgroundof a strengthening economy instead of a still weakening economy, myview is that there probably would have been more of a discretionarydownward adjustment made to build up that borrowing gap even further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the decision to make a discretionary downward adjustment in the nonborrowed path, and states that if the bulge in demand for reserves was occurring against a background of a strengthening economy, there probably would have been more of a discretionary downward adjustment made. This implies that there may be differing opinions on the appropriate level of adjustment and how it should be influenced by economic conditions.


Passage number 447.
MR. BLACK. Well, you actually made two ad hoc adjustments,if I understand it. One was on the 4th of January and then one was onthe 15th. What I was talking about, really, was not those ad hocadjustments but whether you had considered making the automatic[response] a little stronger or weaker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a clarifying statement made by Mr. Black regarding the timing of adjustments, and a request for further consideration of the automatic response strength.


Passage number 448.
 I just wondered what you--MR. AXILROD. One point, President Black--and this issomewhat subjective because I don't have the data laid out--is that weknow for sure that, for one reason or another, the relation betweenborrowing and the funds rate has become a lot looser over the lastyear or two than it had been. Often we get a level of borrowingwithout as much pressure associated with it in the funds market as onemight have expected. It could be that in this period when things areconfused by year-end [pressures] and all that, and in addition it isearly in a period of pressure on bank reserve positions--that is, ithas only been three or four weeks or so of which the first week or twoare uncertain, because it was the year-end period--it may simply takemore time for those pressures to build up. The function may besomewhat asymmetric or something. The banks may have to be in debtfor a longer period before we get as marked a reaction as we mighthave expected ahead of time. So, if they have these kinds ofpressures for a more sustained period, we might see a more promptreaction in market conditions than when they first get in debt by $1billion or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and exploring different possibilities.


Passage number 449.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provided, "MR. BLACK," does not contain enough information to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 450.
 Well, I think that's reasonable; I certainlycan't suggest anything--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This situation has also been complicatedby the fact that in January we had some reserve misses that went in arather perverse way. We didn't tighten up de facto as much as wethought we were doing earlier in January simply because we had morereserves in there than we thought we had. And then this past week itreversed. And while the market didn't tighten up particularly untilthe market [players] saw the figures, when they saw the figures theyexaggerated how much we had tightened up. It gives us a bit of aproblem; maybe it does or maybe it doesn't, depending upon what thefuture brings. But, statistically, we had much more but latertightening than we intended simply because of the way the reservefactors went.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply describing a situation and expressing uncertainty about its future impact.


Passage number 451.
54-2/1-2/82MR. BLACK. And the way we construct the path, the timing ofthe first indication of the overrun determines the pattern ofborrowing for the whole period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is presenting a statement made by Mr. Black about constructing a path and timing of the first indication of the overrun. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 452.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We ran over in reserves and short inborrowings and then had the reverse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a sequence of events.


Passage number 453.
 That's--MR. BLACK. Well, I was just expressing some hope that maybesomebody had some ideas on how we could try an automatic mechanismthat might work a little better than this had. But I guess that'sprobably expecting too much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses a hope for potential ideas but ultimately concludes that such expectations might be unrealistic.


Passage number 454.
MR. PARTEE. Go to contemporaneous [reserve accounting] andclose the window.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is giving a clear instruction to go to the contemporaneous reserve accounting and close the window.


Passage number 455.
MR. BLACK. Well, that's one way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or expressing their opinion.


Passage number 456.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's one way of doing it; then we'd geta very strong one. Anybody else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply presents one way of doing something without any contrasting viewpoint or disagreement expressed by anyone else.


Passage number 457.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes, I'd just like to ask Peter how he thinksthe market would react to either an increase in the surcharge or anincrease in the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for Peter's opinion on how the market would react to certain scenarios.


Passage number 458.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Given the events of the last week or so, itwouldn't come as a total surprise, but I don't think there's apreponderant expectation of a move either. I think there would besome reaction to either of those, probably less so if a move wereconfined just to the surcharge. It hasn't been fully discounted; somepeople would say that they don't expect such a move because they stilldon't see the turnaround in the economy that they think would be partof the background of such a move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the possibility of a move, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 459.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions. Arethere any other technical questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the need to ratify the transactions and asking if there are any additional technical questions.


Passage number 460.
MS. TEETERS. So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is making a motion and the SPEAKER is seconding it, indicating agreement.


Passage number 461.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will ratify them andturn to the immediate problem before us. In terms of what we werejust talking about, Mr. Axilrod, is it fair to ask if all youralternatives, A, B, C, and D assume no great change in the demand formoney. You're assuming that the money created is in there and it'snot going to relapse on its own accord.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 462.
MR. AXILROD. We have assumed a sharp deceleration in moneydemand in all of the alternatives in that we don't think the highdouble-digit growth rates of the past three months on average willpersist. We have not assumed in any of them a contraction in theoutstanding amount of money over a two-month period. We could have a1 percent [annualized rate of] increase--say, a -7 percent [annualgrowth rate one month] and a +9 percent [in the next month] orsomething. That is possible, but we have not assumed a contractionover a two-month period in any of the alternatives unless action istaken to make market instruments more attractive, which in effectmeans interest rates rising, which is the assumption of alternative A.2/1-2/82That is, we believe that a contraction could be attained but withinterest rates rising substantially. Alternatives B, C, and D suggestmuch slower growth rates than we have had and alternatives B and Cwould hit the upper limit of the present long-run [range] later.Alternative D remains outside [the range] if the Committee were tovote for a continuation of the [previously set] growth rates over therest of the year.I might add, Mr. Chairman, that because of this problem wedid suggest a second alternative in the Bluebook for the directivelanguage on the thought that the Committee may not wish to squeeze theeconomy further in order to attain the contraction but might find sucha contraction highly welcome if it were to develop without squeezingthe economy further. The second of the two alternative languagespresented, while it need not be different in the substance of thenumbers, is somewhat different in the public posture it portrays aboutthe Committee decision. It is meant to provide an alternative whichwould in effect welcome a sharp drop [in money growth], provided thatthe drop could be attained without squeezing the economy further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting different alternatives and explaining the assumptions and implications of each one. The statements are mainly explanatory and there is no indication of a disagreement or argument.


Passage number 463.
MR. ROOS. Well, how would the economy be squeezed. What doyou mean by that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roos is simply asking for clarification or further explanation about how the economy would be affected by something.


Passage number 464.
MR. AXILROD. I meant that if the Committee targeted on adrop of 7 percent, our suggestion would be that to attain that we'dneed borrowing to start as high as $3 billion. But suppose theCommittee said no, we don't believe that; our thought would still bethat if you targeted on a drop as low as 7 percent and even if youstarted with borrowings where they are now, the required reserveswould immediately come in higher than is consistent with that drop.And borrowing would tend to rise very sharply, so that you would get asharp rise in short-term rates because the immediate demands for moneywould be in excess of the -7 percent that was targeted. If we'rewrong about that--and we may very well be--then we would not get thisrise in interest rates. So, what I meant by squeezing the economy wasthat the Committee may choose not to target on such a thing on thegrounds that it runs greater risks of raising interest rates in themiddle of a recession. But it may wish to target on somethinginvolving a slower deceleration into the long-run targets--a moregradual slowing on the grounds that that minimizes the chances ofrising rates. On the other hand, the Committee might be quite willingto accept a sharp decline if that could be attained without furtherupward pressure on short rates at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting different options and discussing the potential consequences of each option without expressing disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 465.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without further context, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage "MR. ROOS." The passage seems to be a name or a title, which does not provide any information that would suggest a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 466.
 But the most--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you want to say anything in a moreorderly way, Mr. Axilrod, without my asking you a leading question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking Mr. Axilrod if he has any additional thoughts or if he wants to organize his response in a more structured manner.


Passage number 467.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I've just given the substance of thecomments I had written out, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the actions taken by Mr. Axilrod without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 468.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steve, since we don't know theJanuary figures--and we have done this before--why aren't we basingfrom December to March rather than from January to March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or question seeking clarification on a suggested approach.


Passage number 469.
MR. AXILROD. Well, one could base it from December to March.The first alternative left that blank in case the Committee wished to2/1-2/82retain November or December or whatever. The second alternative wasdesigned just to make it clear that the Committee wants a decelerationfrom the very recent growth rates, which was January essentially.That was what was carrying the Committee beyond its tolerance point,so it just seemed natural to base it on January. We have full datathrough the 20th of January and partial data through the 27th; sothere may be a change in the base but not as substantial a change asit appeared we would have in December because we had quite a bit lessdata for December when the Committee met last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the different alternatives for basing a decision and providing information about the data available.


Passage number 470.
MR. PARTEE. Page 10 has November to March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. This is simply a statement of time duration.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 471.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I saw that, and I didn'tunderstand why we would do November to March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contentiousness in the passage. The speaker states that they saw something and did not understand the reasoning behind it. This suggests disagreement or confusion about the decision to do something from November to March.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 472.
MR. AXILROD. That's what your base was before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrase "That's what your base was before." It suggests that Mr. Axilrod disagrees with or contradicts something mentioned before, indicating contention.


Passage number 473.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but to me [a December base] justseems a little more logical, since we really know only 2/3 of Januaryand we do know December. And the numbers look more moderate if we gofrom December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and providing a logical explanation for their preference without contradicting or challenging any opposing views.


Passage number 474.
MR. AXILROD. The December-to-March numbers consistent withalternatives B and C, President Solomon, are 8 percent and 9 percentfor M1. That's why in alternative I [of the draft directive language]we left it for the Committee to fill in whichever base it felt mostcomfortable with. Alternative II suggests simply [to base on]January, to make clear that with January behind us the Committeewishes to get money growth moving back toward the range. That's theessential reason for that approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining different alternatives and their reasons for choosing a particular approach.


Passage number 475.
MS. TEETERS. Steve, did you say what the borrowingassociated with alternative A was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 476.
MR. AXILROD. In our judgment, it could go as high as $3billion because we believe that we can't get that kind of reductionfor two months without a further rise in the funds rate, even thoughthe economy is as weak as it seems. But I have a certain degree ofuncertainty about that because our quarterly model does suggest, ifyou believe it, that given the amount of money that has already beenproduced and given the weakness of the economy, that that amount ofmoney isn't in effect needed for transactions associated with GNP inthe first quarter. But it might be needed for precautionary purposes,so you have to force interest rates up to get it out of there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod believes that the reduction could go as high as $3 billion, while acknowledging a certain degree of uncertainty. He suggests that the amount of money produced may not be needed for transactions associated with GNP in the first quarter, but it might be needed for precautionary purposes, thus necessitating an increase in interest rates.


Passage number 477.
MS. TEETERS. The $3 billion on borrowing that you'retentatively estimating for "A" could go as high as $5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a possibility or potential scenario.


Passage number 478.
MR. AXILROD. Oh, it could go a bit higher; that's correct.We assumed that was consistent with a fairly high funds rate. But itcould be anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about the possibility of the funds rate going higher, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 479.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It could go as high as what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express either contention or disagreement. It is presenting a possible range of values without any conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 480.
MR. AXILROD. It depends on how hard you want to fight it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the outcome depends on the level of effort put into the fight.


Passage number 481.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me try a common-sense interpretationof this--I hope.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their intention to provide a common-sense interpretation, expressing hope in their own ability to do so.


Passage number 482.
-57-2/1-2/82MR. FORD. Of what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only consists of an equation (-57-2/1-2/82) and a speaker's name (Mr. Ford).


Passage number 483.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of A, B, C, and D.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided a passage for me to analyze. Could you please provide the passage so that I can determine if there is contention or disagreement within it?


Passage number 484.
MR. FORD. I thought you were going to do alternatives I andII.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 485.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll suggest a possible approach as afocus for discussion. I think you're saying, Steve, that eitherbecause of transactions balances alone or transactions plusprecautionary balances--depending upon what model you look at--thedemand should not continue to rise at the rate it has been rising, butit is going to rise a little anyway, or hold stable perhaps.Therefore, if we're going to get [M growth] down, we have to takesome action to tighten up--well, for borrowings to be about where theyare or higher, up to $3 billion. That's the number you just gave interms of borrowing. Alternative A says, against the presumption whichmay be wrong--it may just relapse on its own--that if we really wantto retrace January, we have to be aggressive in tightening up themarket. And that's going to push the funds rate way up because ofthis demand factor. Alternative B says, if we stay more or less wherewe think we are--lower than where we were in practice last week andmaybe this week, but where we were aiming--that we would get aleveling off, but that's it. Alternative C says, if we're a littleeasier in terms of pressure on reserve positions, measured by $1billion worth of borrowing, that we probably would get a smallincrease in the money supply but we certainly cannot retrace theincrease we had. And "D," of course, moves further in that direction.It says that even if we were quite easy on reserve positions, wewouldn't get much of an increase in the money supply compared to whatwe have had, but we would certainly add to what we have had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker is suggesting different alternatives and discussing their potential outcomes, indicating that there may be disagreement or different opinions on the best course of action.


Passage number 486.
MR. PARTEE. Because it has already occurred.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply stating a fact that the event has already occurred.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 487.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because it has already occurred, that'sright. Now, the question is what we want to do. If we get anysignificant increase from where we are, I am suggesting that we haveto resist it. I would accept that as a starting proposition. I thinkthere is some chance it could happen by itself. But who knows.Tentatively, anyway, I reject something like alternative A, [whichimplies] that we're just going to whack off a big amount in an effortto get a quick reversal that we feel we otherwise would not get. Onecan take the view that it would tighten up the market verysubstantially in the middle of a recession. I am not proposing that.I do think we have to show some resistance, which means a tightermarket than we now have, if the figures carry us up significantly fromwhere we are. And I interpret something like "B" or "C"--either oneor someplace in between--as saying we can ride along and we would besatisfied.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that they resist any significant increase, while also rejecting alternative A which implies taking drastic measures to quickly reverse a situation. This indicates a difference in opinion on how to approach and handle the situation.


Passage number 488.
 It is not the happiest situation in the world, but wewould be satisfied at riding along if we have to be someplace aroundwhere we are in terms--MR. PARTEE. By "where we are" do you mean the level of themoney supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 489.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --of the money supply, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 490.
MR. PARTEE. Not the rate of increase, but the level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 491.
2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, the level. We would be willing toride along with that level without tightening the market further. Wewill wait longer and make another decision, obviously, in 6 or 8 weeksor whenever we meet again. But, in balancing off all theseconsiderations, we would be content to see an eventual unwindingwithout any substantial changes in the level of the money supply withmoney market conditions more or less where we intended them to be,which is somewhat easier than they in fact are at the moment in termsof federal funds rates and borrowing levels. We are talking aboutsomething around $1.5 billion in borrowing, which is lower than it hasbeen for the last 10 days. That seems to me a reasonable approach.But I would feel rather strongly about the caveat expressedin that second version of the directive: That if the assumption ofessentially unchanged demand for money proves to be wrong and, withthat amount of pressure on the market, the money supply relapses, Iwould be delighted. I would not say that at that point we would putin money in order to keep the money supply at an unchanged level or a+1 or +2-1/2 percent or whatever. In other words, if we couldaccomplish that--. This may give too much weight to what we do in theshort run, but if the dynamics of the marketplace produced a relapsein the money supply downward consistent with unchanged or even areduced level of borrowing, we should just accept that and count ourblessings and wait for the next meeting. If it doesn't happen, ifmaintaining these pressures produced a result like "B," let's say, wewould be content with the situation. If the tendency of the moneysupply were to rise further, we'd have to act against it. And thatwould send the level of borrowings still higher--maybe not higher thanit is now, but higher than what our target is at the moment. So, thatis the approach that seems to me to make sense. And we wouldincorporate--I don't know what the precise numbers would be--somethinglike 0 to 2 percent or whatever number we wanted to put in there forM1 for the next couple of months with a borrowing level where it is,or maybe even a little lower than that, depending upon what weight wewanted to put on the possibility of a decline arising spontaneously.And if M1 does decline, we would let it decline as a welcome reversalof what we had [in January].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their willingness to wait and see how the market develops, and they state that they would be content with an eventual unwinding without substantial changes in the level of the money supply. They also mention that they would be happy if the assumption of unchanged demand for money proves to be wrong and the money supply relapses. Overall, there is a sense of flexibility and acceptance of different outcomes.


Passage number 492.
MR. ROOS. I'd like to ask Steve to verify whether thefollowing reasoning or these facts are right or wrong: If M1 remainsat its current level of about $450 billion throughout the firstquarter of 1982, would the estimated growth rate for the first quarterbe about 12 percent. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a question for Steve to verify the accuracy of certain reasoning or facts.


Passage number 493.
MR. AXILROD. That's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod simply states that the statement is correct.


Passage number 494.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That 12 percent assumes M1 is unchangedfrom now on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not present any contention or disagreement because it is a straightforward assertion about a specific assumption.


Passage number 495.
MR. ROOS. Then if money grows at this 12 percent rate overthe first quarter, if we do what the Chairman suggested and stay wherewe are, what does that imply for the growth of M1 over the rest of'82. In other words, if M1 growth in the last quarter of last yearwas 6 percent and in the first quarter of this year is 12 percent,doesn't that imply, if we're going to stay within the long-term rangethat we have been talking about, something like a 3 percent growthrate for the next two quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roos is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 496.
2/1-2/82MR. AXILROD. Yes, in general, it's right in that order ofmagnitude.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 497.
MR. ROOS. Okay. If we had a 9 percent average growth for M1over the last two quarters and we're forced to seek a 3 percent growthrate of M1 for the next two quarters, wouldn't that have a verytraumatic effect on output late in the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that forcing a 3 percent growth rate of M1 for the next two quarters after an average growth of 9 percent could have a very traumatic effect on output late in the year. This implies a difference in perspective or opinion regarding the potential consequences of such a change in growth rate.


Passage number 498.
MR. AXILROD. Well, our thought at the moment is thatsomething like what you described will develop more or less givendemands at something like current interest rates. That is, we willget a sharp deceleration in money growth to a 1 to 2 percent monthlygrowth rate over the next couple of months--it's implicit in that--anda moderate rate of growth over the second quarter. Where we would seemore of a sharp effect on output would be if that pattern requiredhigher interest rates because there were bigger demands for money thanare implicit there. Then we would see much sharper effects on output.But our projection for GNP is based on a pattern somewhat like whatyou were describing, on the thought that that will not be accompaniedby substantially different interest rates than we now have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their current thoughts and projections, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 499.
MR. ROOS. Steve, your most expansive case, alternative D--and I promise I'll shut up soon, Mr. Chairman--has the lowest fedfunds range of these four alternatives. Yet, with the explosion ofmoney growth that we have experienced in the last few weeks, the fedfunds rate is already above the top of that alternative D range. Whatmakes you think that we aren't going to have increasing fed fundsrates even if we go the more expansive route. That's what worries meabout this whole thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, is expressing his worry and seeking clarification on a particular issue.


Passage number 500.
MR. AXILROD. It all depends, President Roos, on one'sassessment of the demand for money relative to the amount theCommittee is willing to supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement by Mr. Axilrod that is followed by an explanation of the factors that determine the outcome. There is no explicit indication of disagreement or conflicting perspectives.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 501.
MR. ROOS. Can anyone accurately forecast the demand formoney.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Roos is asking if anyone can accurately forecast the demand for money. This implies that there could be different opinions or disagreements on the subject.


Passage number 502.
MR. AXILROD. It's very difficult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement between two or more parties. It seems to be a statement or opinion expressed by Mr. Axilrod without any contrasting perspectives being presented.


Passage number 503.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've got us on that one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges that the speaker or writer does not have an answer or solution to a particular situation.


Passage number 504.
MR. ROOS. The prosecution rests.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply indicates that the prosecution has finished presenting their case and does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 505.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The kind of consideration that you raise,Mr. Roos, is what I have in mind. If the demand were so strong thatit turned out, let's say, that with the amount of pressure we nowhave, we were continuing to get increases in the money supply, I'dbegin wondering very seriously about our targets for the year, becausethey wouldn't seem to hang together with what we know about theeconomy and all the rest. Now, we'd have to evaluate the economicsituation, but just sitting here now it doesn't seem to hang togetherif the demand for money were that strong. But we don't know that yet.Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. Instead, it focuses on a hypothetical situation and the speaker's thoughts about it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 506.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If I understood whatyou said earlier, the only quarrel I might have with you is what sideof "B" we ought to end up on. You are on the right; I'd go a bit tothe left.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey is expressing a different viewpoint or preference ("I'd go a bit to the left") than the speaker ("You are on the right").


Passage number 507.
-60-2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure. Let me just clarifythat for a moment. As I sit here gazing at these numbers again, we'reessentially talking about how we are going to act between now and thenext meeting, of course. And given the great bulge that we've had,I'm not sure it's the right thing to say--we can have anotherdiscussion about what the borrowing assumption would be--but in termsof the right posture, maybe the right number to put in there is zero:The breaking point for us on whether to tighten or ease is whether weget any further growth beyond this great big bulge that we've had.What we would be doing is expressing some unhappiness with and someresistance to any growth above the elevated level that we now have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mostly the speaker expressing uncertainty and discussing possible actions or considerations.


Passage number 508.
MR. FORD. And that puts you between "B" and "A," not between"B" and "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the positioning of someone between "B" and "A."


Passage number 509.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it's almost to "B." Of course, it isbetween "B" and "A" but it's a trivial distance from "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is just providing a response to a question or statement regarding the location of something. It acknowledges that the location in question is close to "B" but also clarifies that it is in a trivial distance from "B."


Passage number 510.
"MR. GUFFEY. It's on the left side of "B." It's almost thesame.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey is simply providing a clarifying statement regarding the location of something.


Passage number 511.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just looks to me a little funny, nowthat I look at it, to say we want 1 percent growth. That's just afine [line] after this bulge. What's so magic about one percent.We're willing to accept, if we have to, what we already have but wewouldn't like to see it going up any further. [Zero] may make alittle common sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing his own opinion and questioning the significance of aiming for a specific growth rate.


Passage number 512.
MR. GUFFEY. That's coupled with the thought you alsoexpressed that we would move against any evidence above zero and wouldtolerate or accept and be grateful for anything below zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement and support for evidence above zero and appreciation for anything below zero.


Passage number 513.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. Precisely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple affirmation, with no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 514.
MR. GUFFEY. I think that's precisely what I'd like to seehappen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context to suggest contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Guffey expressing his desire for something to happen.


Passage number 515.
MS. TEETERS. We could fall off the cliff on the other side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "We could fall off the cliff on the other side" is a hypothetical scenario and does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a potential outcome.


Passage number 516.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, this is about degree. I'm saying wedon't move very hastily if M1 begins falling. If we got a couple ofweeks of decline--let's say in a few weeks it fell off $6 billion justto pick that number out of the air--the market would be easing becausewe would be quite satisfied with that and could afford to be somewhatmore relaxed about it. I'm not making a fine judgment as to how muchto let borrowing go down. I'm saying we wouldn't at the very leastbegin making discretionary adjustments and we wouldn't begin pumpingmore money in than the path said with a fairly sizable decline in M1.We'd say we were happy about that. We might let the automatic[response] that Bob Black was referring to work, but we wouldn't begintaking aggressive action to keep [borrowing] up while [M1] declined by$5 or $6 billion. We'd be delighted. If it began declining further,we might well [respond]. Now, just where the number is, I don't know.I have some figures that may not be out of the ballpark. Thepreliminary figures have been very poor in terms of indicators, butsuppose it came out [as a decline of] more than $2 billion--say,$2-1/2 billion, which it could easily do. And suppose we had anotherdecline of that magnitude the following week. One can always hope.-61-2/1-2/82We would then have a $5 billion decline and a sizable decline may bein train for February and I think we just ought to be delighted. Ifthat continued, then we would expect to see some easing in the market,but would not be aggressive in trying to offset the decline duringthis 2- or 3-week period. We'd welcome the decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The author is expressing their opinion and stating what actions they would take in response to a decline in M1. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 517.
MR. RICE. If we saw an increase of, say, 2 percent over theperiod, would you rush to resist that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a hypothetical scenario and asks a question.


Passage number 518.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think "rush" is the right word butwe would resist, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 519.
MR. PARTEE. We would let borrowings go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a hypothetical situation or proposal.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 520.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would certainly let borrowings go up atleast, in accord with the automatic [mechanism]. And we might have todo a little more than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

The passage suggests that there may be disagreement or contention about whether or not to allow borrowings to go up and also whether or not to do more than increasing borrowings in order to achieve a certain outcome. The use of words such as "certainly" and "might" indicate a potential difference of opinions or conflicting ideas on the matter.


Passage number 521.
MS. TEETERS. We have already signalled our displeasure tothe market. We are at 15-1/2 percent [on the funds rate] and $2billion in borrowing. When we say "stay where we are," are we talkingabout staying at $2 billion or $2-1/2 billion or $3 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is stating the current situation and asking for clarification on the borrowing amount, but there is no indication of a disagreement or conflict among the parties involved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 522.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, a billion and a half dollars. I don'tknow how soon it would develop--we will want to discuss thatexplicitly--but I am talking no higher than $1.5 billion of borrowing,which presumably means an easier market than we have now even withzero [M1 growth]. Just to be explicit, on the borrowing one couldargue that maybe it should be even lower. It depends on what kind ofchances one wants to take.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Just to be explicit, on the borrowing one could argue that maybe it should be even lower" suggests that there is a difference in opinion about the appropriate level of borrowing.


Passage number 523.
MR. PARTEE. What were we seeking. I lost track.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion about what they were seeking and admitting that they have lost track.


Passage number 524.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A billion and a half dollars as I recall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a recall and does not express any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 525.
MR. AXILROD. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This is a statement of agreement, indicated by the word "Right."


Passage number 526.
MR. PARTEE. It got up from $1.2 billion to $1.5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, simply states a fact about the increase in value from $1.2 billion to $1.5 billion without any opposing viewpoints or conflicts.


Passage number 527.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Essentially, what I am suggesting isretaining that with a zero number [for the M1 growth rate]. If itbegan rising above zero, we would go above that. If for a while itdeclined below that, we wouldn't be very quick about moving; if itdeclined enough, obviously, we'd move; but we wouldn't be very quickabout it on the down side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a method for retaining a zero growth rate for M1, with the possibility of adjusting if necessary.


Passage number 528.
MR. PARTEE. It's hard to imagine a negative between now andthe next meeting that would be so large that we would think it was anexcessive washout of the bulge. I guess there is such a number--25 or30 percent--but it has to be awfully big because it was a 22 percentincrease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by MR. PARTEE expressing his opinion about the possibility of a negative event between the current time and the next meeting that would significantly impact the increase.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 529.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but we would not be in too bad shapeby the end of the quarter, or we'd still be high. But that's comparedto where we are now. I don't think we should assume that we couldn'tget a $5 billion decline in the money supply between now and March.And then if March were stable, we'd look in not too bad shape. Wewould still be high [relative to the long-term target].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that the situation is not too bad by the end of the quarter, while also mentioning the possibility of a $5 billion decline in the money supply. This suggests a differing viewpoint on the severity of the situation.


Passage number 530.
-62-2/1-2/82MS. TEETERS. We more than washed out last April in the spaceof what--3 months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply mentions a specific time period and implies that something negative happened or was lost during that time.


Passage number 531.
MR. PARTEE. By the end of three months some of us weregetting concerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 532.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we get the washing out startingearly in February, I don't think any of us has a problem. If itdoesn't work out like that, though, it seems to me that we might wantto build in a little extra protection by setting the initial borrowingassumption at, say, $1.3 billion rather than at $1.5 billion becauseotherwise we're going to get a rise in rates, I think. If we startwith $1.5 billion for borrowing and don't get a decline, there's agreater risk that we're going to get a rise in interest rates. Wewould give ourselves a little margin if we start with $1.3 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests setting the initial borrowing assumption at $1.3 billion instead of $1.5 billion in order to avoid a potential rise in interest rates. This implies a difference of opinion or contention about the appropriate borrowing amount and the potential risks involved.


Passage number 533.
MR. SCHULTZ. Why would we do that if borrowing is alreadyrunning above $1.5 billion right now. If we start out setting it at$1.3 billion, which is a considerable drop from where we are at thispoint, and even $1.5 billion is a drop from where we are--SPEAKER(.). No, it isn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The answer is "No" because the speaker simply affirms that the statement made by Mr. Schultz is not true. There is no additional dispute or argument presented.


Passage number 534.
MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "yes" indicates agreement or confirmation, not contention or disagreement.


Passage number 535.
 Borrowing is running--MR. STERNLIGHT. $1.5 billion is what we have been aimingfor; the actual came in at $2.3 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply stating a discrepancy between the aim (1.5 billion) and the actual amount (2.3 billion). It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 536.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One has to distinguish between the aim andthe actual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating a distinction that needs to be made between the aim and the actual. It is not indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 537.
MR. SCHULTZ. Between the aim and the actual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Schultz about the relationship between the aim and actuality of something.


Passage number 538.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're talking about the aim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or ideas. It simply states that "we're talking about the aim," suggesting a discussion or focus on a specific topic without any apparent disagreement.


Passage number 539.
MR. STERNLIGHT. This week borrowing is [averaging] $1.7billion so far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a fact, without any expression of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 540.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The nonborrowed reserve path rightnow is based on the assumption of aiming for borrowing of $1.5billion. At the moment I'm assuming that we don't want to see a15-1/2 percent fed funds rate. I'm assuming that we're talking moreabout what we had hoped. which was that $1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply presents assumptions and goals without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 541.
5 billion in borrowingwould produce a fed funds rate of closer to 14 or 15 percentMR. STERNLIGHT. I would have said about 14-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both parties agree that borrowing 5 billion would result in a fed funds rate of around 14 or 15 percent.


Passage number 542.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right, about 14-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 543.
 So, itseems to me--MR. CORRIGAN. But doesn't that argue that if we stay withthe $1.5 billion, we're going to get lower interest rates anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. The speaker is sharing their opinion and it does not appear to invite or provoke disagreement from others.


Passage number 544.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, my instinct is based on ourdiscussions in New York, to the effect that the psychology in themarkets is such that if we aim at $1.5 billion and don't get anydecline [in M1], we're probably going to end up with a higher fundsrate than 14-1/2 percent. And, therefore, I think there's some2/1-2/82advantage to starting with a modest safety margin in case we don't getthe decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their instinct and suggesting the importance of starting with a modest safety margin in case their desired outcome is not achieved.


Passage number 545.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends upon what safety marginwe're talking about. I view the difference between $1.3 and $1.5billion as no big deal. But you're talking about a safety margin interms of market reactions. Other people may think of the safetymargin in terms of what happens to the money supply, so it depends onwhere you're looking for the safety.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that different individuals may have different perspectives on what constitutes a significant safety margin, depending on their focus or viewpoint.


Passage number 546.
 And that's what we're--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right, but if we're living with theJanuary bulge, and I certainly agree that that makes sense, we're nottrying to correct it in the very, very short run. If we start offwith $1.3 billion, basically what we're saying is that if all of theprojections worked out exactly as projected, we would get back to theupper end of the target halfway between June and September. Now, ifwe start with $1.5 billion, what we're saying based on the staff'sanalysis is that we would get back to the upper end by June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different scenarios and their potential outcomes.


Passage number 547.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'm a little confused.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing confusion, but there is no indication of any disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 548.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we get off on this question, let meask in general whether anybody is radically out of the ballpark Isuggested. If people are, let's put it on the table and then disposeof that issue and then come back to the fine-tuning. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is asking if there is disagreement or contention among the others and is suggesting to address and resolve it before continuing with the discussion.


Passage number 549.
MR. ROOS. Well, I think it's obvious that we ought to dowhat we did last year and pinch out this bulge. If you recall, we hadalmost the same experience in the middle of last year; and when wetook the action we did in April of last year, the fed funds rate didrise from about 13 to 19 percent. It stayed there a couple of months.But then it came down again and we were in a much more favorableposition after we had taken the remedial action. So, that's obviouslymy point of view. I think we ought to do something sooner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Roos, is presenting his point of view and suggesting a course of action to address the bulge. However, there is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 550.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's just put this on the table anddispose of it or not. You are just an advocate of an aggressive moveat the moment in the hope and expectation that that will help in thelong run. And you would take all the implications that that may havefor substantially higher interest rates in the very short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker implies that the person they are speaking to is in favor of an aggressive move, which would potentially result in higher interest rates in the short run. The use of the phrase "dispose of it or not" suggests that the two parties disagree on whether the aggressive move should be taken.


Passage number 551.
MR. PARTEE. I just might point out, Larry, that when wemoved in April, we moved in the context of the strongest quarter inGNP that we had seen for a long time--the first quarter. Now we wouldbe moving in a context of the weakest quarter in GNP that we've seensince the spring of 1980. The economic circumstances are quite a lotdifferent than they were then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact comparing two different economic circumstances.


Passage number 552.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is clearly an aggressive viewon the table. It's a legitimate view. Does anybody want to supportit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the view on the table is aggressive but recognizes it as a legitimate perspective. The question at the end is an invitation for someone to express support for the view, indicating an openness to different opinions without disagreement.


Passage number 553.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think what you have more or lesssuggested is an excellent fallback position, and if it developed inthat way I'd be just tickled pink about it. But looking at pastexperience, these trends that develop are so like runs in stockings:They sometimes keep going on. It's like trying to drive on the ice,as I have been recently. If you don't correct until you're way off2/1-2/82toward the ditch, you sometimes have to make a pretty big correction.We have looked at this as carefully as we could and tried to find outwhether this burst was an aberration or permanent, and I don't thinkwe know the answer to that. So, I think it's safer to minimize therisk by assuming for the time being--though we may be dead wrong--thatthe bulge is permanent, and I would be inclined to move more stronglyagainst it now, along the lines of what Larry was saying. But by thesame token, if it comes out the other way, which is probably justabout as likely, then we ought to be prepared to let the federal fundsrate come down and use the whole range for it if [M1] comes in overlyweak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black expresses uncertainty about whether the trend is an aberration or permanent, and suggests taking a stronger stance against it. However, he acknowledges that the opposite outcome is also possible.


Passage number 554.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The presence of the name "Chairman Volcker" does not imply any disagreement or contention, as it only identifies a person without providing any additional context or information.


Passage number 555.
 It's hard to see it overly weak in my wayof thinking, but I--MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or opinion of the speaker, without any contradictory or opposing viewpoints presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 556.
 I don't think we could get that in one month, butif that persisted for a while it could cause--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement expresses disagreement or contention by suggesting that the mentioned outcome is not achievable in one month but possible if it continues for a longer duration.


Passage number 557.
 Oh, if it persisted for a while--MR. BLACK. Until recently, I thought the economy was goingto be much weaker than I now think it is. I've begun to wonder if itmight not be bottoming out, which is something I never thought I wouldthink at this point. But if you look at what happened at the bottomof the previous two recessions, the [M1] growth was not unlike whatwe've had, so I don't think we can rule that out. I don't know whatprobability we should attach to it, but I just believe that's thecourse of lesser risk, because I think further growth now is a littlemore dangerous than moving the rates up temporarily to try to bring M1growth down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 558.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, these are difficult matters ofjudgment. The only thing I would say on the other side--withoutsaying this view is wrong because we won't know until afterwards--isthat we have had a pretty big tightening move in the market alreadyand we haven't had much chance to see [the response] because it wasdelayed; in fact, to exaggerate, the market got no message at allalmost until very recently. We haven't had a chance to see what kindof reaction that will bring. One can argue that being as aggressiveas you're talking about, particularly against the business backgroundthat exists, takes too many risks. That's what I feel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinion regarding the risks associated with being aggressive in the given context.


Passage number 559.
MR. BLACK. I think that's a good point, and it does addstrong support to what you're suggesting. The only thing that keepsme from doing that is remembering that it is so darn hard to hit theseshort-term targets. And we have missed them so often, despite ourbest efforts, that I just shift a little in the other direction. ButI think your position is a perfectly reasonably one and I would expectmost people would think that's the better one to follow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the point made by the other person and acknowledges that it provides strong support. They only express their hesitation due to previous difficulties in hitting short-term targets, but ultimately state that the other person's position is reasonable and is likely to be agreed upon by most people.


Passage number 560.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've had some expression of view onthe more aggressive side. I guess the next logic is to ask: Doesanybody want to be considerably less aggressive. Let's get that viewon the table if it has any support. Not hearing any, I think we'redown to fine-tuning. Just to repeat the specificity so that we havesomething to fine-tune, the proposal is to use a zero in there for theM1 number and I guess we can leave the M2 number where it is [in-65-2/1-2/82alternative B]. And we have a $1.5 billion and a $1.3 billionborrowing assumption advanced so far. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes a discussion or decision-making process, but there is no mention of disagreement or contention among the participants.


Passage number 561.
MR. GUFFEY. I would opt for the $1.5 billion. Althoughwe've been above that over the past week or two, it seems to me thatthings are moving in the right direction. I believe Peter said thatwe had a $600 or $700 million [run-off] last week and a potential atleast of some run-off again this week, which would bring the borrowinglevel back to about $1.5 or $1.4 billion. That seems to me to be theright place to start with a zero [M1] growth in the intermeetingperiod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Guffey's opinion and interpretation of the situation.


Passage number 562.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it only states "Mr. Ford," providing no indication of any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 563.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 564.
 I'm reasonably close to where you are, if Iunderstand you correctly--that is, "B" with a slight tilt to "A,"which would say--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would say a purely cosmetic one. Thatzero somehow looks more defensible than one percent in terms of whathas happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a perspective or opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 565.
MR. SCHULTZ. Now, wait a minute. I don't think "B" with aslight tilt toward "A" is accurate because that's January to March.The Chairman is suggesting zero [M1 growth] from now until the nextCommittee meeting. I think that's a different animal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is expressing disagreement with the suggestion made by the Chairman. He argues that the Chairman's suggestion of zero M1 growth from now until the next Committee meeting is different from the previous statement.


Passage number 566.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, no, I meant it to be the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 567.
MR. FORD. I understood it to be the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, is expressing their understanding of something and does not indicate any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 568.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I meant it to be the same. I think thatroughly is until the next Committee meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker is simply expressing their intent for something to remain the same until the next Committee meeting.


Passage number 569.
MR. FORD. I would lean a bit toward the tighter end of whatyou're describing by saying that we ought to assume $1.5 billion onborrowing, especially given that the funds rate today, as it wasyesterday, is coming in close to the upper end of this band and weought to continue with the common sense notion of bracketing the fundsrange around where it is when we leave this room and allowing someleeway on the upper end of that range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and preference, but there is no opposition or conflicting views present.


Passage number 570.
 I know that's not going to bereal--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't mention that but myinstincts are against taking the last 2 days on the federal funds rateas the rate to bracket. I would say the 14 percent is probably whatwe ought to bracket on those assumptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and there is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 571.
MR. FORD. Alternative A shows 3 percentage points [of leewayboth above and below the midpoint of the range]; the others show 2points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states the options available and their respective percentage points without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 572.
 If you are saying that you want to peg the fed funds and nothit 16--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't say that. I said I would worryif the federal funds rate were 16 percent now. I surely would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is clarifying a misunderstanding or misinterpretation by restating their statement.


Passage number 573.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage and its context are not provided.


Passage number 574.
 I can understand on an intra-day basis and it hasbeen 16 percent or right---66-2/1-2/82MR. STERNLIGHT. It touched 16 percent yesterday. Theeffective rate yesterday was 15.68 percent or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 575.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we're not talking about an intra-daytouching.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 576.
MR. FORD. Still, I'd go along with "B" and the zero growthrate for M1 and something like the [alternative B] M2 figure, but I'dwant to give ourselves a little room to breathe on where the fundsrate goes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with alternative B and suggesting a slight flexibility in determining the funds rate.


Passage number 577.
MR. PARTEE. I think we ought to do away with the funds raterange. I think this is the perfect meeting just to do away with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee simply expresses his opinion or suggestion without any opposing views being mentioned.


Passage number 578.
MR. BLACK. I second that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage, as Mr. Black is expressing support for something that has been previously stated or proposed.


Passage number 579.
MR. FORD. All right. I think that's a great idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "Mr. Ford" expresses agreement and enthusiasm for the idea mentioned.


Passage number 580.
MR. BALLES. I'd agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. Mr. Balles simply agrees with something, but there is no conflicting opinion or argument presented.


Passage number 581.
MR. FORD. We say we're shooting for zero growth in M1 and norate restrictions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Ford about their goal of zero growth in M1 and norate restrictions.


Passage number 582.
MR. BOEHNE. Why is this a perfect meeting to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply asking why this meeting is the perfect opportunity to do something.


Passage number 583.
MR. PARTEE. It's the first meeting of the year. We'retotally at sea. We have a very simple suggestion from the Chairman,which is that we target for zero [M1] growth and we accept anyshortfall. And we take the rate that comes up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the Chairman's suggestion for the meeting.


Passage number 584.
MR. GRAMLEY. As long as we're going to put out extremes,I'll suggest throwing out M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is simply proposing an idea, suggesting the removal of M1.


Passage number 585.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to provide an opinion or interpretation of a passage without actually seeing the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 586.
 So we throw out zero and we come up--MR. WALLICH. Not using a funds range makes a lot of sensebecause that range is always misunderstood in the market. They allbelieve that it cannot be breeched, but actually it is a checkpoint atwhich consultation begins. I think we'd do ourselves a lot of good byremoving it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Wallich suggests removing the funds range, stating that it is always misunderstood in the market. This suggests that there is disagreement or contention surrounding the use of the funds range.


Passage number 587.
MS. TEETERS. You're willing to remove the bottom as well asthe top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is asking about the removal of both the bottom and top of something, without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 588.
MR. PARTEE. Sure. We opt to take it out; we don't want it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee states a decision without any opposition or conflicting views mentioned.


Passage number 589.
MR. WALLICH. That doesn't mean that we can't consult underany circumstances, I take it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressed by Mr. Wallich.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 590.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I would be very upset if, without anyevidence that the economy has bottomed out--I think the only evidencesuggests the economy is still going down--we threw out any constrainton interest rates on the up side, as Mr. Partee suggests.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. This is evident when Mr. Morris expresses disagreement with Mr. Partee's suggestion of removing constraints on interest rates. Mr. Morris states that there is no evidence that the economy has reached its lowest point and believes that the economy is still declining.


Passage number 591.
MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me that there are lot of people outthere who think we're going nuts in the direction of the money supplyanyway, and if we just throw out any restraint on the funds rate,-67-2/1-2/82given the economy where it is, it's going to convey the notion thatwe've lost our sense of balance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating an observation or opinion.


Passage number 592.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can even leave off the "of balance" inthat statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement and does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 593.
MR. GRAMLEY. And I don't think we ought to have a hiddenconsultation rate that we don't tell the public about. It seems to mewe owe the public [information on] the way we're looking at things andthe way we're operating and how that works. If we're going to use a16 percent and 12 percent as the upper and lower limits for purposesof consultation, we should tell the public that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing the belief that the public should be informed about the consultation rate and how it is being used.


Passage number 594.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I have great faith in the conservatism ofour management.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses his belief and trust in the conservative approach of the management.


Passage number 595.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to answer the question without the full passage or context.


Passage number 596.
 Now, if we use a borrowing assumption, which wedon't publish, and which is a much more operationally important thingthan the consultation ranges--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let us defer this particular argument andsettle on the other dimensions. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the use of a borrowing assumption, without any conflicting views or arguments presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 597.
MR. CORRIGAN. I have just one little anecdote here. We talkabout all these statistics all the time, and I would note for therecord that many of the people who are always telling us what to dotell us we should look at the monetary base. If you look at themonetary base for 1981, it's actually quite stable on a quarterlybasis. But the most interesting thing is that the growth rate of themonetary base was slowest in the fourth quarter when the growth of themoney supply was fastest. And I think there's a little message there.As to the substance of the short-run decision that we will bemaking, I personally would have quite a strong preference for havingsomething like the second alternative directive [shown in theBluebook] as our basic marching order, with M1 at zero and M2 at 9percent. I would be very comfortable with a funds rate range of 12 to16 percent. I for one would feel very, very strongly that we shouldmaintain a band on the federal funds rate for some of the reasons thathave already been stated. I don't think there is a great deal ofmisunderstanding in the marketplace as to what that band means rightnow; most people know exactly what it means. So, I would be veryuncomfortable getting away from having a federal funds rate band, andI would fix it at 12 to 16 percent. On the borrowings, again, I wouldfeel fairly strongly that we should start at $1.5 billion. At leastas I read the Bluebook and look at what has happened even since thisBluebook was written, I would interpret the staff's analysis as sayingthat over the intermeeting period as a whole a borrowing level of $1.5billion should be compatible, from where we are right now, with bothlower interest rates and a lower actual level of borrowing. That'show I would look at it, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Corrigan expresses his personal preferences and opinions regarding monetary policy. He states that he would prefer the second alternative directive and a funds rate range of 12 to 16 percent. He also expresses his opinion on maintaining a band on the federal funds rate and setting it at 12 to 16 percent. Additionally, he shares his view on starting borrowing at $1.5 billion. These preferences and opinions indicate some level of disagreement or contention with potentially differing views from others.


Passage number 598.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Corrigan, may I please just correct one thing,sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roos is simply asking Mr. Corrigan to correct one thing.


Passage number 599.
 The monetary base has grown much more quickly in the lastquarter of--MR. CORRIGAN. On a quarterly average basis, I think it isthe slowest growth rate of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or conflicting statements. It simply presents a statement about the growth rate of the monetary base.


Passage number 600.
2/1-2/82MR. PARTEE. It was in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a short, isolated sentence that does not express any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 601.
MR. ROOS. No, not according to us. We'll have to put you onour mailing list.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roos is simply stating that there is no disagreement on their side and they will add the person to their mailing list.


Passage number 602.
MR. WALLICH. There's a different base in St.Louis; we knowthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is simply stating a fact about there being a different base in St. Louis.


Passage number 603.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 604.
MR. BOEHNE. I'm about where Jerry is. I like your generalballpark specifications, Mr. Chairman. Zero seems right to me for M1and 8 or 9 percent is acceptable for M2. I feel strongly that weought to keep the fed funds range of 12 to 16 percent and $1.5 billionon borrowing. And I like the alternative II specification of thedirective. I think that captures my sense of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. All individuals in the passage seem to agree on the general specifications and directives being discussed. There is no contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 605.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You pointed out something. I misspokewhen I said 9 percent for M2. I was looking at the numbers down belowwhich were for November to March. I just meant the same number as wasin alternative B, which is 8 percent and not 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges their mistake and clarifies their intended meaning.


Passage number 606.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, 8 or 9 percent would be acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne suggests that 8 or 9 percent would be an acceptable percentage, but it is not stated whether anyone disagrees or challenges this statement.


Passage number 607.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it's critical but I was justreading off a piece of paper and I read the wrong number. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges a mistake they made while reading a wrong number.


Passage number 608.
MR. KEEHN. Well, philosophically, I'm very close to what Edhas just suggested. I'd feel far more comfortable with alternative B.I would like a directive that would emphasize that we're trying tomaintain the current level as opposed to being slavish to anyparticular number. I would be comfortable with the borrowing level of$1.5 billion. I would feel very strongly that we should not eliminatethe fed funds range. I'd be in favor of maintaining that at 12 to 16percent; given the current rate, that seems reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Keehn, expresses agreement with Ed's suggestion and shares his own preferences and opinions on the matter.


Passage number 609.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to analyze the content for contention or disagreement without the passage.


Passage number 610.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'm very much with Jerry and Ed and Si on thespecs. And I'm there because I am deeply worried about what wouldhappen to the economy if interest rates go up again. I think BobBlack said, perhaps inadvertently, that we can't rule out a recovery.But we can't rule out the possibility that there won't be a recovery.I'm particularly worried about what may be happening to business fixedinvestment. I think that all the risks are on the down side asregards capital formation and that any inadvertent increase ininterest rates now, with the aim of pinching this bulge in the moneystock, would be a grave mistake.I want to note what we're doing here around the table as weset specs for the short run. We say that we'll take M1 of zero andthat for M2, well, maybe there's something to that aggregate but wedon't really care much [about it]. I do care and I care a lot.That's because I think we're looking at a world in which M1-B or M1--or what we use for M1 now with other checkable deposits in it--isshowing an enormous variation in response to changes in interest ratesthat very much parallels what has been going on for several years insavings deposits. If you look, for example, at the recent period2/1-2/82you'll find that other checkable deposits had a turnaround; in termsof annualized percentage rates their growth was around 26-1/2 percentfrom October to December. Savings deposits had a turnaround in termsof annualized growth rates of roughly 32 percent. I think the parkingargument is very much the reason for it. People are using theirsavings deposits as a vehicle for temporarily depositing funds thatthey're going to put back into other forms of financial assets later,and they're beginning to use their other checkable deposits for thesame purpose. We're going to see a tremendous amount of variation inMl, I think, in response to changes in monetary policy and in responseto changes in the economy that affect interest rates that we will notsee in the nontransactions component of M2 to anywhere near the samedegree. I think we get a more stable response to changes in policy,therefore, in a larger aggregate like M2 than we do in M1. I wouldn'tpush this to the point where Frank Morris is of throwing out all theaggregates altogether; I could perhaps be persuaded if you twisted myarm, Frank. But I do think it means that we ought to give moreattention to what is happening to M2, not just for this meeting butmore importantly for the longer term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 611.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want any remarks of mine that you mayhave interpreted the other way stricken from the record because Iagree with what you're saying. I just misread the M2 figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges their mistake and agrees with the other person's statement.


Passage number 612.
 It'snot that I don't think it's--MR. PARTEE. Well, M2 growth in January anyway was 11.2percent, or that's the estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 613.
MR. GRAMLEY. But what does that mean about thenontransactions component of M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a question without any conflicting views.


Passage number 614.
MR. PARTEE. Well, do you believe that the parked money isgoing to move entirely out of the Ms. I think a lot of it will shiftfrom M1-B or M1 into M2 components and, therefore, if we set an 8percent limit, we would have a pretty tough policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention between the speakers. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee expressing his belief about the movement of money between different components (M1-B and M2) and the potential impact of setting an 8 percent limit.


Passage number 615.
MR. GRAMLEY. If you're that concerned, Chuck, about parkedmoney moving from one component of [M2] to another, then focusing onthe broader aggregate seems a way of dealing with that. If you lookat the monthly growth rates in terms of the billions of dollars ofnontransactions components in M2, there was a big bulge in November,but September, October, December and January were all very much thesame order of magnitude. We did not have this tremendous burst, and acontinuation of that burst, in the nontransactions components of M2.That's exactly my point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is acknowledging and agreeing with Chuck's concern about parked money moving within M2, and suggesting that focusing on the broader aggregate could address this concern. He then presents some data to support his point, stating that the nontransactions components of M2 did not have a tremendous burst and continuity in growth.


Passage number 616.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me suggest this. We're going to havea little time problem here; I'm going to have to do a little workduring intermission. The German mark has been very weak and there's aquestion of whether we should intervene or not. I don't have anyfixed view on this, but I want to talk to [the German officials]. AndI have to talk to a few people here. So, I would like to wind up thisportion of our discussion fairly promptly, if that's possible. Let'ssee where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no real disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply mentioning a time problem and stating their need to do some work during intermission. They also mention a question of whether or not to intervene regarding the weak German mark, but they do not express a fixed view on the matter. The speaker then expresses their desire to wrap up the discussion promptly. Overall, there is no clear contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 617.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'm ready to vote on it, Mr. Chairman. I don'thave anything to add to the discussion. I think we've settled inhere. There seems to be a very general consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 618.
2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to make sure that that's whatwe have. Mrs. Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement that expresses a desire for confirmation and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 619.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I don't object to starting at $1.5billion on borrowings because that's coming down from where we are.My only difference from the specifications suggested so far is that Ithink we should be prepared to move toward $1.3 billion. The languagehere does that, but I think it should be put on the table that we'renot going to be rigidly stuck at $1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is expressing her opinion and suggesting a slightly lower amount of borrowing, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 620.
5 billion of borrowing if things--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if things really turn around. Ifind it very difficult to specify just where we would be, but I mightbe very reluctant on that first $3 or $4 billion [decline in M1] tomake much change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and reluctance regarding the first $3 or $4 billion decline in M1 and the potential borrowing of $5 billion.


Passage number 621.
 If it went beyond that, some gradual response wouldbegin to--MS. TEETERS. The point I'm making is that we went from $300million to $2 billion [on borrowings] in the last six-week period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about the increase in borrowings from $300 million to $2 billion in the last six-week period.


Passage number 622.
So, if we're going to be that flexible going that way, we should beprepared to be equally flexible when we get--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, certainly if this January [M1 bulge]washed out, borrowing would be down. There's no question about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It discusses a hypothetical situation and its potential impact on borrowing without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 623.
If it really washed out--I don't expect that to happen in that extremeform, but who knows, it might--MR. PARTEE. Well, I think the only question Nancy is askingis: Will you let the usual arithmetic relationship show through inlower borrowings if in fact there is weakness below zero in the moneysupply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario and a question raised by Nancy about the relationship between borrowings and the money supply.


Passage number 624.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I hate to get very specific aboutthis, but I guess what I am saying is that I'm not sure I would reactto the first $3 billion below zero. Beyond that, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty about their reaction to a certain situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 625.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The way Nancy formulated it, it'sbasically a discretionary decision. It seems to me that the advantageof starting with $1.3 billion as against $1.5 billion is that then wehave a carry-through during the entire period of the lower base.That's because we make the adjustments and the amount of change thatresults from the reality of the situation doesn't affect the startingpoint. So, you get the carry-through effect of the $200 millionincrease in the initial nonborrowed reserve path by starting withborrowings of $1.3 rather than $1.5 billion. I will live with $1.5billion--in every other respect I agree with what has been putforward--but I'm just not sure that at $1.5 billion we will get 14 oreven 14-1/2 percent [on the funds rate]. I certainly don't think 14percent is what it is likely to produce; it probably will be 14-1/2percent at best. And given the psychology of the market, we may notget that. I just wanted to have a safety margin to start with. If wedon't build it in to start with, Nancy, then it becomes simply adiscretionary decision at a later time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses uncertainty and disagreement with starting with $1.5 billion instead of $1.3 billion, suggesting that it may not produce the desired outcome and that there should be a safety margin included.


Passage number 626.
 And I don't see that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it doesn't have to be completelydiscretionary. Even in that first little margin we could take theposition that we at least will let it go through to whatever extent itautomatically shows through, which wouldn't be very much, unless we'vegot a big decline, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 627.
-71-2/1-2/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is just an identifier or title for Vice Chairman Solomon.


Passage number 628.
 Yes, there--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles, I skipped you completely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply acknowledges that the speaker accidentally overlooked Mr. Balles. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 629.
MR. BALLES. Well, just very quickly, since we are still in arecession, I would go along with your proposal, Mr. Chairman, but witha strong plea or caveat as the case may be that we take such actionsas are necessary to avoid the big overshoots that we had on the[monetary growth] paths we set at the November meeting and theDecember meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles indicates his agreement with the proposal made by the chairman and adds a plea or caveat to avoid repeating past mistakes.


Passage number 630.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wish I knew how to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply expresses a desire or longing to possess certain knowledge or skills. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 631.
MR. BALLES. I wish I did too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement expressing a personal desire.


Passage number 632.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 633.
MR. BOYKIN. I would be in agreement with the way youspecified it and with the second alternative on the language of thedirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boykin is expressing agreement with the specified way and the second alternative on the language of the directive.


Passage number 634.
MR. RICE. I'd go along with your proposal, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement shows agreement and support for the proposal being discussed.


Passage number 635.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have any comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is simply asking if anyone else has any comments, without any indication of conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 636.
MR. WALLICH. I have nothing to add. I would go along withzero and 8 percent. I prefer not to mention the funds range, notbecause I think interest rates are unimportant, but because I thinkit's misleading. But 12 to 16 percent is fine as is $1.5 billion onborrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Wallich expresses agreement and preference for a certain range of interest rates and borrowing amount. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 637.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else. Let me try to repeat it andmaybe we can vote on it. What happens during this coming period willreflect on our longer-range strategy, but leaving that aside, whatwe're talking about is zero for M1, 8 percent for M2, and $1.5 billionas the initial borrowing assumption. Allowing for Governor Teeters'and Mr. Solomon's comment, let me modify what I said and say we wouldlet [an M1 decline] show through in the purely automatic way but wewould be reluctant to make any discretionary adjustment without areally big decline. However, whatever presumably rather smalladjustment comes through by itself, if we do begin getting anydeclines here, we let them show through. It's a slight modificationfrom what I said before. And the funds rate range is 12 to 16percent. Frankly, I feel rather strongly that 12 to 16 percent is ashigh as I want to go on that funds range. If we were going to goabove 16 percent on the federal funds rate--maybe we'd do it--I'd wantto scratch my head and have the opportunity to scratch my head prettydarn hard. I'd scratch my head at 15-1/2 percent, I tell you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing their thoughts and preferences on various financial matters.


Passage number 638.
 At 15percent, it's--MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, in view of what you said earlierabout being very anxious that we not go above that rate, would youwant it to be purely automatic if we did get a continued spurt orwould you want some discretionary adjustment in the nonborrowed path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on whether the rate should be purely automatic or if there should be some discretionary adjustment in the nonborrowed path.


Passage number 639.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If M1 goes above the zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement that indicates a condition or situation: if M1 goes above the zero.


Passage number 640.
MR. BLACK. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The given passage does not provide any specific content or conversation to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 641.
-72-2/1-2/82MR. PARTEE. I think we might well have an adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply suggests that there may be a need for an adjustment.


Passage number 642.
MR. BLACK. Would you want that to be an automaticadjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or differing viewpoints. It is a straightforward statement or question without any apparent disagreement.


Passage number 643.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd certainly do the automaticadjustment and we might have to do a discretionary one if M1 really isrising. It would call into question this federal funds range and ifand as it does, we'd have a consultation. I'd be much more quick tomake a discretionary adjustment on the up side, if we have to, than onthe down side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. It is discussing potential actions in response to a certain situation but does not involve conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 644.
MR. BLACK. I thought that's what you meant, but I justwanted to clarify it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply seeking clarification on the speaker's previous statement.


Passage number 645.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that clear enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This question is asking for clarification, not expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 646.
MR. BLACK. That's fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions "That's fine" in response to something, implying agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 647.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might as well vote on this and have arecess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not involve any form of disagreement or contention. It simply suggests a course of action - voting and having a recess.


Passage number 648.
MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesUnanimous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that all individuals mentioned in the passage are in agreement (unanimous) without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 649.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's have a recess and return tothe other regulatory exchange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It suggests taking a break from the current topic and resuming a different regulatory discussion later.


Passage number 650.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to go to Mr. Cross atthis stage and dispose of his report. It's particularly relevant inview of the question about intervention. I will just bring you up todate. The mark, of course, has gotten quite weak, with our interestrates going up; other currencies have moved to a lesser degree in thesame direction; the mark had gotten to a rather high level. [TheGermans] have pretty much given up doing anything. They made a greator semi-great stand two or three weeks ago. but they think this[weakness] so much reflects interest rates and the uncertainty aboutwhat is going on [in the United States], that it's hard for them to doanything through intervention alone. That's probably a correctjudgment. We have come to a conclusion with the Treasury that if themark did weaken this afternoon or tomorrow when they probably will beannouncing some economic expansionary measures--the latest movement ofthe mark has been toward some strengthening--we would look kindly uponan intervention gesture. We are not talking about huge amounts but-73-2/1-2/82about moving in the direction that indicates some interest on ourpart. They probably have an interest, too, but they didn't want to doanything alone. And that's the way it stands at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It primarily provides information and updates on the current situation regarding the mark and the possibility of intervention.


Passage number 651.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That would be interpreted in themarket as dissatisfaction with the level, not as countering adisorderly or a very volatile market, I think. Wouldn't you agreethat that's the way the market would see it to some degree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is speculative in nature and does not express any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 652.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think some mixture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any conflicting opinions or disagreement. It is simply introducing the speaker's perspective without any contradictions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 653.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 654.
 I think we could do this on the grounds thatthere is an element of disorder when the market pays little attentionto fundamentals like inflation and--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that still comes back to a viewabout the level. I'm not unhappy about this because it's a beautiful[chance] to finally get a change and a perception of a change in theSprinkel policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their view and opinion about the market and the potential for a change in policy, but there is no direct disagreement or opposition presented.


Passage number 655.
 I do think, though, that the market will be a littleconfused because when we've had these disorderly or volatile markets[before] we have not intervened and all of a sudden we are interveningin a situation--and this is a big movement--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not talking about doing it on a reallytrivial movement; I'm not talking about a couple of pfennigs anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that the market will be confused due to the sudden intervention in a situation, specifically a significant movement.


Passage number 656.
MR. WALLICH. But we have never said anything other than thatwe would fight disorder. Now, disorder is in the eye of the beholder.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 657.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And the beholdee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only contains the word "And the beholdee" which does not express any conflicting opinions or contradictions.


Passage number 658.
MR. WALLICH. I think we can make our point in the marketwithout giving away the statement that we do it for disorder.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion or suggesting a strategy, but it does not involve any disagreement or conflict with another person or idea.


Passage number 659.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't think we give that away to anyextent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that they do not believe in giving something away to any extent. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 660.
MR. BOEHNE. Does this reflect a slight movement towardpragmatism on the part of the Treasury people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It merely states the possibility of a slight shift in the approach of the Treasury people toward pragmatism.


Passage number 661.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe.SPEAKER(.). Maybe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not convey any clear contention or disagreement. It simply presents two possibilities without taking a definite stance.


Passage number 662.
MR. GRAMLEY. Where will this all end--this pragmatism overthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing a question about the future outcome of pragmatism.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 663.
MR. SCHULTZ. Good common sense. We can't have that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The statement "We can't have that" indicates disagreement or contention, implying that the speaker opposes the idea of having good common sense.


Passage number 664.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with that background, why don't yougo ahead, Mr. Cross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply giving Mr. Cross permission to proceed or take the next step.


Passage number 665.
MR. CROSS. Well, Mr. Chairman, that comes close to theconclusion of what I was going to say. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement by Mr. Cross that he is about to conclude his remarks.


Passage number 666.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 667.
-74-2/1-2/82MR. WALLICH. Sam, do you observe that the yen is moresensitive to interest rate differentials now than it has been in thepast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking Sam for his observation and there is no conflicting information presented.


Passage number 668.
MR. CROSS. It seems to have followed pretty closely, atleast during these recent weeks, the changes in the interest ratedifferentials. I haven't looked back to compare that very thoroughlywith earlier periods, but it does seem to have happened in thisperiod. Mr. Chairman, I also do have a recommendation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating their observation and making a recommendation.


Passage number 669.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 670.
MR. CROSS. [Secretary's note: Text of Mr. Cross'srecommendation not extant. Staff notes indicate that he recommended a$1/4 billion increase to $3-1/4 billion in the informal limit onholdings of German marks and an increase of the same amount to $4-3/4billion on the limit of holdings of all foreign currencies to allowfor the accrual of interest on mark balances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a secretary's note about Mr. Cross's recommendation for an increase in the informal limit on holdings of German marks and foreign currencies.


Passage number 671.
]MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to indicate any contention or disagreement. It only mentions "Ms. Teeters," but does not give any context or details about her.


Passage number 672.
 If you're going to be intervening, aren'tthese two--MR. CROSS. If we intervene, then we will need to modify thatfurther.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Instead, it seems to be discussing a potential course of action and the need for further modification if intervention is chosen.


Passage number 673.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it would be prudent toincrease that [informal limit] by even more than [the $1/4 billionthat] Sam is recommending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although the statement expresses a different opinion about the recommended increase in the informal limit, there is no explicit or strong disagreement or contention. The speaker simply suggests that the increase should be more than what Sam is suggesting.


Passage number 674.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions Chairman Volcker without any conflicting or contrasting statements.


Passage number 675.
 I think we could live with--MR. SCHULTZ. That gives us a little problem. There arethree of us on the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and I'm leaving.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or situation.


Passage number 676.
MR. CROSS. It's an informal agreement, I believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. This is evident from the use of phrases like "I believe," indicating a personal belief rather than conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 677.
MR. SCHULTZ. Oh, I see. Okay, fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz simply seems to understand and agree with the situation or information presented.


Passage number 678.
MR. TRUMAN. Maybe the Secretary can correct me, but in thepast we haven't dealt with this in terms of a formal vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that in the past, they have not dealt with the situation in terms of a formal vote, and Mr. Truman is seeking clarification from the Secretary.


Passage number 679.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't require a vote of theCommittee. This is purely an informal understanding. I think we canjust leave it the way you are proposing, Sam, and understand that ifwe do intervene, you are not going to exceed this [new limit] rightaway anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 680.
MR. CROSS. We're very close to the [current] limit at themoment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Cross is stating a fact about the current limit without any contradictory statements or opposing opinions.


Passage number 681.
MR. PARTEE. [The leeway] is only $12 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 682.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's only $12 million at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a factual statement about the current amount of $12 million.


Passage number 683.
MR. CROSS. Yes, $12 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a simple response indicating agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 684.
MS. TEETERS. With $200 million of interest [earnings to beadded] in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there will be $200 million of interest earnings to be added.


Passage number 685.
-75-2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It seems to be a statement of identification or attribution rather than expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 686.
 When does that $200 million--MR. CROSS. If you raise it now, then we have that much scopeand we will be receiving those interest receipts over the next fivemonths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 687.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. We can do it any way we wantto, but I don't feel hard pressed [to change it]. If we say this[increase from $3 billion to] $3-1/4 billion is generally acceptable,the understanding would be that if we intervene [the limit] is goingto have to be more. And the Foreign Currency Subcommittee wouldpresumably review that. Maybe we can [raise] it $1/2 billion, if youwant to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement discussing different options and suggestions without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 688.
MR. CROSS. The present overall limit is $4-1/2 billion. TheCommittee could raise it to $5 billion, which would give us a littlescope just in case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that the committee could potentially increase the overall limit to $5 billion in order to have some extra leeway.


Passage number 689.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we ought to [raise] it $1/2billion because sometimes the situation moves fast. And it does seemto me that there is no issue of principle here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement presents an opinion about the need to raise an amount of money, but there is no opposing viewpoint or contradictory argument mentioned.


Passage number 690.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any big issue oneway or the other. Which do you feel more comfortable with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their neutrality and lack of concern regarding a certain issue. They are not taking a stance or expressing disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 691.
MR. CROSS. I would recommend [raising the overall informallimit to] $5 billion and raising [the informal mark limit] by $1/2billion [to $3-1/2 billion].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Cross, is making a recommendation regarding raising the overall informal limit and the informal mark limit.


Passage number 692.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that acceptable. With thatunderstanding, we will proceed.Now we can return to our long-run ranges in the light of thedecision we just made. Let me describe one variable that if I weredoing it today I'd do differently than I did a few weeks ago. Iagreed to testify on February 10th, which isn't very far off. Iwanted to do that in part because I just don't like the idea of a longlapse between our decision and the time that it's announced. I thinkwe should try to get it out of the way as soon as possible. Thenthere's a recess of the Congress, long in this context, for Lincoln'sbirthday and Washington's birthday. The alternative, if I don'ttestify on the 10th or 11th, is that I can't do it until the 23rd orsomething like that. At this point, if I hadn't semi-committed myselfotherwise, I'd just as soon wait until the 23rd and see what happensto these numbers over the next three weeks. I note that because it'snot impossible to go back and change that if we want to. There's nopoint in changing it if everybody is happy with the decision today.But if there were a view that minds could be swayed strongly one wayor another by what happened to the money supply over the next--. Wewould have three weeks more of data, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply discussing their decision-making process and considering alternative options.


Passage number 693.
MR. AXILROD. Pardon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement.


Passage number 694.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I didn't testify until [later]--is Mr.Winn here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a hypothetical situation about testifying at a later time.


Passage number 695.
MR. AXILROD. The 23rd would be the alternate date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating that the 23rd would be an alternate date without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 696.
2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The 23rd is the alternate date, which is aTuesday, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply questioning whether the 23rd is a Tuesday or not.


Passage number 697.
 We would know--MR. AXILROD. We would have partial data for the 17th and the3rd and 10th would be published.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that partial data would be available for certain dates.


Passage number 698.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The 23rd is Tuesday. So we would havepartial data for the 17th. What do we have now: partial data for the3rd. So we would [know] two more weeks' data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply reporting the days of the week and discussing the availability of partial data for different dates.


Passage number 699.
MR. AXILROD. Tomorrow we'll have partial data for the 3rd.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement about what will happen the next day.


Passage number 700.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have partial data for the 3rdyet. So, we'd have three more weeks' data if we waited.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a fact and an option for waiting to obtain more data.


Passage number 701.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 702.
MS. TEETERS. There's also the delay in the [President's]economic report and the budget.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states the existence of a delay in the economic report and the budget.


Passage number 703.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd use that as part of the excusefor delaying. I wouldn't delay unless there were a strong feelingthat it would add a great deal. Before you respond to that, I'd notethat in a more general way, as I suggested earlier--based upon what weknow now and a feeling that there is some reasonable chance, though Idon't know where I would put those odds, that a considerable amount ofthis January surge in particular will wash out--I would feelcomfortable with essentially the same targets we announced before withthe same base. I think that would minimize the difficulties allaround. What I would be inclined to say is that we would feel quitecomfortable as we see things now--I am issuing a nuance statement--[with growth] in the upper part of the range, if that's the way thingscame about on M1. That's not quite the same as saying we would aimthere deliberately. I don't think we can aim that finely a year awaybut we could say that we find that quite acceptable based uponeverything we know now. I think that is consistent with what I saidovertly before--but I don't remember precisely the reason we put in abottom [for the range] as low as [2-1/2] percent--that the onlypurpose for the lower part of the range was the concern that atechnological change, such as the rise of money market funds and sweepaccounts and so forth, might have such a depressing effect on M1 thatwe would want to allow for that. It wasn't a policy assertion; ratherthan being a sign of a real policy objective, it was a concern that[M1 behavior might reflect] a technological response. All otherthings being equal, we wouldn't have growth as low as 2-1/2 percent.On M2 we have a set of projections, for what they're worth,that say as I understand them that the range is more or less adequate.In other words, even at the upper end of M1, we'd expect to be withinthe M2 range; that may be a good or a bad judgment. And if we were inthe middle of the M1 range and were presuming implicitly all otherthings equal--technology and everything else--we would expect morelikely than not to be in the upper part of the [M2] range. We wouldcertainly be in the upper part of the range on M2 and maybethreatening the upper limit, which is where we've been all along. AndI would say that. Now, one can obviously argue logically: Why notjust raise the M2 range. I wonder a bit what we would gain by that asagainst the explanation that we have been running slightly above the2/1-2/82upper end of the M2 range for recent years and as a result of that Ithink it's understood in the market that the operative part of thatrange is around the upper limit. One could argue that raising therange puts us nearer the middle, but I'm afraid we might get someinterpretation that the operative part of the range remains the upperpart. So, if we moved, let's say, to 10 percent as the upper end,people might say 10 percent or slightly above is what we're aiming forbecause that's where we've been in terms of that range. And thatwould give us a higher M2 [growth] figure than we have had in anyrecent year. We also have this pattern where we haven't had any realdeclines in M2 [growth rates] for a number of years as I recall. Infact, we've had increases I think. It has been fairly steady forthree years as I remember, but if you go back to the mid-1970s, M2growth was much higher. That was back when we had this largecomponent of fixed deposits. It got high when interest rates wentdown; it got low when interest rates went up. And since basically aflexible rate [has been paid on M2 deposits], M2 has closely trackedGNP very well. I don't know whether that will last, but it has sofar. It has been hanging roughly just above 9-1/2 percent, plus orminus every year for those three years. Now we have the staff tellingus--for what it's worth and I assume it's worth a lot--that M2 growthshould be lower, consistent, of course, with the lower nominal GNPthat is being projected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is discussing different opinions and considerations regarding M1 and M2 growth targets, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement between the speakers. They are simply presenting their thoughts and discussing potential implications.


Passage number 704.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the staff's view is that the datawould have suggested there were stronger arguments for raising therange for M2 in the previous two years than there are this year, givenour [GNP] projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the staff's view that the data suggests stronger arguments for raising the range for M2 in the previous two years compared to the current year.


Passage number 705.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that was reflected earlier when wewere at this position. The staff told us we'd be threatening theupper end quite clearly and maybe would exceed it. That's notimpossible this year, but as I interpret it you feel more comfortableabout the range this year than you felt at any time in the past twoyears anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their interpretation and opinion, but there is no indication of any disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 706.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is "Yes" because the speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is expressing agreement with something that was said or suggested by someone else. There is a presence of disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 707.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, there are these arguments that werepresented yesterday, which I think have a degree of theoreticalvalidity. There were two that I recall: One was that if we get moresavings, we may get more M2 because that's a savings vehicle forindividuals; the second is that if the IRA/Keogh accounts pull moneyout of what is [not] now encompassed in M2, we would get an upwardbias--assuming that we continue to count IRA/Keogh deposits in M2,which is a doubtful proposition. But we'd have the opposite problemof a downward bias if we took [those deposits] out. I was thinkingabout that just last night and maybe somebody can confirm my off-handjudgment that either of those events would involve literally tenths[of a percentage point] because we're not talking about the wholeincrease in IRA/Keogh but only about the part pulled out of marketinstruments and into M2. If the saving rate went up 1 percentagepoint, let's say, it doesn't mean a one percentage point increase inM2 [growth] by the wildest stretch. The saving rate is first of allcalculated against disposable income, which is much lower than GNP. Aone percentage point increase in the saving rate isn't one percentagepoint against GNP, which is where we are measuring this. And it's notall going to go into M2-type deposits. It can go into housing equity2/1-2/82or into many other things. So, I think we're talking about tenths ineither of those things, although they probably work in that directionand they're theoretically correct observations as near as I can see.But it has struck me that they are not the kind of thing--and I'm justgetting a staff comment on this--that would have a really large impacton M2, although, if they happen, they would tend to go in thatdirection. I don't know if there is any equally clear offset. Onecould argue that on technical grounds, but we'd be arguing about anadjustment in the nature of 1/2 percent or something of that kind toallow for those things. That is my feel for it, but I don't knowwhether the staff has any other view. Of course, the staff made anestimate. I don't know to what extent you consciously took thesethings into account.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different arguments and observations, but there is no direct disagreement or conflict between different viewpoints.


Passage number 708.
MR. AXILROD. Not very consciously at all, Mr. Chairman. Idon't know what one would say. One percent on M1 is about $18billion, which is probably as reasonable an estimate as one might makeif you consider 10 million people at a $2,000 maximum per person.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any arguments or conflicting viewpoints. It is simply stating a fact and providing an estimation.


Passage number 709.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but we're not going to get that. Idon't know what your estimate is for IRA/Keogh deposits, but certainlya large proportion of what goes into IRAs and Keoghs already wouldhave been in M2 anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no direct contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply states a different perspective or limitation, but it does not contradict or argue against any specific point made previously.


Passage number 710.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. I'm saying as an upperlimit I would think 1 percentage point is not unreasonable. So, itwould be small in practice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion about an upper limit, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 711.
MR. PARTEE. The saving rate could be more influentialbecause presumably this would be money that otherwise would have beengoing into consumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that explains the potential influence of a higher saving rate on consumption.


Passage number 712.
 I don't know what a 1 percentage pointincrease in the saving rate would be--MR. CORRIGAN. $25 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the speaker does not know what a 1 percentage point increase in the saving rate would be and Mr. Corrigan responds with the estimated amount of $25 billion.


Passage number 713.
MR. GRAMLEY. It would be about $20 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement of fact or estimation without any apparent disagreement or contention.


Passage number 714.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but how much of that would appear inM2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 715.
MR. PARTEE. Most of it. I should think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a straightforward statement without contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 716.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question, which does not display any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 717.
MR. PARTEE. Well, you said more equity in housing. Thatseems to me extremely unlikely this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee expressing his opinion about the likelihood of there being more equity in housing.


Passage number 718.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. People just don't borrow. We know onething, which is that borrowing is going to be low in that area. I'mnot sure I've thought this all through, but I think the major changethere is how much new mortgage [financing] somebody puts on inexchanging houses and so forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a belief or assumption but does not express any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 719.
MR. PARTEE. Housing is nonexistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement of fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 720.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states "MR. FORD," which does not provide any information or context to indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 721.
 That's one way it would show up, but I would-79-2/1-2/82MR. PARTEE. But housing is not a personal consumptionexpenditure. Housing investment is an investment expenditure, not aconsumption expenditure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining that housing is considered an investment expenditure rather than a personal consumption expenditure.


Passage number 722.
MR. FORD. That's not what he's talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Ford simply states that the topic being discussed is not what the other person is mentioning.


Passage number 723.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When one increases the equity in one'shouse, it shows up in the saving rate, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement presents a causal relationship between increasing equity in one's house and it being reflected in the saving rate.


Passage number 724.
MS. TEETERS. We're not adding housing next year anyway whenwe have a 17 percent mortgage rate, so why worry about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they are not planning to add housing next year due to a high mortgage rate. They express a lack of concern about the matter.


Passage number 725.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I'm saying. I don'tthink this is a year in which people are going to be consuming byborrowing on mortgages and in effect running down the equity in theirhouses and building up consumption. They're going to be paying offthose mortgages because they're stuck with them. And that shows upwith an increased saving rate, I think. Right, Mr. Zeisel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their opinion and stating what they think will happen regarding borrowing and saving in the coming year. There are no opposing views presented or conflicting ideas expressed.


Passage number 726.
MR. ZEISEL. We were involved [in a side conversation] here.The answer, I think, is yes. If people don't spend money onconsumption items, it shows up in the saving rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Zeisel is simply stating his opinion and giving an explanation.


Passage number 727.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the form in which that savings islodged if one is paying off mortgage debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply asking a question about the form in which savings are lodged when one is paying off mortgage debt. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 728.
 It's a decline inindebtedness rather than an increase in--MR. PARTEE. I think that's true. As Jerry said, if onetakes cash income and pays off mortgage debt, then obviously that cashincome isn't used to consume and, therefore, it raises the savingrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 729.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And I'm saying it's not unlikely thatthat's going to happen because ordinarily we get some new borrowing,which people in effect can use for consumption. This year we're notgoing to get the new borrowing side of the equation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting information and expressing a possibility without addressing or contradicting any opposing views.


Passage number 730.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we really didn't have it last yeareither.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about not having something the previous year.


Passage number 731.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "That's right" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple agreement or affirmation of something previously stated.


Passage number 732.
MR. PARTEE. We didn't have any.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 733.
MR. GRAMLEY. The issue is that if there's some deliberatedecision to consume less and save more, the logical disposition of theproceeds is to pay off debt or increase financial asset holdings. AndI would think that for the average homeowner who has a mortgage wellbelow 16 or 17 percent or whatever he could earn on money marketmutual funds, he's not going to pay off his debt, he's going to add tofinancial assets. So, the counterpart of the consumer balance sheetwould be an increase in financial asset holdings and it would likelygo into M2--not the whole thing, but maybe 3/4 of [it].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their opinion about what the average homeowner would do with the proceeds from consuming less and saving more.


Passage number 734.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Some portion of it. We're just talkingabout the magnitude of this effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply about discussing the magnitude of a certain effect, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 735.
-80-2/1-2/82MR. GRAMLEY. It seems to me that the bigger [issue withrespect to] what we want to do with M2 is not the fact that we have anadditional bias or lack thereof this year relative to last year butthat last year we were well over the upper end, or several tenthsover. If what we want is an increase in nominal GNP of, let us say,between 8 and 9 percent, then we ought to be choosing a range for M2,given the recent velocity figures, that has a midpoint between 8 and 9percent. And if we put out another 6 to 9 percent range, particularlyif, as I hope, we will be giving increased stress to M2 this yearrelative to M1, then we would be aiming almost certainly at a targetthat we will tend to violate on the up side unless we're not going toget that kind of economic performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Gramley is suggesting that there is disagreement or discontent with the approach taken regarding M2 last year. He argues that the focus should be on selecting a range for M2 that aligns with the desired increase in nominal GNP, and that a range of 6 to 9 percent would likely lead to surpassing the target on the high end. This indicates a difference of opinion or disagreement about the appropriate approach to setting targets for M2.


Passage number 736.
MR. PARTEE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "That's right" is simply an agreement or confirmation of what was previously said.


Passage number 737.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are to the presentationalquestion: Is it worth it. If we were going to aim at the midpoint asyou say, does that follow the record. I don't think that's the way itwill be interpreted because people see that growth has been around thetop of the range. And it just looks as if we're raising the target.I think we would have to say that we expect [M2 growth] to be towardor at the upper end of that range. I have no problem with thatbecause it has been there for three years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and explaining their reasoning, but there is no opposing view presented or argued against.


Passage number 738.
MS. TEETERS. But we used [the upper end] at least once as aconstraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the upper end was used as a constraint.


Passage number 739.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying we wouldn't use it as aconstraint again. I'm not saying we will ignore M2. The relevantissue is where it becomes a constraint. I'm saying a constraint issomeplace in the neighborhood of 9 percent. I'm not saying it's aconstraint at the logical midpoint, which is 7-1/2 percent. I'm notsaying that. And then we have a presentational problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their position on using a certain constraint and clarifying their stance on the issue.


Passage number 740.
MR. PARTEE. I would emphasize the incremental possibilitiesmore than Lyle would. I think M2 has about an even velocity, whichwould suggest 8-1/2 percent. But then there probably is a bias on theside of getting a little larger increase. So, I think it's verypossible that we will be over 9 percent this year. Now, if you say tome that you don't care if it's over by a few tenths, because it wasover by a few tenths last year and the year before, then you'retelling me that it's not a binding range. And then I don't care wherewe put it; we can put it at 3 to 5 percent or whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his own opinion about the potential interest rate increase and considering different possibilities. He acknowledges that there may be a bias towards a slightly larger increase but does not argue or disagree with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 741.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not saying that. There's adifference between being at 9.3 percent and being at 10.5 percent.That is a difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that there is a difference between being at 9.3 percent and being at 10.5 percent without expressing any conflicting or opposing views.


Passage number 742.
MS. TEETERS. Not if the range goes up to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 743.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. If the range goes up to 10 percent, Ithink it will be read that 10.5 percent [growth] is okay. And that'sthe issue. Obviously, we can we raise the range and say cross ourhearts, hope to die, we're going to stay in it; we won't be [above]it. That's the alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement and discusses a potential issue and alternative solution.


Passage number 744.
MR. BALLES. I'll vote for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles states that he agrees with a certain proposal or statement, indicating his support.


Passage number 745.
-81-2/1-2/82MR. WALLICH. M2 is very hard to control in a direct sense;we can control it by controlling GNP essentially. Savings is afunction of GNP and in that sense, if we get a good M2, we have done agood job on GNP. But I would not get too firmly ensconced on an M2target precisely for that reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that controlling M2 (a measure of money supply) directly is difficult, but it can be indirectly controlled by controlling GNP (gross national product). The speaker suggests not placing too much emphasis on setting a specific target for M2 because it is ultimately dependent on the performance of GNP.


Passage number 746.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Given the imprecision of the numbers,it seems to me that we all ought to agree with the general propositionthat we are doing our job well if we come in anywhere within theranges. We should not give the impression that we are aiming formidpoints.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no direct contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply expressing their view that given the imprecision of the numbers, it is reasonable for everyone to agree that if they fall within the provided ranges, they are doing their job well. The mention of not aiming for midpoints is just a suggestion from the author, rather than a point of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 747.
MR. PARTEE. I agree with that.SPEAKER(.). I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Partee and the speaker agree with the stated statement.


Passage number 748.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Therefore, I think there is aconsiderable disadvantage in raising the range for M2 because then [itwould seem that] what we are really trying to do is to come in closerto the midpoint and we would be disturbed with coming in around theupper end of the range. So, in addition to the staff predictions thatwe probably will be more comfortable with the M2 range this year thanin the previous two years, it seems to me that there is a prettystrong case for not raising the M2 range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is expressing their own opinion and providing reasons to support it, without opposing or contradicting any other viewpoint.


Passage number 749.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we elaborate any more on M2, let mejust complete my story and go back to the [presentation] problem. AsI said earlier. I would feel very uncomfortable with this M1 target ifI thought that this bulge were semi-permanently built in. I do nothave the evidence for that now, but if we just go ahead with ourtargets on the same base, I would be inclined to say--and it is not avery easy thing to say and get it just right--that if it turned outthat this bulge more or less stayed in, this Committee would beprepared to review that target rather promptly, particularly in termsof this basing problem that we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing a potential issue and expressing a willingness to review targets if necessary.


Passage number 750.
 And we would report back evenbefore the normal midyear review if we have sufficient evidence thatthis is a more permanent kind of--MR. PARTEE. Shift in [demand].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 751.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A shift that we did not anticipate. Withthe passage of, say, a couple of months, one way of looking at itwould be that on balance we would conclude that coming up to lastyear's target range right at the end of the year was a more meaningful[event] than the earlier declines, in terms of the basic outlookregarding the need for money. I'd just lay that out on the table andsay that if that is the kind of evidence we get in the ensuing coupleof months, we are prepared to review that target. We are not makingthat assumption with regard to the target right now, and that is whywe are sticking with the convention.Now, one thing we could do is to delay the testimony; itwould give us three more weeks and maybe we would have a little moreevidence one way or another. I guess everybody would feel morecomfortable if [M1 in] those next three weeks showed a decline; thenthis target would look much more reasonable. If it showed no declineover those three weeks, I would feel more uncomfortable with it than Ido today. We still would not know. It might decline in March,2/1-2/82 -83-obviously, but I would have substantially more uneasy feelings that weare too low on the range. So, we could play around for another threeweeks before making a judgment if you thought that added something.But the alternative--this is just the way I feel--is to go ahead onthe present schedule but just say reasonably clearly that this is ourfeeling at the time based upon a feeling that there is a temporaryelement in that figure and that it does not reflect a lasting[phenomenon]. I don't think I would use the term "shift in demand"but some English that reflected that. And I'd say that if it does notwash out with the degree of pressure in effect that we judge is rightin the market, we would sense that something more fundamental is goingon here, which would suggest that we may be using the wrong base forthis year's target. And we would be prepared, as I said, to reportthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses different options and considerations regarding the target range and the need for more evidence before making a decision.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 752.
MS. TEETERS. Does no one share my concern that the forecastis too low. If all our temporary problems get [unintelligible] inessence that we are negating the President's program. I find myselfin the odd position of being the only supporter of President Reagan inthe room here. Basically, [the staff is] projecting a major continuedrecession at very low rates of [activity]. And the overall policy maybe too tight. Whether we have problems with the base or any of therest of it, we are just making monetary policy too restrictive to getthe sort of recovery that I think all of us want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Ms. Teeters expresses concern that the forecast is too low and questions whether the overall policy is too tight. She feels that the staff's projection and monetary policy are too restrictive for the desired recovery. She also states that she is the only supporter of President Reagan in the room, suggesting disagreement among the staff members.


Passage number 753.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, these questions areinterrelated, and you raise the issue in a more fundamental way. Letme just say that, mechanically, the impact of changing the base isjust a little over a 1 percentage point [increase] in the targets. Interms of the end of the year, the contour is different than raisingthe target, but mechanically it gives us the result of being up 1percent at the end of the year, because we are up 1 percent at thebeginning of the year and it just carries through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the potential impact and calculation of changing the base.


Passage number 754.
MR. ROOS. If Mr. Meese's comment this morning that thePresident would want to consult with you turns out to be meaningful,would that have any effect on the timing or on any aspect of thisscenario that you are talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roos is simply asking a hypothetical question about the potential impact of Mr. Meese's comment on the timing or aspects of the scenario being discussed.


Passage number 755.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I do not know. I did not hear him,and I do not know what to answer to that question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge about a certain situation, but there is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 756.
MR. FORD. He said--I saw him--that he is going to beconsulting with you very shortly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "He said--I saw him--that he is going to be consulting with you very shortly" is attributed to someone else, indicating a second-hand account of a planned consultation.


Passage number 757.
MR. PARTEE. Who, Meese.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply includes a statement or question being posed by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 758.
MR. FORD. Yes, on the Today show, I think it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is simply stating his opinion about a previous event.


Passage number 759.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information on Mr. Roos or any potential contention or disagreement related to him. Without further context, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 760.
 I just meant could that have an effect on yourtiming in--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On the timing question, you seem tofeel that there are no disadvantages, particularly, in delaying forthree weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the impact of delaying for three weeks without presenting any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 761.
2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, there is a disadvantage in that wewould have to change something that has been announced. I think thatis a disadvantage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a personal opinion about a potential disadvantage.


Passage number 762.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I see. I just wanted to be sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of understanding and assurance. There is no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 763.
MS. TEETERS. I think there is a disadvantage in going [totestify] as early as the 10th because [Congress] might come back andsay that we did not give a proper evaluation of [the Administration's]economic policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters believes there is a disadvantage in testifying early because Congress might argue that they did not give a proper evaluation of the Administration's economic policy.


Passage number 764.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not think that is the excuse we woulduse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 765.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The indication is given by the contrast between "Ms. Teeters" and the subsequent word "Yes." This suggests that Ms. Teeters might hold a contrasting opinion or a different viewpoint than what was previously discussed.


Passage number 766.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure how credible it is becausethey assume we know what it is anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses uncertainty about the credibility of a certain subject.


Passage number 767.
MR. GRAMLEY. When you say that something would have to bechanged that was announced, are you talking about the date of yourtestimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification about a statement made by someone else.


Passage number 768.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without knowing the content of the passage, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 769.
MR. GRAMLEY. Or the decision itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 770.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the date of my [testimony].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating the date of the testimony without any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 771.
MR. GRAMLEY. Allegedly, no one knows that we are making adecision on long-run targets today. That is always a big deep secretthat is reported in the newspapers, but no one really knows for sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there is speculation or uncertainty indicated by the use of "allegedly" and "no one really knows for sure," there is no clear contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 772.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am saying that if we delayed thetestimony, what I would do is attempt to arrive at a very cleartentative decision today but we would then confirm it [later].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their plan to arrive at a tentative decision today and confirm it later.


Passage number 773.
MR. GRAMLEY. So there would not be any question of a leakbecause we would not have made any final decisions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about not making any final decisions, which suggests a lack of potential conflict.


Passage number 774.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right; we would not have made thefinal decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The excerpt does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it simply states a fact or agreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 775.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It is worth pointing out on the otherside that there is an advantage in testifying on the scheduled daybecause then we would begin to accustom the committee, the Congress,and the public [to the idea] that we are willing, when there aretechnical or structural shifts, to be more flexible on midyear--or Ishould say intra-year--adjustments. If we wait the three weeks thenyou are somewhat less likely to put forward that point of view. So,it seems to me that there are arguments on both sides.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker presents both sides of the argument, stating that there is an advantage in testifying on the scheduled day, but also acknowledging that waiting three weeks can make it less likely to put forward a certain point of view. This suggests a disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 776.
MR. PARTEE. I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker explicitly states that they agree with the statement being made, indicating a lack of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 777.
MS. TEETERS. We have been so flexible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "we have been so flexible".


Passage number 778.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have not. And that is why weshould begin, when we have a good reason to support it such as when2/1-2/82these technological changes and innovations result in shifts, to getpeople accustomed to our being flexible within the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have not done something and suggesting a reason for why they should start doing it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 779.
MS. TEETERS. I learned 25 years ago that monetary policy wasa flexible policy instrument, and we have been rigid for 2-1/2 yearsnow, which is ridiculous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses her disagreement with the current rigid monetary policy, finding it ridiculous.


Passage number 780.
MR. SCHULTZ. The world is a little different than it was 25years ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states that the world is different now compared to 25 years ago. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 781.
MS. TEETERS. No, not that different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "No, not that different" does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests that whatever is being referred to is not significantly different.


Passage number 782.
MR. SCHULTZ. But I do agree very much with Tony Solomon thatif indeed we do want to be a bit more flexible in the future, then theway to do it is to go ahead and testify--we have the best opportunitywe are ever going to have--along the lines that the Chairman has justput forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates agreement between Mr. Schultz and Tony Solomon on the idea of being more flexible in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 783.
MR. GRAMLEY. The counterargument is that if we are notwilling to be flexible from July to early February, what makes anyonethink that suddenly we are going to resolve to be flexible between nowand, let's say, March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in this passage because the speaker is presenting a counterargument to a previous statement. They are disagreeing with the idea that flexibility will suddenly occur after a certain point in time.


Passage number 784.
MR. SCHULTZ. Because we say so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Because we say so" is a declarative statement without any opposing viewpoint or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 785.
 We say it and that doesnot--MR. GRAMLEY. If we can agree that we are going to beflexible, let us start flexing. Let's not postpone this by notifyingthe public that we are flexible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker here is emphasizing the need for action and flexibility, while also indicating disagreement with the suggestion of postponing the matter by notifying the public.


Passage number 786.
MR. ROOS. Of course, certain market participants areallegedly upset because we have been flexible--if you want to use thatword--or volatile. They say that we have not really been able tostick with, on a rather inflexible basis, a set program. One can lookat it either way. Does the press know the date that you are presentlyscheduled [to testify].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting two different perspectives without taking a clear stance.


Passage number 787.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I presume they must. I do not think thereis much public discussion, but--SPEAKER(.). They may not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that there is not much public discussion on the topic being discussed, but acknowledges that they may not be entirely correct in their assumption.


Passage number 788.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without providing the actual passage. Please provide the relevant passage for further analysis.


Passage number 789.
 Because there could be dangers in misinterpretinga delay as--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they must know about it. I assumethat if we change the date, it will be known that we have changed it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing a belief or assumption about the potential consequences of changing a date.


Passage number 790.
MR. COYNE. Yes, they do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement affirming that "they do" (something) in response to an unspecified question or statement.


Passage number 791.
MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, what do you think couldreally happen between now and the next few weeks that would cause anytentative decisions today on ranges for the whole year to be changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 792.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to give an extreme view: If I saw acontinuing tendency for the money supply to rise despite the actionsthat we have taken to reverse it. It is hard to predict everythingelse that could go on, but if I see no sign of liveliness in the2/1-2/82economy and we have rising interest rates and a rising money supplyover the next three weeks, I'd be ready to change.SEVERAL. Which way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is presenting a hypothetical scenario and stating their perspective on how they would respond to that scenario.


Passage number 793.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would rebase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only contains a statement without any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 794.
MR. PARTEE. You would add the 1.2 percent that rebases it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a direct statement of Mr. Partee's suggestion to add the 1.2 percent to the rebasing process, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 795.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That is right" implies agreement or affirmation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 796.
MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems to me that if one is uncertainand later may have to say that we need flexibility because things haveturned out differently, then one would strengthen one's position byshowing this uncertainty a little earlier rather than coming in[firmly] early and then having to backtrack. I think we would have aharder time making that change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: Mr. Wallich disagrees with the approach of coming in firmly early and then having to backtrack. He suggests that it would be stronger to show uncertainty earlier rather than changing positions later on. This implies a difference in opinion or perspective on the appropriate approach.


Passage number 797.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not saying that. If we go aheadright now and I testify on the 10th and then the same thing happensthat I have just described, I wouldn't change it right then. I wouldwait another month or so, having already been on record, before Iwould make the change. But I might be prepared to make it if we hadannounced nothing at that point.Let me just say, too, that there was some comment yesterdayabout rebasing being hard to explain. I do not think it is at allhard to explain. The explanation just flows as smooth as silk. Ormaybe I am overestimating my capacities to explain. But I distinguishthat very sharply from the market reactions and suspicions we wouldget. They would understand what we are doing; I do not think there isany problem with that. And we do have a logical explanation for it.That does not mean that there are not going to be people in the marketwho will say that we used this particular technique in order to ease[policy]. That is what they would say, but they would understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion on the ease of explaining rebasing and addressing potential market reactions.


Passage number 798.
MR. BALLES. Have we ever rebased before. I am trying torecall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. Mr. Balles is simply trying to remember if they have rebased before.


Passage number 799.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, that is the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 800.
MR. MORRIS. We have always had overshoots in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a historical fact about overshoots in the past.


Passage number 801.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But this has always been discussed as apossibility and then we have not done it. So it is not a new concept.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence states that a certain concept has been discussed but not implemented, indicating a lack of change or newness.


Passage number 802.
MR. BALLES. It is not a good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "it is not a good idea."


Passage number 803.
MR. GRAMLEY. Look, how many times have we been accused ofbase drift. We hear "You people always have base drift," to which weare going to say now "By Jove, no more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of disagreement or contention. It only presents a statement acknowledging a common accusation and expressing a desire to no longer be accused of it.


Passage number 804.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The criticism that we would get is that wedid not adjust for the base drift when we had it on the up side butnow when we have it on the down side we are adjusting for it.SPEAKER(.). [Unintelligible] be the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a criticism that they might receive without expressing their own opinion on the matter.


Passage number 805.
2/1-2/82 -87-MR. FORD. That is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply confirming the accuracy of the date mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 806.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is not that they would not understand;it is that they would say there is a bias.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
Explanation: The passage suggests that there may be a disagreement or contention regarding the understanding of a particular topic. Additionally, the statement implies that some people might argue that there is a bias involved in the topic being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 807.
MR. FORD. They would say it is a one-way deal and we arefaking it. It comes across as being dishonest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "They would say it is a one-way deal and we are faking it" suggests that there is a disagreement between Mr. Ford and the other party mentioned. The phrase "It comes across as being dishonest" further emphasizes the disagreement as it implies Mr. Ford's disagreement with the perception of dishonesty.


Passage number 808.
MR. CORRIGAN. This is a reversal of Nancy's problem.SPEAKER(.). Imagery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The two speakers are simply discussing a topic without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 809.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 810.
 Some people will say dishonest, but theexplanation is--MR. PARTEE. Visually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that some people might have a different opinion but then states an explanation.


Passage number 811.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When we set these targets, we say weexpect [growth] to come in around the bottom of the [range]. We justsay we would like to be around the bottom and that's what we'reassuming. That is what we assumed when we set the target and we didnot change our mind. That is what we say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their belief or expectation.


Passage number 812.
MR. FORD. Well, of the two approaches you have described, Iwould very strongly prefer the one you described when you startedtalking a few minutes ago of implicitly leaving the base unchanged theway we have been doing and taking the hit on the [range]. Then, if weneed to come back, I'd overtly state what we are doing, which is thatwe have decided for good and sufficient reasons to raise the band.I'd be up front with [it].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a preference for one approach over another but there is no disagreement or conflict with another person or viewpoint.


Passage number 813.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even there, my inclination would not be toraise the band. It would be to change the base and say we think weare operating off the wrong base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal inclination or preference to change the base rather than raising the band.


Passage number 814.
MR. FORD. Well, I would say change the band. We would bedoing the same thing either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is making a suggestion that is not challenged or disagreed with by anyone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 815.
 It is just a question of which is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it is [the same]. That ismy point. If we raise the band, we are saying that from now on wewant a higher growth rate. If we change the base, we are saying we donot want a higher growth rate from now on; we have forgiven whathappened. I think that is saying two different things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents two different perspectives on the issue of raising the band or changing the base. One perspective argues for a higher growth rate, while the other suggests forgiving past events and not expecting a higher growth rate. This disagreement indicates contention between the two viewpoints.


Passage number 816.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Since the passage does not provide any additional context or information, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement based solely on the given statement "Mr. Partee. Yes."


Passage number 817.
MS. TEETERS. It comes to the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not state any specific ideas or arguments that could lead to contention or disagreement. It only mentions someone's name without any additional context.


Passage number 818.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It comes to the same thing for the numberat the end of this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 819.
MS. TEETERS. That is right. And either way it is an easingof monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is stating that easing of monetary policy is good, but someone else may disagree and argue that it is not.


Passage number 820.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is a difference in theimplication for 1983.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement about a difference in implication for 1983.


Passage number 821.
MR. GRAMLEY. That is the important point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is stating what he believes to be the important point without presenting any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 822.
2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "2/1-2/82." It appears to be a date range or numerical sequence without any statement or argument to indicate disagreement.


Passage number 823.
 It is theimplication for the trend that we are on, not the--MR. GRAMLEY. Only the expansionists want to change therange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions the implication of a trend and notes that only expansionists want to change the range.


Passage number 824.
MR. FORD. It is not going to do much for our credibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about a situation that will not have a positive impact on their credibility.


Passage number 825.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. After all, the short-run decisionthat we just made early this morning does logically lead to what Paulsaid. I don't think it will happen, but if we find that the moneysupply is strong in February, then we have to do something to giveourselves more room. As I say, I don't think that is going to happen,but it does seem to me that we are better off sticking with thescheduled date for testimony and going on record and preparing peoplethe way you indicated. I would point out that the uncertainty alsoexists because of the question of whether the innovations that we sawin 1981, which tended to depress demand, will continue in 1982. Thereis uncertainty not simply on the up side but also on the down side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 826.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To exaggerate a bit, it may be that whatthe Federal Reserve Board does on sweep accounts for money marketfunds and what the DIDC does on a new short-term instrument may havemore to do with what M1 does this year than any decision we make.SPEAKER(.). Sure.SPEAKER(.). I would second that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are agreeing with each other.


Passage number 827.
MR. GRAMLEY. Unfortunately, if we are not careful, we willend up with targets so low that we really have no option as aregulatory body but to permit sweep accounts to save the economy. Iam not entirely joking. I just don't think that we can possibly haveanything like a well performing economy unless two things happen: Oneis that this bulge proves to be very temporary; and the second is thatwe have more innovations that are pushing down the money demandfunction. That is built into the staff forecast. And if both ofthose do not come along, we are going to be in tough shape.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the potential impact on the economy if certain conditions are not met. They are not arguing or disagreeing with anyone else's point of view.


Passage number 828.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There has been an element of that in ourtargets right along, because that kind of change has led to thispersisting increase in velocity. And we are assuming it is going tocontinue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply describes the presence of an element in their targets and assumes that it will continue.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 829.
MS. TEETERS. Have you thought through the implication ofthese interest rates for the savings and loans institutions. [Theirrepresentatives] were here the other day asking us if we weredeliberately putting them out of business. And I would say that, yes,we are deliberately putting them out of business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows contention or disagreement. Ms. Teeters implies that they are deliberately putting the savings and loans institutions out of business, while the representatives of those institutions disagree and argue against it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 830.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I want to reject that. I think theimplications for savings and loans are very important, but it is notall that clear--I will join Mr. Roos to some extent here--whether thesavings and loans would be better off by greater or lesser expansionin the money supply and what that means for interest rates over aperiod of time. That is a dilemma we are fighting all the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident when the speaker states, "No, I want to reject that" and proceeds to express uncertainty about whether greater or lesser expansion in the money supply would benefit savings and loans. This indicates a lack of agreement and a conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 831.
 Ifwe literally believe the savings and loans that it takes a bill rateof 8 or 9 percent to save them--I do not know about that but we will2/1-2/82have to redo these estimates--then the only way to save them is byputting the economy in a real--MR. PARTEE. Well, it is a question of how many we want tosave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a hypothetical scenario and there is no conflicting viewpoint being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 832.
 I think then--MS. TEETERS. Or how many we want to put out of business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a potential disagreement regarding how many businesses should be put out of business. The use of the phrase "Or how many" suggests a difference of opinion or varying perspectives on the matter.


Passage number 833.
MR. PARTEE. I think we may lose another few hundred as aresult of policy, but we would not lose them all. On the other hand,I cannot think of any way we could save them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is stating his opinion about the potential loss of a few hundred individuals due to a certain policy but also acknowledges that he cannot think of a way to prevent that loss.


Passage number 834.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [How to] save them, that is the problem.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 835.
 When the FDIC--MR. PARTEE. I would say they are one of the many casualtiesof monetary policy, but we did not intend it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that the FDIC is one of the casualties of monetary policy and that this was not intended. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 836.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I'm not sure I agree with that either. Istill contend that long-term interest rates are the key. And they arenot going to come down until the deficit comes down. I think GovernorGramley is making the assumption that we by monetary policy are goingto make these changes in what happens to the economy. I do not happento believe that that is the case because if we give up, then theinflation problem is just going to explode again and the economy willbe in terrible shape. We are in a box. I do not think we have theopportunity to move. We have to stay where we are and do our job. Wecannot control the economy; we cannot control what the Administrationdoes. You say, [Nancy], that you are supporting the President. Itseems to me that the President has to support his program, which he isnot doing right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz disagrees with Governor Gramley's assumption that monetary policy can make changes to the economy. He believes that long-term interest rates are the key and that the deficit needs to be reduced for interest rates to come down. He also disagrees with the idea of giving up and believes that controlling inflation is important for the economy, even if it means staying in a difficult situation. Additionally, he questions Nancy's support for the President and suggests that the President should support his own program.


Passage number 837.
MS. TEETERS. But he is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Ms. Teeters is presented without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 838.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I do not think the key to the thrifts islong rates; I think it is short rates. But in general I agree withwhat you have said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses his opinion on the key to the thrifts, stating that he believes it is short rates rather than long rates. However, he also agrees with the general point made by the other person.


Passage number 839.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make one other rather psychologicalobservation: Bill Ford raised it yesterday. If we are going to rebase--and I do not think we would do this--it would look nicer if werebased both M2 and M3. M2 does not make that much difference, but ithappens to go in a direction that a lot of people are uneasy aboutanyway. It is only what--a .4 difference. That is not terriblyimportant; it would not be important except for the concern ofovershooting there anyway. And since that concern exists, it isimportant. That would make it more logical in some sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing the idea of rebasing M2 and M3 and considering the potential impact it may have.


Passage number 840.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But then we would tighten the M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "But then we would tighten the M2" suggests a continuation or consequence of a previous idea or action, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 841.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, slightly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: While the passage does mention multiple viewpoints (a hallmark of disagreement or contention), it does not clearly indicate any strong opposing arguments or conflicting opinions. Instead, the passage presents a more neutral or mild presentation of different perspectives. Therefore, the contention or disagreement in the passage is slight.


Passage number 842.
MR. PARTEE. But we are talking about liberalizing the M2range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply discussing the topic of liberalizing the M2 range.


Passage number 843.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know; that is what I am saying. Peopleare concerned about whether it is too tight to start with, so it runs2/1-2/82against that grain. And that is why we presumably would not do iteven though it looks better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining people's concerns about a certain situation.


Passage number 844.
MS. TEETERS. We could rebase the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement or suggestion made by Ms. Teeters.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 845.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we would rebase at the top of therange; that is what to do. But even rebasing at the top of the rangecosts .4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But even rebasing at the top of the rangecosts .4 percent" suggests that there is a potential disagreement or contrasting viewpoint regarding the cost of rebasing at the top of the range.


Passage number 846.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without additional context or information.


Passage number 847.
 If we offset the tightening byraising the M2 range--MR. PARTEE. Because we were above the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement suggests a potential solution to offset the tightening by raising the M2 range, without any opposing viewpoints or contradicting information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 848.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. --and we rebase M1, we are in realdanger of getting a major reaction by the market, the press, and thepublic that we are definitely easing monetary policy verysignificantly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

This passage suggests that there is potential for contention or disagreement. The statement implies a concern about the reaction from the market, the press, and the public regarding the decision to rebase M1. This indicates that there could be differing opinions or potential disagreement on whether easing monetary policy significantly is the right course of action.


Passage number 849.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will make one more comment and then getsome other comments. All this worry about our credibility is there,but at some point if we think we should change, we have to change. Wedo not build up credibility for the sake of building up morecredibility. We build up credibility to get the flexibility to dowhat we think is necessary. If I were convinced now--more convincedthan I am that this change is appropriate--I would say the heck withthat point. My trouble is that I am not convinced [the bulge] isgoing to stay. And if we rebase and then find [M1] falling on us, wewould have [allowed for] quite a lot of growth--too much in myjudgment--between now and the end of the year. We would have apossibility of growth of a little over 6-1/2 percent, which seems alittle too much to me, if M1 declines [and the bulge is washed out].And since I think there is a good chance it will decline, I would hateto present that now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and concerns about the potential change in question, but they are not directly arguing with or contradicting anyone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 850.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I am saying--I think you aremisunderstanding me--is that I think we could get away with rebasingM1. But to rebase M2 and then offset it by raising the target rangeanother 1/2 point I think is overkill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "But to rebase M2 and then offset it by raising the target range another 1/2 point I think is overkill" shows a differing opinion or disagreement with the idea of rebasing M2 and raising the target range.


Passage number 851.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I agree with you on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement indicates agreement.


Passage number 852.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We are better off, if we are forcedinto rebasing M1, not to rebase M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests that it is better to rebase M1 rather than M2 if forced to do so.


Passage number 853.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In order to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage, we would need the passage itself. Without the actual passage, it is not possible to gauge whether there is agreement or disagreement.


Passage number 854.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And there are some arguments on whyit does not have to be symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there are some arguments against something being symmetrical, without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 855.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not disagree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement clearly indicates that the speaker does not disagree with something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 856.
MR. SCHULTZ. I disagree with your comments on credibility.I think there is an enormous sense out there that we are still theonly game in town in the fight against inflation. If we do somethingto change that, we are going to do something very important. To methat credibility question is really critical. We are right back inthe situation we have been in before, particularly now that the2/1-2/82President will not do anything about the deficits. We are in thisuncomfortable, improper, nasty situation that we have to deal with,which is that the central bank of the United States has far moreresponsibility than it ought to have. But the fact of the matter isthat we have it because of the way the political system works. Andthis credibility question is just absolutely vital. We have not yetchanged those inflation expectations because everybody thinks that weare going to cave in to the political pressure that is going to be onus. They do not understand all these nuances about demand shifts andlinkages and all this other stuff; all they see is that the Fed is theonly inflation fighter we have in the country. If we give anindication that we are caving in and if we start making some changes,there are some really serious costs in terms of credibility, Paul. Ithink that credibility factor is more important than you just gave itcredit for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. SCHULTZ. I disagree with your comments on credibility" shows that the speaker disagrees with someone's comments on credibility.


Passage number 857.
MR. WALLICH. The central banks that have the mostcredibility, such as the Swiss National Bank and the Bundesbank, arepretty relaxed with respect to their targets. Sometimes one of themeven abandons its targets. And yet they do not lose credibilitybecause there is that basic belief that they will achieve betterstability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that central banks with credibility, such as the Swiss National Bank and the Bundesbank, are relaxed with their targets and may even abandon them at times, but they do not lose credibility because there is a belief that they will achieve stability.


Passage number 858.
MS. TEETERS. More people perceive that we have 15-1/2percent interest rates and 17 percent mortgage rates than whether weare [fostering growth of] the money supply at 1 percent or 2 percentor 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that more people are aware of the high interest rates and mortgage rates rather than the specific rate at which the money supply is growing.


Passage number 859.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The trouble is that everything we sayhere is true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing views or statements. It simply states that everything being said is true.


Passage number 860.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage does not provide any clues or statements about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 861.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even when we say different things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply states that different things are said, without indicating any conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions.


Passage number 862.
MR. MORRIS. Fred Schultz's comments suggest that we shouldnot make a change unless it is clear that if we don't, we are going tobe following a policy that we really do not believe in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is stating Fred Schultz's comments, which suggest caution and not making a change unless there is a clear belief in the alternative policy.


Passage number 863.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I believe that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. (Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting views or opinions. It simply states the author's belief without any opposing arguments or contradictory statements.)


Passage number 864.
MR. MORRIS. That would lead to not making a change untilmidyear. If we find that we have to, fine, we ought to change thetargets at midyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply suggesting that if there is a need to change the targets, it would be best to do so at midyear.


Passage number 865.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, it could be earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is simply stating that something could happen earlier without any conflicting viewpoints or contrasting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 866.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon how things go, but I couldwell see circumstances where we would want to do it before midyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It simply states that the timing of an action depends on how things go, and it expresses a possibility of doing it before midyear.


Passage number 867.
MR. MORRIS. Well, that could be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is making a statement or expressing a possibility but there is no indication of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 868.
MR. ROOS. You will be subjected, I am sure, to furtherquestioning about our procedures and whether we just assume that weare doing this in the most satisfactory way, technique wise. That iswhere we are going to get some flak, I think. I assume that nobodyaround this table really would welcome or advocate any major changes,such as targeting on total reserves or taking the step that we have-91-2/1-2/82heard over and over again, which is going to contemporaneous reserveaccounting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the possibility of further questioning about procedures and potential opposition to major changes.


Passage number 869.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the contemporaneous reserveaccounting issue is going to be on our desks very quickly. I willtell you my view of contemporaneous reserve accounting very simply. Ido not think it is going to make a lot of difference in and of itself.There is a certain logic in doing it. And if we were living onNeptune, I would do it because I think there is a certain logic justin terms of being consistent with our present techniques. My concernis that people will read into it more than it is worth and we wouldget more flak rather than less. But that is a psychological point andnot a technical point. They will say: "Now that you havecontemporaneous reserve accounting why isn't everything perfect." Andsince I do not think it is going to change things very much, we mayend up even more on the defensive. Now, that may not be persuasive asa reason for not doing it because just looked at as a purely technicalmatter it may well be desirable but marginal. So, my main concern indoing it is only that it will get over-interpreted. If we do that andcombine it with some other things, such as closing up the discountwindow, that would be an entirely different kettle of fish. I am justprepared to argue against that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 870.
MR. PARTEE. Well, at least change the conditions [for accessto the discount window]. We do not let them close it altogether.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention between the speaker and another person. It simply suggests a change in the conditions for access to the discount window.


Passage number 871.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To make it very much tighter. Yes,obviously, it is [an] extreme view to say close it altogether.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement acknowledges that it is an extreme view to say close it altogether but does not argue against it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 872.
MS. TEETERS. I would say to Larry Roos that having gone tothe reserve targeting and monetary aggregates targeting with a greatdeal of reluctance and skepticism, and having all the troubles andcriticism that we have had, I am getting more and more to the pointthat I do not think it is the right way to [conduct policy]. We oughtto be moving back toward interest rate targeting combined withaggregates targeting, knowing that we are not going to achieve eitherperfectly, but we would have a better monetary policy than we have hadand a better economy. We have bounced this economy all over the matfor three years with no growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, expresses her disagreement with the current policy of targeting monetary aggregates and instead suggests moving back toward interest rate targeting combined with aggregates targeting. She criticizes the current policy and believes that it is not effective in achieving economic growth.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 873.
MR. ROOS. Of course, Nancy, what disturbs me--and I say thiswith humility--is that I fear that what is being done may not producethe results we sought. Procedurally, I don't think we really aredoing what ought to be done to conduct monetary policy in the way thatthose who wanted to target on reserve targets had sought initially.What I think will happen in the real world--I am not going to bearound--is that this will not work. And everybody, broad-brush, willsay that the monetarist approach failed when I really do not thinkthat we have conducted a true monetaristic experiment here. But wecould argue that for forever and a day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their concern that the current approach to monetary policy may not achieve the desired results and may not be the proper way to conduct monetary policy. They also indicate that others may view the approach as a failure, but the speaker does not believe it was a true monetaristic experiment. This difference in opinion creates contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 874.
MS. TEETERS. I have a much more practical point. I do notlike what we have done to the economy in the past three years. I donot like 9 percent unemployment rates and I do not like interest ratesin the 17 to 20 percent range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker clearly expresses their dissatisfaction with the state of the economy and presents a different viewpoint from those who may argue that the economy is doing well.


Passage number 875.
MR. ROOS. But, Nancy, I think a lot of people could say theydid not like what happened when we were concentrating on controlling2/1-2/82interest rates. That record is a very poor one and probably led tothese high rates. Anyway, I do not mean to be cantankerous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While Mr. Roos expresses a negative opinion about the decision to focus on controlling interest rates, he states that he does not intend to be cantankerous, indicating a lack of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 876.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we are not going to resolve thatproblem this morning.Let me just put this question on the table and dispose of itone way or another: Do we want to try to delay the testimony anddelay the decision. Do people think that is going to help them enoughso that it is worth whatever public question that arouses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting a question for discussion and consideration.


Passage number 877.
MR. BOYKIN. I vote no.SEVERAL. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Boykin and several other individuals are in agreement, as they all vote "no."


Passage number 878.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Let us dispose of that optionthen. We are left with making a decision today, essentially. What Iwould put on the table is what I said earlier--we can skip to thefine-tuning--that the basic decision would be to keep the targets thesame as we already said, or very close to that, with a statement thatwe are prepared to relook at this, particularly M1. in the relativelynear-term future, meaning probably a couple of months, in the light ofthe concerns I expressed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a decision that needs to be made and suggests keeping the targets the same or very close to what has been previously stated, with the possibility of reevaluating in the near future. There is no indication of disagreement or contention among the speakers.


Passage number 879.
MR. CORRIGAN. With it being clear that if something were tochange, we would be making the base adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is straightforward and does not involve any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 880.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We do not actually have to commitourselves to that, but I would throw that out as the logicalpossibility without committing us to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a logical possibility without committing to it.


Passage number 881.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You would do it in an even-handed wayin the sense that you would mention the possibility of a shift indemand due to the innovations and to technology.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing a way of approaching a situation in an objective and fair manner by considering the possibility of shifts in demand due to innovations and technology.


Passage number 882.
 If so,--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would not do it in an even-handedway in that I do not visualize any possibility that I would say wewould come back in two months and lower the [ranges].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion on a decision, without directly opposing or disputing any other view.


Passage number 883.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: there is contention or disagreement in the passage based on the given information because the statement does not provide any information about the passage itself.


Passage number 884.
 But youwould mention that there is this--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would distinguish between twothings. In describing the range, I would say that the lower part ofthe range is basically designed to take care of the innovations thatmight appear and that we would not be at all unhappy, as we now seethings, to be in the upper part of the M1 range and, indeed, we wouldexpect to be toward the upper part of the M2 range. Okay, thatfinishes that discussion. Then I would go on to say that if this[bulge] in M1 is more permanent than we think, we would come back toCongress with a new M1 range--presumably rebased, but not committingourselves to that--in the space of a couple of months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their perspective on the M1 range and proposing a possible adjustment to it if necessary.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 885.
 If it becameclear on the basis of the evidence that accumulated over this period,that the November-December-January spurt was more indicative of theunderlying demand relationship than the August, September, and Octoberlow levels--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would vote yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that the November-December-January spurt is a more accurate reflection of the underlying demand relationship compared to the low levels in August, September, and October. This suggests a disagreement in the interpretation or significance of the data.


Passage number 886.
-93-2/1-2/82MR. BOYKIN. I would be in agreement with that, providedthat--. Well, you said something about the ranges as specified orclose to it. Do you mean as specified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Boykin is expressing agreement with a statement and seeking clarification on a certain aspect.


Passage number 887.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am leaving that question until weget to the precise part. I presume we are going to have a [detaileddiscussion] on exactly what those numbers will be, so I am justtalking generally about something the same as or very like what wehave. That is the next thing I will take up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their intention to discuss a specific topic in more detail in the future, indicating a planned agreement or understanding between the parties involved.


Passage number 888.
MR. BALLES. I would be concerned, Mr. Chairman, about theboomerang effects of creating that [specter] of further possiblechange and all the uncertainty that may [foster]. The Fed watcherswill be going right up the wall and looking at us every minute insteadof every hour. If, when we first talk about those ranges, we say theymay be subject to near-term change, somehow that does not strike me asa very stabilizing influence in terms of expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply presents Mr. Balles expressing his concern about the potential negative effects of creating uncertainty and changing expectations.


Passage number 889.
MR. PARTEE. I do not think we are saying that the rangewould be subject to change, John. What we would do is rebase therange. In a way we would consider January a part of last year to adegree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining MR. PARTEE's perspective on the matter.


Passage number 890.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 891.
 That is a--MR. WALLICH. We have rebased every year through base driftonly we do it nondeliberately rather than in this way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about the method of rebasing, with no contrasting views or contradictory statements.


Passage number 892.
MR. MORRIS. Using the Federal Reserve calendar rather thanthe standard calendar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a preference for using the Federal Reserve calendar.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 893.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, whatever we say other than thatthese are the ranges and come hell or high water we are going to bewithin them, we are going to raise some questions in some people'sminds. There is no question that people will be talking about it, fortwo weeks anyway, if we say anything but that. But the problem is:Do we want to say that. We also may get ourselves in so deep that wecan never change the darn things and we may be doing thingssubstantively that we do not want to do. So, we have to balance thatoff. The fact is that there are going to be a lot of people out therewho would heave a sigh of relief if we said that, because a lot ofpeople think policy is too tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage presents a debate or disagreement about whether or not to adhere to certain ranges and the potential consequences of doing so. There is a discussion about raising questions and the possibility of facing difficulty in changing the ranges. This suggests a contention or disagreement within the passage.


Passage number 894.
MR. GRAMLEY. May I question what it is we are assuming aboutthe behavior of M1 from here on out which would give rise to a changein the targets. Do we, for example, decide that if what we have votedon this morning for our short-run targets materializes, which wouldget us essentially zero growth between now and March, that we canbreathe a big sigh of relief and live within our targets. Making somevery rough calculations, that seems to me to imply at most a 3 percentannual rate of growth from March on out to get within the upper limitof the range. So, are we going to say then that we made it and now wecan supply 3 percent money growth and that will be enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is questioning and seeking clarification about the assumptions and implications of the behavior of M1 and the targets. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflict present in the statement.


Passage number 895.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that depends on what has happened.You cannot just give me the figure on money growth. What is happeningin the markets. What is happening in the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the conclusion or answer depends on additional information related to what is happening in the markets and the economy, rather than just considering the figures on money growth.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 896.
-94-2/1-2/82MR. GRAMLEY. Well, let's say the economy begins to showsigns of a modest recovery along the lines that the staff hasforecast. But the staff forecast was built on the assumption thatthere was going to be a big drop in M1 during the course of the firstquarter. Given the policy targets that we set this morning, we aresaying that is not happening; we are saying it is going to stay level.So, from March on we are going to be applying a tighter monetarypolicy than was built into the forecast, which means that if we wantto stay within the range, we will be opting for a weaker economy. Dowe want less than 1.3 percent real growth from the fourth quarter tothe fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that implementing a tighter monetary policy than originally forecasted would lead to a weaker economy, which may differ from the desired goal of achieving at least 1.3% real growth.


Passage number 897.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I cannot answer your question precisely.But if you say zero growth from now on and that is accompanied byinterest rates as high as we have them now and a weak economy, yes, Iwould question whether we might not want to ease up on the range. Iwould begin getting pushed on that. I already have the question, andI would have more questions then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 898.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would opt to wait a couple of weeks, if Ithought I could get anyone else to go along with me, on loosening thereins. But I doubt very much--no matter what happens over the nexttwo weeks--that this Committee is going to be willing to loosen up theranges. Maybe they are, but I suspect that your suggestion has appealbecause I do not think this Committee realizes yet how harsh amonetary policy it is imposing on the economy with the kind of targetswe are looking at now, given what I think is going to happen to money.Maybe we will be lucky and money growth will turn negative and we willhave a lot of room from then on. But I doubt it. So, I think we arelooking at a situation, if we are not awfully careful and if we do notstay really flexible, where we are going to be opting for a stillworse economy than what the staff is forecasting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, expresses doubt that the committee will be willing to loosen the reins and suggests that they do not realize how harsh their monetary policy is on the economy. This indicates a potential difference of opinion or viewpoint within the committee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 899.
MR. AXILROD. Governor Gramley, if I might say, believable ornot, the staff forecast is based on the scenario you described--thatis, virtually no growth in money over the next couple of months andthen three quarters of growth averaging 1.3 or 1.4 percent quarterly.And as you have pointed out, that requires, if you believe the models,a resumption of the downward drift in so-called money demands afterthis quarter at a rate almost as rapid, but not quite, as we had allof last year. So, if that does not develop, then we would get muchhigher interest rates, at least in the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is questioning the believability of the staff forecast and the scenario described by Governor Gramley. He implies that if the scenario does not unfold as predicted, there could be higher interest rates in the short run.


Passage number 900.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is certainly true in your assumptionof velocity. But let me put it the other way around. If I understandthose staff forecasts as best judgments, if in fact we sat here nowand said we were content with being in the upper part of that M1range, we would have a better business outlook than you have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply offering a different perspective or alternative viewpoint to the assumption about velocity.


Passage number 901.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 902.
 That is right, on that assumption of a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With all the other assumptions you aremaking. And that is reflected in these alternatives that you give.It is scenario 2 instead of scenario 1. We would get a 1 percent orwhatever it is higher nominal GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 903.
MR. AXILROD. That is right, but with some further downwardshifts in [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unclear.


Passage number 904.
-95-2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know. That assumption may gowrong, but just holding that assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing personal knowledge and acknowledging the possibility of the assumption being incorrect in the future.


Passage number 905.
MR. CORRIGAN. But if we have Governor Gramley's situationnow and we did end up rebasing, say, in March or something like that,the combination of rebasing and being in the upper part of that M1range produces a couple of percentage points at least in terms of themoney growth that is implied just by looking at the midpoint for theperiod from March through December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the potential effects of rebasing and being in the upper part of the M1 range on money growth.


Passage number 906.
MR. BLACK. Well, we must not forget that that forecastimplies a certain assumption about inflation. If we are lucky enoughto do better on that, we can do still more on the real side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the possible implications of a forecast and the potential for further improvement.


Passage number 907.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you were going to say if we areunlucky enough to do worse, we would have a bigger problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a belief or supposition about a potential outcome, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas being presented.


Passage number 908.
MR. BLACK. Well, I agree with that too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Black expresses his agreement with a previous statement or idea.


Passage number 909.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Both statements are true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 910.
MR. BLACK. Expectations of which way that will go depend onwhat we decide to do, presumably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is only stating that the outcome depends on their decision.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 911.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At the risk of being mischievous, mayI point out that this process or line of presentation--namely, gettinga decision sequentially on this particular issue--[may prejudice thedecision]. You are asking for a decision on that and saying that youare going to inform the [Congressional] committee and prepare theground that under these conditions we might be willing to make anadjustment and that it would be logical to do it in the form ofrebasing. If you get an affirmative decision from this Committee nowon that and then go on to ask if we should fine-tune on the targetranges, then the answer I think becomes clearly no. We will looksilly, it seems to me, if we make minor adjustments in M1 or M2 even,and then on top of that say we are prepared to take another look atthis and do some rebasing. So, if you do not want to prejudice thedecision on the last point, it seems to me that you really have to askfor a decision on both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing disagreement with the process or line of presentation being proposed and suggesting that it may prejudice the decision. They argue that if a decision is made on one issue, it would make asking for a decision on another issue unnecessary and would make them look silly.


Passage number 912.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will get to it in good time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that the matter will be addressed at an appropriate and suitable time, without indicating any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 913.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I see. I am just pointing out whereit logically leads.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the speaker is pointing out where something logically leads, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 914.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we are only talking about rebasing M1, Ibelieve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 915.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think so, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: This answer assumes that there is disagreement or contention in the passage but does not provide any further explanation or context to support this claim. More information is needed to determine if there is indeed disagreement or contention.


Passage number 916.
MR. GRAMLEY. I wonder how we lose credibility the fastest:By saying, in effect, that we are going to go back to the base we hadfor the fourth quarter of 1980 and use the same target range that wehad for 1981 and now a lower target range for M1 for 1982, explainingin the footnotes what the numbers are; or by going out in March orApril or thereabouts and saying we give up, money is running too fastand we cannot hold it within those targets, so we are going to raisethem and retroactively change the base. My feeling is that we are2/1-2/82less likely to upset the public and give rise to those concerns FredSchultz was talking about, if we tell them right now that money growthvery recently has been rapid but the fourth quarter was very, very lowand, therefore, we are taking a longer-range point of view and stillreducing the growth of M1 but basing it from the fourth quarter of1980. I think we could sell that point of view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 917.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think we could sell it. Theproblem is that it may be the wrong decision. We would have committedourselves, then, to the decision. I have no problem with that if this[bulge] is going to be semi-permanent. But suppose it does wash outin February and March. Then I think we have too high a target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and concerns about a potential decision. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 918.
MR. GRAMLEY. With 2-1/2 percent as the lower end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides a statement from Mr. Gramley without any other contradicting or opposing views.


Passage number 919.
MS. TEETERS. With 9 percent unemployed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the unemployment rate.


Passage number 920.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. People would be looking at the upper ends.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 921.
MR. GRAMLEY. Taking the 1.2 percent or so that we areraising it by the implied base shift, then we are talking about 3.7percent growth in M1 after this shift. And that is not likely to giverise to a new wave of inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact and presenting it as unlikely to lead to a new wave of inflation.


Passage number 922.
MR. ROOS. Whatever adjustment is made in March or April,especially if you have a meeting with the President, anything that canbe construed as being more expansionary at that time of the year willbe interpreted immediately as the Fed caving in to political pressurein view of the November elections. They are going to be watching us.The question I hear is: Are you fellows going to be able to stand theheat from the politicians during an election year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 923.
 And I think wehave to be awfully careful that we do not fall into that trap and dosomething that may be better but that will be interpreted, in effect,as our climbing into bed with this Administration or any other--MR. SCHULTZ. I think we have that problem right now, Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses a concern about a potential situation, and the other person agrees by saying "I think we have that problem right now."


Passage number 924.
MR. ROOS. Even now I think we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions.


Passage number 925.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I think Larry is right: It will be worsein the spring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. Both Mr. Partee and Larry think that things will be worse in the spring.


Passage number 926.
MR. ROOS. It will be worse in the spring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is made by a person, Mr. Roos, and no one else is mentioned in the passage. Therefore, there is no potential for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 927.
MR. GRAMLEY. It will be worse if, in fact, the quotationfrom Mr. Meese that Bill Ford mentioned is correct--that the Presidentis going to pull you over for a little conference. We have not heardthat officially yet. We would be better off as a Committee to makeour decisions before that occurs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is discussing a hypothetical scenario and suggesting that the committee should make decisions before that scenario occurs.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 928.
MR. BALLES. Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The word "absolutely" indicates a strong agreement or assertion, suggesting that there is disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 929.
MS. TEETERS. Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a direct response giving an exact answer without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 930.
MR. BLACK. Did Meese say he or the President.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that Mr. Black asked a question about what Meese said, without indicating any disagreement or contradiction between the parties involved.


Passage number 931.
MR. GRAMLEY. I did not see it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that the speaker (Mr. Gramley) did not see something.


Passage number 932.
2/1-2/82MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It appears to be a reference or identification of someone without any indication of conflicting opinions or conflicting statements.


Passage number 933.
 It was just a passing remark in which he said hefelt that the President was going to get together with [the FederalReserve Chairman]--MR. GUFFEY. --for the purpose of coordinating monetary andfiscal policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply describes a passing remark made by someone about the President and the Federal Reserve Chairman potentially coordinating monetary and fiscal policy.


Passage number 934.
MR. RICE. It really was not an announcement; it was just apassing remark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It describes a statement made by Mr. Rice without indicating any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 935.
MR. BLACK. I thought it was Meese who was going to do thetalking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement about someone's expectation or assumption regarding who will be doing the talking.


Passage number 936.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It probably is going to happen anyway.Senator Baker has been saying it is going to be done all along. So,there is going to be a natural response to that. I would not readanything more into that than when people like Senator Baker are allover the paper saying it should be done. I see him sometimes anywayand there is going to be a certain amount of hullabaloo about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Senator Baker has been saying something will be done and that there will be a natural response to that, including some hullabaloo. There is no conflicting or opposing view presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 937.
MR. SCHULTZ. We have real costs in terms of credibility ifwe change the targets. We ought to change them only if we have good,strong reasons. And I disagree with Larry Roos; I think if we havegood strong reasons to change them, we are better off changing them inMarch or April than right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The contention or disagreement in the passage is indicated by the statement "And I disagree with Larry Roos; I think if we have good strong reasons to change them, we are better off changing them in March or April than right now." This shows that Mr. Schultz disagrees with Larry Roos about when it would be appropriate to change the targets.


Passage number 938.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the problems that Larry mentioned are,of course, there. It just depends upon the setting. If we came outof the clear blue sky and said we are going to change them, that isone thing. If people saw the economy in bad shape, interest rates at18 percent and so on, we have a different setting. It is awfully hardto predict these things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing different scenarios and acknowledging the difficulty in predicting them.


Passage number 939.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions "MS. TEETERS" without any context or details about the situation.


Passage number 940.
 What are the consequences of being--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ordinarily I would agree with you that itis better now. But then, better now in which way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges a previous agreement but raises a question to seek further clarification or specify the context.


Passage number 941.
MS. TEETERS. The political consequences of being the solecause of a continuing 9 percent rate of unemployment can be greaterthan anybody is talking about around this table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is stating a potential consequence without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 942.
MR. SCHULTZ. But I do not believe that at all. I just donot believe that the monetary policy that we have carried out has beenthe sole cause or even the primary cause. I think this country was infor some real economic problems. Inflation was just shooting up likecrazy. And I do not think that we can be held responsible for all ofthis. It is clear that if we are going to change inflation, we haveto go through a painful period. There was never an easy way out ofthis. I refuse to accept the view that monetary policy has to takecredit and I do not think it is correct to say that if we changemonetary policy, everything is going to get better all of a sudden. Ijust do not believe that that is going to be the case.SPEAKER(.). Hear, hear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses their personal belief and opinions about the causes and solutions for inflation, but there is no direct disagreement or contention with any other point of view.


Passage number 943.
MR. WALLICH. It seems to be a pretty widespread view that itis the budget that is responsible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is a widespread view that the budget is responsible for something.


Passage number 944.
2/1-2/82MS. TEETERS. Not this year. Our problem is 1983; it is notthis year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The statement simply states that the problem lies in the year 1983, not in the present year.


Passage number 945.
MR. WALLICH. I think the market looks ahead; and interestrates went up for no particular reason other than the budget.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is expressing their opinion about the market looking ahead and offering a possible explanation for the rise in interest rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 946.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me come back and see whether wecan resolve this. We have a proposal on how to present this on thetable. There obviously are pros and cons. There are problems withit, as expressed by Larry Roos and others; they are clearly there.There are also, obviously, some advantages. If we contemplate thatapproach, to some degree it is going to affect how people look at theprecise decision, which I want to get to next. Do we proceed on thebasis of making that decision against that kind of background or not.What is the consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The mention of pros and cons, problems expressed by Larry Roos and others, and the statement about how the approach will affect people's perception of the decision suggests that there are differing opinions and viewpoints on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 947.
MR. PARTEE. What are the options.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only includes a question and does not contain any statements or opinions that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 948.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [The issue is] whether we open thepossibility of coming back at midyear or before and in effect confessthat we have some question in our mind about whether the range is tootight on M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention, it simply presents a statement about the issue being discussed.


Passage number 949.
MR. PARTEE. Or whether we rebase now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 950.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, whether we rebase or not, we justexclude that point and we do not express any doubt about our target.That is the only question on that. Then we get into an argument aboutwhether to rebase now or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage as it mentions "we get into an argument about whether to rebase now or not." This indicates a disagreement between two or more parties about the decision to rebase.


Passage number 951.
MR. ROOS. Paul, would it be possible, without tipping ourhand, to say that we might come back if it were tight. Can't youbuild a case that there are a lot of imponderables and that it may benecessary to change the targets without saying in which direction--just signalling that we are always flexible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for the possibility of being flexible and not revealing their plans or preferences.


Passage number 952.
MR. PARTEE. Our record shows that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that "our record shows" something, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 953.
MR. SCHULTZ. We are always flexible; we just haven't flexedyet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz simply states that they are always flexible, implying that they can adapt to different situations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 954.
MR. WALLICH. We do expose ourselves to [heavy] pressure ifwe say we are flexible. And one has to take that into account. Ireally prefer the flexibility, provided we can resist [the pressure].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses a preference for flexibility but acknowledges the potential pressure that comes with it. This suggests a disagreement or potential conflict between the benefits of flexibility and the risks of pressure.


Passage number 955.
MR. BALLES. Our problems remind me of a definition Irecently heard of diplomacy: It is usually the choice between theundesirable and the unacceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's opinion and comparing the problems to a definition of diplomacy.


Passage number 956.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is, I think, precisely where we are.I am just asking for people's judgment on this. One is going to beaffected by the next question, so all we can do is ask for apreliminary view on whether that generally makes sense and whether forthe moment that is the way we want to approach the other decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply asking for people's judgment and seeking agreement on a certain approach.


Passage number 957.
MR. GRAMLEY. I am not sure what the other decision is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley simply expresses uncertainty about another decision.


Passage number 958.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where the target should be precisely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any specific target or reference any specific disagreement about where the target should be precisely.


Passage number 959.
-99-2/1-2/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There are two alternatives: One isrebasing; the other is just to stick with the targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is stating two alternatives without expressing any disagreement between them.


Passage number 960.
MS. TEETERS. Or change them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 961.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or we can change them. We have threealternatives; that is right. Can we pass on to that decision,operating on the presumption for the moment that there will be in thestatement something to the effect that upon further examination ofthis recent bulge and depending upon developments, we would be willingto consider the possibility that the M1 target might be too low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is discussing different alternatives and considering the possibility of changing them.


Passage number 962.
MR. CORRIGAN. And it would be rebased.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Corrigan, there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 963.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably. I am not committing ourselvesto that, but I would refer to the base question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states their presumption and indicates that they are not fully committed to it, but would like to refer to the base question.


Passage number 964.
MR. WALLICH. The target is not too low; the base is toohigh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is stating his opinion that the base is too high, which implies that the target is not too low.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 965.
MR. PARTEE. You want to be pretty specific about it, becausethe way you just stated it, it sounds as if we have flinched.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "it sounds as if we have flinched" implies that one party believes the other party has shown signs of hesitating or backing down. This suggests a disagreement or contention between the parties involved.


Passage number 966.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Well, I just did not want toprejudge the Committee. I am willing to state it as the target, withthe base the [fundamental] question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their hesitancy to pre-judge the Committee and is willing to state something as the target, with the base being a fundamental question.


Passage number 967.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, that is the analytic argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement presented and acknowledges it as an analytic argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 968.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I prefer to rebase now, but I do notthink I have much [support]; not too many people are with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they prefer to rebase now, but acknowledge that they lack support as not many people agree with them.


Passage number 969.
MS. TEETERS. I would prefer to rebase now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 970.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am sure some have that preference,but I take it that it is not the prevailing preference. So, let's goto the targets. We have 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent [for M1], 6 to 9percent [for M2], and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent [for M3]. I must sayregarding that 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent: What is your projection fornext year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating different percentages and asking for a projection for the next year.


Passage number 971.
MR. AXILROD. For M3. For M3 we would have growth of around9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement presented in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, simply states a predicted growth rate of around 9 percent for M3.


Passage number 972.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And there we probably have the clearesttechnical reason for saying something; there's just more [financing]running through the banking system. Why were bank credit and M3 sodivergent this past year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply stating a technical reason for something without presenting or debating alternative viewpoints.


Passage number 973.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we have in M3 many things that are not inbank credit, such as the money market funds and Eurodollars heldoverseas. I think that is a good part of the reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply stating that M3 includes items that are not in bank credit, such as money market funds and Eurodollars held overseas.


Passage number 974.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had a big differential between M3 andM2, and one would think that that would reflect the banking component.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the differential between M3 and M2 without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 975.
100-2/1-2/82MR. AXILROD. That would be the large CDs, the long-term RPs,and Eurodollars other than overnight--those maturing in more than oneday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 976.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I know what it is statistically.Why are large CDs, Eurodollars maturing more than overnight and soforth going up so much more rapidly than bank credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity and seeking an explanation for the rapid increase in the values of large CDs, Eurodollars maturing more than overnight, and other financial instruments compared to bank credit. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 977.
MR. AXILROD. I stand corrected on the Eurodollars, which arein L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement correcting a previous mistake.


Passage number 978.
MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, there are a number of factorsinvolved here. Arithmetically and I think analytically, one is theway the banks financed their asset growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a statement from Mr. Prell about the factors involved in how banks finance their asset growth.


Passage number 979.
 It was much more throughthe issuance of large time deposits and much less through Eurodollarborrowings and the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is what I assumed was theanswer, as a matter of fact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 980.
MR. PRELL. That is one factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage contains a statement by Mr. Prell, stating a fact or piece of information. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this statement.


Passage number 981.
 Another factor--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Eurodollar borrowings are not in M3,right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a fact about Eurodollar borrowings not being included in M3. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 982.
MR. PRELL. That is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Prell is confirming that what was stated is correct.


Passage number 983.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they went down, in effect, or roseslowly. That is the answer, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states a fact or opinion without any opposing views or conflicting information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 984.
MR. PRELL. The money market funds are another factorcontributing to the divergence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions that money market funds are contributing to the divergence, suggesting that there is disagreement or contention on this topic.


Passage number 985.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What are your latest data on L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for information about someone's latest data on something.


Passage number 986.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have already said this but just to getother responses, assuming what I took as the consensus: The argumentseems to me pretty strong not to horse around with the figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states their own opinion while acknowledging that others might have a different consensus.


Passage number 987.
MR. PARTEE. That is one view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only presents one view without any opposing perspectives or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 988.
 There is a minority--MR. BALLES. Well, some of us had a different view yesterday.I have not changed my mind, but obviously those of us who felt thatway appear to be in a minority.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "Well, some of us had a different view yesterday. I have not changed my mind, but obviously those of us who felt that way appear to be in a minority" suggests that there is a difference of opinion among the group, with the speaker acknowledging that they are in the minority.


Passage number 989.
MR. PARTEE. I don't know; there were quite a number on M2, Ithink. I did not distinguish between voting members and otherpresidents.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a lack of knowledge about the specific number of voting members and other presidents on M2.


Passage number 990.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there was a majority for notchanging it, but there was quite a difference. A number of people didsuggest changing it; that is true. At least five of the whole groupand some [voting members] did not address themselves to it directly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there was a majority in favor of not changing something, but there were also a few people who suggested changing it.


Passage number 991.
MR. SCHULTZ. Why don't you have a show of hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a straightforward question that does not involve any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 992.
-101-2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's just take the whole proposition thatwe say we do not change any of the targets. Who would have apreference for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing a proposition and questioning who would have a preference for maintaining the targets without any changes.


Passage number 993.
MR. PARTEE. That we are not going to change anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "That we are not going to change anything" is a declaration of a position, rather than a point of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 994.
MR. ROOS. Voting members or everybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the term "voting members" or "everybody" without any context or indication of conflicting opinions.


Passage number 995.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's take voting members first.Six. This is all against the background of admitting that we mightchange later. I do not know how the nonvoting members feel about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the number of voting members and expressing uncertainty about the feelings of the nonvoting members.


Passage number 996.
That adds a little weight here when we--MR. ROOS. If we went with the present M1 target, would youconsider saying that we would seek something at the upper [end of the]range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement reflecting a consideration or suggestion without any conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 997.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I prefer not to say it in terms ofseeking that, which just implies a degree of fine-tuning that I thinkis beyond this. I have no trouble saying that the upper end isperfectly acceptable and that it may well come out that way, as we seethings at the moment. It is just a subtle distinction from saying weactually will aim at the upper end. But I have no problem at allsaying that as we now see things the upper part of that range would beperfectly acceptable. I think the open question may be what argumentspeople want to make for changes and we'll see whether that can commandany more people than we now have. What would be the nature of [anyproposed] change in the ranges for M1 or M2 or M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply discussing their preference and expressing their opinion on the upper end of a range. They mention that there might be open questions and potential arguments for changes, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 998.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I have stated my argument before. I donot like the outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a personal opinion without contradicting or opposing any other viewpoint.


Passage number 999.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want them all higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement "You want them all higher" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a desire for all the mentioned entities or variables to be higher.


Passage number 1000.
MS. TEETERS. I want to change the ranges and I want to givemore opportunity for growth and some opportunity to reduce theunemployment rate, some opportunity to reduce the interest rates, andsome help to the savings and loan and the housing industries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is expressing her desire to make changes that will benefit various aspects of the economy, such as reducing unemployment, interest rates, and helping the savings and loan and housing industries. There is no explicit indication of disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 1001.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No matter what we say about the future,you want to increase everything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "No matter what we say about the future, you want to increase everything" suggests a unity of opinion or goal, rather than any conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 1002.
MS. TEETERS. Yes. I think monetary policy is much too tightfor the state of the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, expresses her personal opinion that monetary policy is too tight for the state of the economy.


Passage number 1003.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would like to argue the case for raising therange for M2. Given the fact that we are postponing any decision onrebasing, changing the range for M1 would make no sense at all. Wewould lose any credibility that we might otherwise hold by stickingwith this postponement. But for M2 the most persuasive case seems tobe the fact that in the past two years growth has been running overthe upper end of the target range. I grant that there may be somearguments to the effect that that problem will be a little less in thefuture. But, as Governor Partee pointed out, we do not know whatthese IRA accounts are going to do to the magnitude of M2; and moreimportantly we do not know what will happen to M2 growth if in fact weget a one point or thereabouts increase in the saving rate. Thatcould add [to M2] considerably. And I would much prefer a target-102-2/1-2/82range that had some realistic hope of being realized within thecontext of a growth in nominal GNP in the 8 to 9 percent range.Therefore, I think a persuasive case could be made for raising the M2range to 7 to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their argument in favor of raising the range for M2 and acknowledges that there may be some counterarguments but does not engage with them.


Passage number 1004.
MR. BOEHNE. I second Governor Gramley's comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 1005.
MR. BALLES. I third it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with a previous statement.


Passage number 1006.
MR. PARTEE. I fourth it. I think we could [present] this,Paul, as being consistent with the President's program. The Presidentis after more savings and more investment, and we have major changesin tax policy that are designed to bring that about. Therefore, weanticipate that we might have a somewhat higher M2 because that is theform in which it would show up. In addition, we have been high on M2anyway because it is so closely related to the nominal [GNP] increaseand expenditures in the economy and, therefore, we are raising it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the idea of presenting the topic as consistent with the President's program and explains the reason for anticipating a higher M2.


Passage number 1007.
MR. MORRIS. Wouldn't it make more sense to take the IRAaccounts out of M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Morris without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 1008.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that is going to be very hard to do I'mafraid. They are in a bunch of different deposit forms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a concern about the difficulty of accomplishing a task due to the various deposit forms involved.


Passage number 1009.
 They are notjust in--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to get statistics on it,though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. Instead, it states that statistics will be collected to support the claim or assertion being made ("They are not just in"). This suggests an intention to provide evidence or data to back up the statement, rather than engaging in an argument or expressing disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1010.
MR. PARTEE. I anticipate real difficulty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "I anticipate real difficulty" suggests that the speaker expects there to be challenges or disagreement in the future.


Passage number 1011.
MR. MORRIS. But they are not liquid assets. Are you sayingwe cannot identify them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply seeking clarification or confirmation about whether or not it is possible to identify the mentioned assets.


Passage number 1012.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1013.
 A lot of them are in small saver certificatesand--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We cannot identify them, as I understandit, without collecting more statistics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that in order to identify a certain group of people, more statistics need to be collected.


Passage number 1014.
MR. AXILROD. We will be collecting data to the end ofgetting the aggregate instead of just the various subcomponents thatwe now have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that data will be collected in order to obtain aggregate information instead of subcomponents.


Passage number 1015.
MR. MORRIS. But an IRA is not a liquid asset unless one is59-1/2 years old or older.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1016.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a good logical argument fortaking them out. But, of course, then we have the opposite problem.I think one could say flatly that in taking them out there would bemore distortion in the trend--but we could adjust for it--than inleaving them in. But it moves in the opposite direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The author presents a logical argument for taking "them" out (presumably referring to something mentioned earlier), but then acknowledges the opposite problem. They mention that taking "them" out would cause more distortion in the trend, but then say it moves in the opposite direction, suggesting a contradictory viewpoint.


Passage number 1017.
MS. TEETERS. I received a solicitation this weekend fromSears to establish an IRA account.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker received a solicitation from Sears to establish an IRA account.


Passage number 1018.
MR. PARTEE. That probably would not be in M2. If you wereprepared to say that we would take account of growth in IRAs and Keoghaccounts and any change in the saving rate that occurred in response-103-2/1-2/82to the President's program, then I guess I could live with 6 to 9percent, because I think that would be saying that we would acceptsomething higher than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is stating his opinion and indicating that he could accept a certain percentage if certain conditions were met.


Passage number 1019.
MS. TEETERS. How would you feed back the change in thesaving rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement given. It is a question asking for feedback on how to measure the change in the saving rate.


Passage number 1020.
MR. PARTEE. Just take account of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 1021.
 All we do is concludethat it would be higher if we say--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think Chuck's suggestion opens upan interesting area of compromise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing agreement with Chuck's suggestion and acknowledging its potential for reaching a compromise.


Passage number 1022.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, from my standpoint, I am inclined to givemore explicit weight to M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their perspective or inclination towards giving more weight to M2.


Passage number 1023.
 I do not regard that as a--MR. PARTEE. It is very fuzzy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I do not regard that as a" is a personal opinion or statement. The interruption by "MR. PARTEE" and the subsequent statement "It is very fuzzy" does not directly contradict or create disagreement with the initial statement. It seems to be a separate observation or comment.


Passage number 1024.
MR. GRAMLEY. It is very fuzzy and it says, in effect, thatwe really do not give a damn what M2 does; we are really concentratingon M1. It says: If M2 goes up above the upper end, so what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of one person expressing their opinion about a certain topic. There is no mention or indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1025.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is an implicit tradeoff in yourproposal, as nearly as I can understand it. You want a little highernumber but you would make it more rigid, in effect, than it has been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a potential tradeoff in the proposal being discussed.


Passage number 1026.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes. I would like to pay more attention to M2.I think it is important for us not just to do that internally but tocommunicate that because I believe the volatility of M1 is giving riseto a great deal of misunderstanding--and indeed misunderstanding onour part as to the effects on interest rates and the economy of ourdecisions, which I think is unfortunate. We have to be more tranquilabout these short-run movements in M1. And if we do not develop thatattitude ourselves, we are going to be building increasing problemsfor the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing his own opinion and suggesting that the Federal Reserve should pay more attention to M2 and be less concerned about short-term movements in M1.


Passage number 1027.
MR. CORRIGAN. I don't know; frankly, I am very troubled atthe prospect of opening up this rebasing issue and changing the M2target. I think Governor Schultz is right on the mark on thisquestion. The issue, as Governor Teeters suggests, is gettingunemployment down and all the rest, but not for a quarter or two. Theissue in some sense is trying to be supportive of a sound approach tofiscal policy. But we are sitting here looking at a fiscal situationthat is just untenable. And one of the concerns I have--and maybe itis tilting at our windmills a little--is that if the perception isthat we really are easing, any prospect of being able to do better onthe fiscal side is weakened as well because that creates theimpression that we are going to sit here and monetize all that debt.I am under no illusion that we are going to have a magic wand comeover fiscal policy in the next six months; but if we are perceived aseasing, I think fiscal policy will go in the direction of further easerather than the other way around. So, I must say I would be troubledat the prospect of doing both of these things, because for the longterm it does not produce the result of lower unemployment andhealthier thrifts and all the rest. I think it works the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is expressing his concern and agreement with Governor Schultz's position on the rebasing issue and changing the M2 target. He also acknowledges the need to address the fiscal situation and expresses concern that if the perception is that the Federal Reserve is easing, it will be more difficult to improve fiscal policy. Overall, Mr. Corrigan's statements reflect his own concerns and opinions, without any clear disagreement with others.


Passage number 1028.
MR. BOEHNE. I wonder if there is a common ground here withwhat Chuck Partee has proposed. It seems to me that the allowances he1042/1-2/82has spelled out do give us some flexibility on the up side. I thinkthere is some merit in that in terms of bridging the gap here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and suggesting that there may be common ground with Chuck Partee's proposal.


Passage number 1029.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with that. Maybe thatis the practical alternative on the table. Let me leave M3 and bankcredit aside for the moment. Let's not get into those; whatever we dowith them is literally almost insignificant. I think what I haveheard, obviously with the exception of Nancy Teeters, is that if wehave this note of reservation, nobody wants to argue about fiddlingaround with the M1 range. Do I hear that correctly. I will proceedon that assumption.Quite clearly, there are people who want to raise the M2range. Let me give you two alternatives that I see now. One,consistent with this idea that we open up the possibility of rebasingand review, is that we stick to the targets we now have with thecomment that Governor Partee made about M2. What concerns a lot ofpeople about fooling around with any of these is whether we are goingto rebase. The alternative is to go ahead and change M2 and not makethe comments about rebasing. Would anybody prefer that. Let me putit this way: We stick basically with the M1 range; we raise the M2range by 1 percentage point; and we do not say anything about thepossibility of rebasing. Does that seem preferable to anybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting two alternatives and seeking input or preference from others.


Passage number 1030.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as there is no specific passage mentioned in the question.


Passage number 1031.
 That is a lesser of the two--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I saw three people saying yes; I did notsee any others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of three people saying yes and not seeing any others suggests that there is a consensus or agreement among those present.


Passage number 1032.
MR. GUFFEY. I would join those three to make it four.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, is expressing agreement with the idea of joining three individuals together, adding himself to make it four.


Passage number 1033.
MR. RICE. I would too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 1034.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "okay" is used as a casual acknowledgement or affirmation, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1035.
MR. MORRIS. Not saying anything about rebasing, I think,would be the sensible thing. That raises the imagery of manipulation.It might cause some people to remember that we have not rebased in thepast and this selective rebasing charge could be [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1036.
 Itseems to me if we are going to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not going to do anything about ittoday. We never do anything about it because we never consider ituntil we get there. But what we do now seems to me rather silly,frankly. We do it all the time because we get trapped into it; I justregurgitate every time we have to put all this emphasis on whathappened in a particular three months of the year. We get locked intothat. We say: Well, that is what we did before, so we have to do itagain. But that is where we are. There is some sentiment, though Ido not detect a consensus, to go that way, which is a possibility.That leaves me with the degree of consensus we have on the other[alternative], which is basically leaving these ranges and making aspecific comment about M2 and the savings connection and that we thinkit is quite likely M2 will be near the top of that range. We say thatis perfectly acceptable and, in any event, M2 could be over [therange] if the savings and the IRA and Keogh accounts turned out to besignificant. Thus, we are putting you on due warning. That is whatwe say on M2. On M1, based upon what we know now, we think this range-1052/1-2/82is appropriate. We do not exclude the possibility that, if thisrecent development seemed to be of a more permanent character, whichbears upon the basic demand for money, we would come back to you atmidyear or before and change that. That carries some connotation, butI think it is consistent with the decision that we just made that weare not going to fight tooth and nail to reverse January. We alreadydecided that, so I think it is perfectly consistent with what we havealready decided. What is the degree of consensus as to how acceptablethat is. I want to put it in terms of acceptability at this point.It seems we have the voting members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It discusses different options and possibilities, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict between the members.


Passage number 1037.
 I guess what I hear is that itsounds pretty acceptable,MR. GRAMLEY. We are doing it with words not deeds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker seems to agree with what they hear and considers it acceptable.


Passage number 1038.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, I do not detect any othercourse that is more acceptable at this point. In the absence of anycomments that [some alternative would be] more acceptable, let me justdescribe it again so there is no doubt in people's minds. This iswhat would appear in the record: We reviewed these targets;considerable concern was expressed about the recent developments in M1which suggest that some relationships could be developing that we didnot anticipate. We think it is too early to make that judgment. Wewant to reaffirm the continuity of policy, but if we get furtherevidence that the presumption upon which we established this target iswrong, particularly considering the fact that we ended up below thetarget last year, we would be prepared to reconsider this matter. Butwe think it is more likely that we will have some relaxation here,which would make the present target appropriate. On M2, we say wethink it is likely and desirable that growth be toward the upper endof the range; it is possible that a higher saving rate combined withthe impact of IRA and Keogh accounts would introduce an element herethat has not been there in recent years, which would change thisrelationship somewhat. If that were a discernable influence on M2, wewould be satisfied with being somewhat above the upper end of thattarget. I think that is about as clearly as I can state it. And wejust leave the M3 range [unchanged]. Does it make any difference toanybody where M3 and bank credit are. What do you have for bankcredit [growth].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply describing their thoughts and intentions regarding certain targets and their willingness to reconsider them if necessary.


Passage number 1039.
MR. AXILROD. 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement of a percentage, without any additional information or context to suggest contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1040.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is your projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The phrase "That is your projection" implies a disagreement or contradiction as one person is stating that something is a projection made by another person. This suggests that there is a difference in beliefs or perspectives between the two individuals.


Passage number 1041.
MR. AXILROD. That is our projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a projection made by Mr. Axilrod without any conflicting views or opposing opinions presented.


Passage number 1042.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And what is the range you are suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for information or clarification.


Passage number 1043.
MR. AXILROD. I think the Committee might as well stay withthe range it has of 6 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod suggesting that the Committee should stick to the range of 6 to 9 percent.


Passage number 1044.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1045.
 A very small wrinkle: If people wanted toraise the range for M3 on the very simple argument that we expect morefinancing to be done through the banking system and that affects M3--MR. PARTEE. Then we almost have to raise the range for bankcredit, don't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both the speaker and the participant seem to agree on the idea that if more financing is being done through the banking system, it would affect M3 and bank credit.


Passage number 1046.
-1062/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might raise the bank credit rangeslightly, too, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement suggests raising bank credit ranges slightly, indicating a possible decision or action without any conflicting opinions or opposing views being mentioned.


Passage number 1047.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But suppose we get a switch fromlarge CDs to Eurodollar financing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 1048.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, nobody pays any attention to thosetargets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 1049.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot provide an answer without the passage. Could you please provide the necessary information?


Passage number 1050.
 We have yet to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess it is not important to meone way or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a lack of importance or personal interest in the matter being discussed.


Passage number 1051.
MR. CORRIGAN. Suppose interest rates come down and we getsome bond financing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 1052.
MR. FORD. Why not drop [those two targets].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1053.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not think it hurts anything to have[them]. So, forget about M3 and bank credit; we just take what fallsout. Leaving the ranges unchanged is the preliminary suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1054.
MR. AXILROD. We will make the proper adjustment for the bankcredit base because of the IBFs. We either have to go from December-January or the fourth quarter, properly adjusted, because of the IBFshifts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about making adjustments for the bankcredit base.


Passage number 1055.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe it would be a good idea justto change the base on that to get in the idea of changing a base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting changing the base as a way to introduce or illustrate the concept of changing a base, without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 1056.
Here we have such a clear technological change that hardly anybodycould question it,MR. AXILROD. It would still be 8 percent [growth] from theDecember-January base. That is how our estimates fell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing a statement about a technological change and presenting an estimate. There is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 1057.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It would still be the same target,but we would rebase [bank credit].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests that the target remains the same but a different approach or strategy would be used (rebasing bank credit).


Passage number 1058.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, because of the introduction of IBFs.Okay. If there are no other questions, we can vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that if there are no other questions, they can proceed to vote.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1059.
MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters NoGovernor Wallich YesEleven for, one against, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Governor Teeters is the only one who voted against, while the rest voted in favor.


Passage number 1060.
107-2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you very much. You wanted to saysomething, Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The given passage appears to be a combination of numbers and potentially a reference to Governor Schultz. It does not provide any clear content or statements that indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1061.
MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, everybody has heard enough from mealready, and I guess you are going to hear a little more. But just tomake you feel better, I would remind you that this will be the lastday that you will have to do this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing that they have already spoken a lot and apologizes for speaking more, but assures the listener that it will be the last time.


Passage number 1062.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might have an emergency shortly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is simply stating that there might be an emergency soon.


Passage number 1063.
MR. SCHULTZ. I wanted to sing a little swan song today. Youunderstand that swans do not sing very prettily but they generallysing a long time, so you will have to indulge me. Just remember thatI am very shortly going to turn into an ugly duckling.There are a couple of points that I wanted to make before Ileave. You people are going to be under a lot of political pressurethis year and a lot of outside pressure, and I have a little politicaladvice for you. You understand that you have to be careful aboutpolitical advice from a losing politician, and I fall within thatcategory, but that is not always true. It is my belief that over timewhat is right is the best politics. I believe that if you do what isright and you are steadfast and consistent in your policies, thepolitical pressures will ease and you will not be in great danger fromthem.You are also going to have considerable internal pressures.I know I felt enormous internal pressures about whether what we weredoing was right and whether what we were doing was the best way to goabout it. Clearly, there are costs to this technique that we areusing; we have all kinds of problems. But when the question is askedof me: If you were going to do anything differently than you havedone over the past 2-1/2 years what would you do. I say that I didnot like the credit controls and that I think we might have reacted alittle better to the increase in 1980, but I honestly believe that thetechnique we are using now is considerably better than what we weredoing. It is like Winston Churchill's comment about democracy beingthe worst form of government ever devised except for all the others.I think the operative question is not whether this technique we areusing now is better than some other technique in an ideal world butwhether it is better in view of what we have had to face. It justseems clear to me that it has enabled us in a time of great volatilityto adjust interest rates more quickly and to adjust them far enough tohave some market impact. I am with Tony Solomon on this. I do notknow what these linkages are; they are getting looser and the demandshifts are coming more and more often; I don't know what the heck ismoney; all of these kinds of things are very difficult. But the realquestion is: What alternative do we have at this point in time. Andit seems to me that what we are doing is the alternative that is bestat this point.I read the other day that somebody criticized us for playingto history. I would certainly hope that we do indeed have a sense ofhistory. It strikes me that with the political system we have in thiscountry and an election every two years, it is impossible to take along-range view in the political sphere. We are the only organizationthat seems to have the opportunity and the ability to take a long-range view. Again, I think the pressures are going to be enormous-108-2/1-2/82because, whatever you do. the economy is not just going to get bettervery quickly. And the question that is going to be asked of you is:How much pain are you willing to inflict on the economy. I do nothappen to think that it is [the Federal Reserve] that has beeninflicting the pain on the economy, but that is the question that youare going to get asked. And the answer is: What is the alternative.If you stop now in this fight against inflation, if you do not carryit through, what kind of pain are you going to inflict on the economythen. It is an issue that just has to be faced and I believe it is alot easier to face it now and overcome the problem now than it will belater on.Finally, I would urge you to remember that you have aremarkable degree of support out there. Nobody is going to love acentral bank; and heaven knows, nobody loves high interest rates. Butthe fact is that the Federal Reserve has built up an awful lot ofrespect out there. People in this country want to believe insomething and you are about all there is to believe in at this time.I think there are a lot of people ready to come to your defense; youhave been seeing some comments recently in the news magazines and thenewspapers in response to the current criticism. A lot of people outthere want to support you. I think you really do need to try to keepin contact with those people and marshal that support when it becomesnecessary, because the fact of the matter is that you are still theonly game in town. And good luck to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a speaker expressing their beliefs and offering advice.


Passage number 1064.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Fred, without prejudging anycomments anybody may want to make later, I think your contribution onthis Committee has been immensely important to all of us and I thinkwe can acknowledge that around this little circle now before we go tolunch where, prejudging it, we can do you a little honor. Weappreciate very much those comments on what has been a variety ofexperiences in your life and your full devotion to this one in thepast 2-1/2 years. We ought to adjourn to lunch but I am reminded thatI have forgotten two things that we ought to do in the nature ofcleaning up.I mentioned Mr. Reuss' proposal to you yesterday and Iunderstood from the reactions that you did all consider that in yourminds and did not choose that as a desirable course. I just want tobe able to report that to him.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It mainly discusses appreciation and acknowledgement of Fred's contribution before moving on to other matters.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1065.
 Can I take that as a--MS. TEETERS. Not me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement implied in the passage through the phrase "Not me." The speaker's response suggests that they disagree with or challenge the previous statement or assumption.


Passage number 1066.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your position is clear and I can reportthat his proposal was considered and that one person rendered ratherstrong support to his point of view, but it did not command thesupport of the group. I think that is a fair representation of what Ihave heard.The other thing to clean up relates to the short-termdecision. I assumed that what we were talking about was the secondversion of the directive. Mr. Altmann has a slight revision, which Ihave not seen. It says: "...for the January-to-March period nogrowth in M1 and growth in M2 at an annual rate of around 8 percent."That is a slightly different way of saying it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing a clear and objective report of the situation, stating that one person showed strong support for a proposal but it did not have the overall support of the group. They also mention a slight revision to a directive without expressing any disagreement or conflict about it.


Passage number 1067.
MR. PARTEE. Why don't we say "no further growth".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. PARTEE is suggesting a course of action, and there is no indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 1068.
2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "No further growth;" good. Maybe we canjust stick in a phrase "Considering the size of the recent growth, nofurther growth...." Maybe this is better: "Taking account of therecent surge...." And then the next sentence is about as he has it:Some decline in M1 "would be associated with more rapid attainment ofthe longer-run range and would be acceptable in the context ofdeclining market interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is suggesting different alternative phrases and expressing their opinions, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1069.
"MR. PARTEE. Would it be acceptable without declininginterest rates. It would be acceptable period, wouldn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It would be acceptable period, wouldn't it?" suggests that there may be disagreement or differing opinions about the acceptability of a certain scenario.


Passage number 1070.
MR. GRAMLEY. If this happened to be a movement along thefunction instead of a downward shift in the function, we would getreal trouble.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is discussing a hypothetical scenario and its possible consequences.


Passage number 1071.
 If, for example, the economy started to collapse--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, one could catch a nuance here whichmight not be in the sentence; but if it declined in the context ofrising rates, we would presumably ease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1072.
MR. PARTEE. It struck me as being an inconsistency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply expressing their observation or perception of an inconsistency, without indicating any disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 1073.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not know whether there is a technicalword or not. I guess it is not a full description of what we mean.It certainly would be acceptable in the context of rising rates,except then we presumably would move to ease. I do not know whetherthere is a better way to say that. This is basically a phrase we haveused before, isn't it, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1074.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the last time it was used was in December1980. We said "In the light of the rapid growth of money and creditaggregates in recent months, some shortfall [from what had beenspecified] would be acceptable in the near term if that developed inthe context of reduced pressures in the money market." That is whatthe directive said in December 1980.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1075.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we say "in the context ofreduced pressure in the money market" instead of "declining interestrates." I think that is a little more polite way of saying it. Okay,then we are agreed and we can go to lunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply suggests using a different phrase and the others agree with this suggestion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1076.
MS. TEETERS. Wait a minute, we have the date of the nextmeeting. That is eight weeks away. Do we want to wait that long. Itis a long time.SEVERAL. It is a long time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Ms. Teeters expresses disagreement or concern about waiting eight weeks for the next meeting, while several others confirm and agree with her statement by saying "It is a long time."


Passage number 1077.
MR. PARTEE. I think we probably do, but [we can] haveconferences [by telephone].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1078.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I would just leave it. Itis a long time, but if we want to have a meeting in between we canobviously do it on the telephone. I do not think we need to decidethis, but if we felt like having a meeting in person four weeks fromnow, would that be welcomed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a suggestion or proposal for a meeting.


Passage number 1079.
MS. TEETERS. It is a matter of clearing our calendars orkeeping them open.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the matter at hand involves clearing or keeping calendars open, without any conflicting opinions or opposing views expressed.


Passage number 1080.
-1102/1-2/82MR. SCHULTZ. It makes no difference to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that it does not matter to Mr. Schultz.


Passage number 1081.
MR. MORRIS. I think eight weeks is a long time in thecontext that we are in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris simply expresses his opinion that eight weeks is a long time in the context they are discussing.


Passage number 1082.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what we can do is just pick out adate. Maybe I will send you two dates or something and ask you tomake sure your calendar is clear. We will not call a meeting, but ifwe want to call a meeting, you would have kept a clear calendar.SPEAKER(.). Four weeks would be around March 1st.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting picking a date for a possible meeting and mentioning that four weeks from now would be around March 1st.


Passage number 1083.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, presumably it would be approximatelyfour weeks from now. I will look for some dates about four weeks fromnow if that is desirable, but I do not know what my calendar is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a timeframe and their intention to find suitable dates.


Passage number 1084.
MR. SCHULTZ. I will be in Hawaii.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is a straightforward declaration of the speaker's location.


Passage number 1085.
MR. GRAMLEY. You can come back. There is a place for you.We will give you another lunch if you come back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is inviting someone to come back and offering them another lunch.


Passage number 1086.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't you look around March 1st. Iwill not call a meeting now, but I will not be allergic to calling oneif it seems at all desirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any evident contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses the possibility of scheduling a meeting.


Passage number 1087.
MR. BOEHNE. Would you think in terms of a one-day meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question being asked.


Passage number 1088.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" simply states the name of a person without providing any context or further information that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1089.
 Yes, I do not know about my own calendar,but I do not see any reason why--MR. ROOS. A meeting on March 1st or coming in then for ameeting on March 2nd.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not know about their own calendar and expresses their view that there may not be a reason for a meeting on March 1st or 2nd.


Passage number 1090.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As close to March 1st as I can make it. Imay say March 1st if it looks all right from my standpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about selecting a date as close to March 1st as possible, with a subsequent willingness to possibly use March 1st if it meets certain criteria.


Passage number 1091.
MR. BALLES. That happens to be a Monday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not mention any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact that it happens to be a Monday.


Passage number 1092.
MR. PARTEE. March 2nd then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states a date without any conflicting information or opposing views.


Passage number 1093.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. March 2nd, I think. When is the nextmeeting.SPEAKER(.). March 30th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks a question about the date of the next meeting.


Passage number 1094.
MR. AXILROD. If that were an updating meeting, Mr. Chairman,I assume you would not need the full panoply of staff presentations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical situation.


