Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on August 9, 2011  A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 9, 2011, at 8:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Elizabeth Duke Charles L. Evans Richard W. Fisher Narayana Kocherlakota Charles I. Plosser Sarah Bloom Raskin Daniel K. Tarullo Janet L. Yellen Christine Cumming, Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, Sandra Pianalto, and John C. Williams, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee  James Bullard, Thomas M. Hoenig, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively  William B. English, Secretary and Economist Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Richard M. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel  Thomas A. Connors, David Reifschneider, Daniel G. Sullivan, David W. Wilcox, and Kei-Mu Yi, Associate Economists  Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account  Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors  Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors  Robert deV. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors  Andreas Lehnert, Deputy Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors  Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors  Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael P. Leahy, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Lawrence Slifman and William Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  Andrew T. Levin, Senior Adviser, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors; Stephen A. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Joyce K. Zickler, Visiting Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  David E. Lebow, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  Joshua Gallin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Beth Anne Wilson, Assistant Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors  Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors  John C. Driscoll, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Carol Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  David Sapenaro, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis  Mark S. Sniderman, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland  David Altig, Alan D. Barkema, and Geoffrey Tootell, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively  Chris Burke, Fred Furlong, Tom Klitgaard, Evan F. Koenig, and Daniel L. Thornton, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, San Francisco, New York, Dallas, and St. Louis, respectively  Keith Sill, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia  Robert L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 2.
 Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of RichmondTranscript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on August 9, 2011   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  This is a joint FOMC–Board meeting.  So I need a motion to close the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement about the structure of the meeting.


Passage number 3.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Ms. Yellen has made a motion or proposal.


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Before we get down to business, we have a few people to whom we have to say farewell—first, Carol Low.  Carol, an FOMC specialist in the Secretariat, is retiring.  She’s worked at the Board for only 41 years, begun at age six.  [Laughter]  She has attended 222 FOMC meetings, which turns out to be the same number that Don Kohn attended.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states information about a retiring employee and their years of service.


Passage number 5.
  So that gives you a measure— MR. WILCOX.  One Don Kohn unit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply provides information about a measure called "One Don Kohn unit."


Passage number 6.
 [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  One Don Kohn unit.  That’s right.  So that’s quite a record.  Carol, you’ve been here for many, many years, and we thank you for your service.  [Applause] It was announced yesterday that Nathan Sheets will be leaving the Board to take a position in the private sector, and hence he recused himself from the last meeting and obviously has had nothing to do with this meeting as well.  I’m sorry he’s not here to accept our congratulations, but as you know, Nathan did a wonderful job piloting the Division of International Finance through some very choppy international waters over the past few years, and we’re going to miss him and his insights and understanding of the international situation very much.  Steve Kamin will be acting director as we try to regroup in International Finance, and we appreciate Steve taking on that responsibility.  For the record, let me acknowledge our thanks to Nathan Sheets for his many contributions. And finally, this is the last meeting for our colleague Tom Hoenig.  Tom began attending FOMC meetings in 1991 and has attended a total of 161 meetings, which exceeds the sum of any two other members around the table.  The only problem I’ve ever had with Tom is that I’m unable to get him to say what he really thinks.  [Laughter]  It’s a 20-year record of service through three recessions—I’m not implying any causality—and we have all benefited very much, Tom, from your perspective, your banker’s insights, and your wide range of experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 7.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you.  I will note to the Committee that I want to apologize.  I had no idea the markets were going to react this way to my leaving.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Hoenig expressing surprise and apologizing for the unexpected reaction of the markets.


Passage number 8.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we will have a chance to make jokes like that at a lunch in your honor after the next FOMC meeting, and I suspect that your retirement might get mentioned once or twice at Jackson Hole.  I’m just guessing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Laughter and joking are mentioned, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 9.
 MR. HOENIG.  I would imagine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Hoenig expressing his own thoughts or assumptions.


Passage number 10.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Tom, thank you.  You have our great appreciation and admiration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude and admiration towards Tom.


Passage number 11.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply thanks someone and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 12.
  [Applause] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Without further ado, let’s go to item 1 on our agenda and turn to Brian Sack for a report on financial developments.  Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply introduces Brian Sack as the person who will be giving a report on financial developments.


Passage number 13.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Brian.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 14.
 MR. FISHER.  I want to go back to panels 1 and 3 in your exhibits.  In your view, from the standpoint of our New York Fed surveys, is there a substantial concentration of people who expect us to either raise rates or shrink our balance sheet in the foreseeable future.  When we say “extended period,” it appears to me that these are confirming the fact that it’s really an extended period, not the next one or two months.  Is that correct or incorrect from the standpoint of what you hear on the street.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification or confirmation on a specific point.


Passage number 15.
 MR. SACK.  Well, certainly the path of the expected federal funds rate conveys that.  As you note, the dealer survey also asks about other steps in the direction of policy tightening.  In addition to what is shown in panel 3, there’s another side of that question, in which we ask about the probability of a number of exit steps.  Those probabilities are not that low, and they’re particularly high over the two-year horizon.  What you see is a relatively big difference between the probabilities in the one-year horizon and the probabilities over the two-year horizon.  So I think the Desk survey suggests that there are decent probabilities being assigned to exit options being adopted within two years, but more likely in the second year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the findings of a survey and explaining the probabilities assigned to different exit options within a certain time frame.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 16.
 MR. FISHER.  And do you sense that that has increased or decreased over the past few weeks.  Just in terms of your gut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a question and asks for the person's subjective opinion, indicating a potential difference in perspectives on the matter.


Passage number 17.
 MR. SACK.  I would say unchanged to slightly decreased, and perhaps decreased less so than I would have anticipated in the sense that the probabilities over two years are still quite high for many of these steps.  We initiated this question in a new form in this survey, and we intend to repeat it in this form.  So we’ll have a clear time series to see how it evolves going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the survey and expressing the intention to repeat the question in order to track its evolution over time.


Passage number 18.
 MR. FISHER.  And as to panel 6, where would you say we are in terms of historic valuation guidelines in terms of the S&P 500, even after this correction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or disagreement between parties.


Passage number 19.
 MR. SACK.  Extremely cheap.  In fact, I think the dividend yield on the S&P 500 is about equal to the yield on a 10-year Treasury at this point.  In our models, the valuations are very cheap, although it’s hard to incorporate these abrupt shifts in expectations about the economy into the models.  So that makes it hard to assess how much of it is pessimism about growth and how much of it is valuation.  I think the big picture here on equities is, obviously, that the move has been very abrupt.  Many of us were puzzled by how well equities had held up, given how the macro outlook had been shifting.  I think what we are seeing in part is just a catch-up to that more pessimistic outlook, but then one that has intensified as confidence has eroded.  We have ventured into a very negative dynamic in the equity market that’s given us this very abrupt repricing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their views on the current state of the equity market and the challenges of incorporating shifts in expectations into their models.


Passage number 20.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I’ll remark on that during my comments.  I just have one other question for Brian, if I may.  And that is, because there is a lot of the chatter in the market about substantial liquidity parked in excess reserves, I just want to understand the dynamics there.  Do we know what percentage or what amount of excess reserves is foreign banks versus domestic large banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 21.
 MR. SACK.  I believe what we’ve seen over the past month or two is the foreign bank holdings coming down and the domestic holdings going up.  I think this in part reflects some of the funding pressures that have been faced by the European institutions, and that rotation, I believe, has been around $200 billion.  And with that rotation, the level of reserves is about evenly split between domestic and foreign institutions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides information about the rotation of bank holdings, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 22.
 MR. FISHER.  So 50–50.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 23.
 MR. SACK.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any context or information that indicates contention or disagreement. It only states a simple response of "Yes" to an unknown statement or question.


Passage number 24.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is expressing gratitude rather than expressing disagreement or arguing against a point.


Passage number 25.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 26.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In terms of the stock market, I agree with Brian’s view, but there’s a different view as well, which is looking at the stock market irrespective of what bond yields are.  Just looking at 10-year trailing earnings, the P/E ratio is actually quite a bit above the long-term, historical average.  Someone like Shiller would say the stock market is actually very overvalued today.  I don’t think that’s the right way of looking at the stock market, but there is an alternative view of stock valuation that leads to a quite different conclusion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage exposes disagreement over the valuation of the stock market. The speaker agrees with Brian's view, but acknowledges that there is a different view which considers the market overvalued. Therefore, there is contention regarding the stock market's value.


Passage number 27.
 MR. FISHER.  Actually, Mr. Chairman, Bill makes a good point there.  This goes back to Ben Graham’s original analysis.  You know that Shiller did a substantial amount of work in terms of cyclical adjustment.  After yesterday’s correction, we’re at 19 times earnings, and I do want to remind the Committee that things can be worse.  The normal valuation is about 19 and a half.  We got down to 6.6 in August of ’82, 8.3 in ’74.  So— just to pump up the enthusiasm at this table—I think one of the arguments that might be made is that there is substantial downside left.  This is just one of many valuation models that we can look at.  I think Bill has a good point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with "Bill's" point and mentions other historical valuation models to support the idea that there is substantial downside left in the current situation.


Passage number 28.
 MR. SACK.  Can I add a comment.  In terms of your question about reserves, as I noted in the briefing, we are seeing funding pressures emerge.  We are seeing a lot more discussion about the potential need for liquidity facilities.  I mentioned in my briefing that the FX swap lines could be used, but we’ve seen discussions of TAF-type facilities in market write-ups.  So the liquidity pressures are pretty substantial.  And I think it’s worth pointing out that this is all happening with $1.6 trillion of reserves in the system.  I think that if we had started without that degree of excess liquidity in the system, what we’d be seeing in terms of these pressures would be much more severe.  But even with that, we’re getting to the point where the market feels that additional liquidity injections might be needed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing information and observations about funding pressures and potential liquidity facilities. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting opinions expressed.


Passage number 29.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Brian.  Thanks for your good work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker expresses gratitude to Brian for his good work, suggesting a positive and harmonious interaction.


Passage number 30.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based on the given information. The phrase "President Bullard" alone does not provide any context or specific details to indicate whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 31.
 MR. BULLARD:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just have a brief question on exhibit 1, panel 1, which is “Implied Federal Funds Rate Path.”  I just want to make sure I understand this.  If I’m reading this correctly, the market expects no action until June, certainly summer of 2013.  And the other part I want to ask about is, why is this light blue line going down to zero at one year, whereas it’s above that today.  That seems odd to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question and there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 32.
 MR. SACK.  Remember that the futures rate is going to reflect the mean of the future distribution of short rates.  So, the futures rate moving above 25 basis points in the middle of 2013, that appears to reflect a modal forecast that policy will be on hold and then some risk that that policy could be tightened.  Of course, the risks around the short rates are one-sided when you’re at the zero bound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply explaining that the futures rate reflects the mean of future short rates and speculating on the implications of the futures rate moving above 25 basis points. There is no conflicting information or argument presented.


Passage number 33.
 MR. BULLARD.  I thought in the past, when we’ve looked at these, we’ve looked at the modal prediction, not the mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Bullard presenting his perspective on how predictions have been approached in the past.


Passage number 34.
 MR. SACK.  I was just about to come to that.  The Board staff does look at a modal forecast derived from interest rate caps, and what it shows is that the modal forecast is actually farther out.  I believe it is unchanged through 2013.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating some information about a modal forecast.


Passage number 35.
 MR. ENGLISH.  It’s basically flat through 2013.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is stating a fact and there is no contradictory information provided.


Passage number 36.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Suppose you made a promise, then, to 2013.  Would it back up from what the modal expectation is.  The modal expectation is beyond that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a hypothetical scenario and discussing the modal expectation.


Passage number 37.
 MR. SACK.  If there were a statement that you were definitely going to tighten in the middle of 2013, then possibly.  If there were a statement that you weren’t going to tighten until then or later if appropriate, then I would think not.  In fact, that reassurance that you were willing to say, “There will be no tightening until 2013, and we’ll continue to evaluate”—I think that would probably, if anything, push down the expectations modestly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a conditional statement explaining the potential impact of a specific kind of statement on market expectations.


Passage number 38.
 MR. WILCOX.  Even with a modal rate hanging close to zero through the end of 2013, if you made a promise not to raise by then, you’d be chopping off the upper part of the tail of the distribution.  As Brian was saying, all of the risk is to the upside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or arguments that suggest contention or disagreement. It primarily presents a viewpoint regarding the potential risks and consequences of not raising the modal rate by a certain time.


Passage number 39.
 MR. ENGLISH.  So the mean would move down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. English simply states a consequence or outcome that would occur.


Passage number 40.
 MR. SACK.  As for why these rates are at zero, that point is where we splice from the fed funds to the Eurodollars.  We have to make a federal funds-Eurodollar basis assumption that’s probably a little bit too big.  So my guess is that the true implied rates are in the low single digits.  They’re not actually zero.  If they were at zero, there would be a pretty good arbitrage opportunity.  But I just interpret that as policy being on hold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and offering their interpretation of the situation. They are not presenting any conflicting opinions or contradicting other viewpoints.


Passage number 41.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you" is a polite expression of gratitude and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 42.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, without additional context it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement in the passage with just the mention of "President Hoenig."


Passage number 43.
 MR. HOENIG.  Brian, I don’t know if I’ll ask this question correctly, but it follows up on President Fisher’s to some extent.  In the conversations we have with the market participants—most markets, like anyone else, talk what they want, or it’s not so much about expectations, but the way they form their answers is to guide us to what they want.  What kinds of conversations do you have around that.  Are they looking for something specific right now—ease because we have to—or are they more up in the air themselves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a question about the types of conversations the speaker has with market participants and their expectations.


Passage number 44.
 MR. SACK.  We should keep in mind that dealers are not always long duration.  Their positions can be all over the place.  There’s no bias through which dealers should always want us to do more to lower the interest rate structure.  So I don’t think the conversations are distorted by their self-interest.  I think the conversations that we have reflect their views on what is appropriate for policy to do, given the macroeconomic outlook.  I think we’ve seen the perceived probabilities of all of these policy actions increase, and I would argue they’re probably much higher than reflected in panel 3 at this point because those dealers have become much more worried about the outlook.  They’ve seen the substantial tightening of financial conditions, and they think some kind of policy response is appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and observations based on conversations they have had with dealers. They do not mention any conflicting views or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 45.
 MR. HOENIG.  But that’s not in their self-interest.  Or are they able to look beyond that in terms of longer-term outcome.  They are dealers and they are working on their own book, and I worry because some of the conversations I’ve had suggest that their focus is very short term and that they are trying to influence where we come out by how they skew the information toward us.  That gives me some pause.  But you think they’re more objective than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, expresses concerns about the dealers' self-interest and short-term focus, while the other person believes they are more objective.


Passage number 46.
 MR. SACK.  I do because it’s not clear that they all have a self-interest in this direction.  Dealers are actually short duration in recent months and have been scrambling to cover, according to some data.  I will also point out that there are other surveys.  Our surveys are limited to the primary dealers right now, but there are broader surveys conducted by others, including Bloomberg.  I just read a story this morning that 51 percent of the respondents from the Bloomberg survey expect some policy action this year.  So I think what we see in the dealer survey is also reflected in surveys with a broader set of respondents who wouldn’t have direct interest in their dealings with the Desk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting different sources of data and highlighting that there are broader surveys conducted by other entities, such as Bloomberg. They are not expressing disagreement or contention with the information presented.


Passage number 47.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have a two-hander from the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 48.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  As someone who used to do this for a living, let me just say that the surveys are filled out predominantly by economists who sit on the trading desks.  They’re basically going to write down what they think is going to happen as opposed to what they want to see happen, because they want to basically get it right, and getting it right is what’s important to them in terms of their call to the markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is providing an opinion or observation about economists' behavior when filling out surveys.


Passage number 49.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 50.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions for Brian.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Any other questions for Brian" is a neutral prompt for additional inquiries, and the mention of President Kocherlakota does not add any conflicting information.


Passage number 51.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, I’ve been hearing this story, and you had mentioned it as well, about how the downgrade on Friday triggered the decline in equities on Monday.  But I’m struggling with putting that together with the fact that Treasury yields went down so much.  Is there a story that’s going around that tries to rationalize all of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging what they have heard and is trying to understand how different events are related.


Passage number 52.
 MR. SACK.  I would actually like to argue that the declines on Monday were not entirely driven by the downgrade.  I think they were a continuation of the decline in sentiment and the concerns about economic growth that we had already seen develop very intensely over the previous week.  The downgrade did seem to add to those concerns.  There could be several reasons for that.  For example, one is that it just further reduces the chances of having a flexible fiscal policy response to economic weakness.  And I do think that a lot of the pessimism about the outlook is partly related to this idea that there aren’t many policy tools to address the weakness in the economy.  My point would be that the downgrade just added to that, but I think the primary driver of all this is really the revision to the economic outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering their own perspective and analysis of the situation, but there is no direct disagreement with any other party or viewpoint.


Passage number 53.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA is simply thanking someone.


Passage number 54.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Seeing no other questions, we need to vote to ratify domestic open market operations.  Can I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for a motion to vote on ratifying domestic open market operations.


Passage number 55.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "So moved" implies agreement and support for a particular motion or statement.


Passage number 56.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Item 2, “Economic Situation.”  Let me turn to David Wilcox to begin the briefing.  David.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Without objection" indicates that there is agreement and consent among the individuals present. The speaker then proceeds to request an update on the "Economic Situation," and to assign the task to David Wilcox. This shows a clear and cooperative communication flow within the passage.


Passage number 57.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What do we think is the GDP effect of the Royal Wedding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is asking for an opinion or speculation about the GDP effect of the Royal Wedding, but it does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or claims.


Passage number 58.
  [Laughter] MR. LEAHY.  Well, I don’t have the exact numbers split out, but we did see GDP drop from about 2 percent to about ¾ percent between the first and second quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information about the drop in GDP without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 59.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Another failure of fiscal policy, no doubt.  [Laughter]  Any questions for our colleagues.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 60.
 MR. FISHER.  I have one question for Mike and one for David.  Mike, you talked about the widening of spreads.  You mentioned Italy and Spain.  You did not mention France.  This is something that I raised last time.  I believe the spreads have widened somewhat in France.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the spreads in France.


Passage number 61.
 MR. LEAHY.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "yes" is simply a response to a question, indicating agreement or acknowledgment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 62.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m hearing more noise about concern about the French fiscal situation, in addition to their bank exposure.  Could you take a minute to comment on France.  Is this something serious, or is it something that people are just piling onto as they look for other problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions that there is "noise" and "concern" about the French fiscal situation, which suggests disagreement or contention among people discussing this issue.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 63.
 MR. LEAHY.  Well, I think there may be a little of both there.  The spreads of French longer-term bond yields over German bund yields have gone up some.  There have also been rumors about downgrades for France circulating in the market.  I don’t really know how much truth there is to those rumors, but there are rumors.  We have seen some funding pressures for some French financial institutions— cutbacks on credit lines and such, and paying higher spreads in overnight funding markets.  The pressures are nowhere near the same degree that we’re seeing, say, for Italian or Spanish banks, but they’re creeping up and it’s something to watch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement and contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that there may be some truth to rumors about downgrades for France, but also expresses uncertainty about their validity. This indicates differing opinions or conflicting information. Additionally, the speaker acknowledges that there are funding pressures for French financial institutions, although they are not as severe as those experienced by Italian or Spanish banks. This suggests a disagreement or contention regarding the extent of the issues faced by France compared to other countries.


Passage number 64.
  MR. FISHER.  Very quickly, David, we seem to be lurching back and forth—all of us, by the way; not just Board staff, but Bank staff as well—in terms of our outlook for the economy.  And we’re constantly asking ourselves, what have we been missing, or what did we miss, and how useful are our various models, depending on their degree of sophistication, in terms of being of assistance to us in trying to get a sense of what’s developing in the economy.  I wonder if, at some point—we may not do it now, but it strikes me that one of the issues that I don’t think we understand very well—this is my working hypothesis—is how our models are affected by overall deleveraging.  Consumer sector deleveraging, for sure.  Certainly a releveraging has taken place in the business sector amongst corporate credits, and, right now, what I expect to be a significant deleveraging is happening in the fiscal sector—that is, with the federal, state, and local governments.  This is just really a request that we pursue this a little bit more.  I see by your nodding of your head, I think I may be correct.  But I do think it’s something that’s inhibiting our understanding—a better understanding of this would probably enhance our understanding of what’s going on with the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a request for further exploration and understanding of how their models are affected by overall deleveraging.


Passage number 65.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes, I think the only part of your statement that I would take exception to is the pejorative word “lurching.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly mentions that they only take exception to a specific word choice ("lurching") in the statement.


Passage number 66.
” MR. FISHER.  Well, I didn’t mean that in a pejorative sense.  I mean, we’re trying to come to grips, let’s put it that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Fisher is clarifying his statement to ensure that it is not interpreted negatively. He is trying to explain that they are making an effort to understand or deal with something. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 67.
 MR. WILCOX.  We’ve been marching determinedly in a negative direction.  John Stevens had a nice exhibit in yesterday’s Board briefing that showed just how much we’d taken the forecast down over the course of this year.  Also, I want to just emphasize that I think the gaps in our understanding of the interactions between the financial sector and the real sector are profound, and they have, over the past few years, deeply affected our ability to anticipate how the real economy would respond, and they are continuing to do so now.  This is an ignorance that we share with the entire rest of the profession, and I think one thing that is good to see is the enormous amount of work that’s going on at the Board, in the System, and in the profession at large in an attempt to develop a better understanding of the interactions between the real sector and the financial sector, operating in both directions.  But boy, I don’t know whether that literature is in its infancy, but I would not put it at any more beyond toddlerhood.  We’ve got just an enormous amount yet to learn and incorporate in that regard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing his opinion and observations about the lack of understanding in the interactions between the financial sector and the real sector. There is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 68.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, as I’ll mention at the end of the meeting, this is going to be part of a special topic for the FOMC coming up pretty soon.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement indicated in this passage. It is a statement made by one individual to another, mentioning a topic that will be discussed in the future.


Passage number 69.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question for Dave Wilcox.  In your discussion of unemployment, do you have an explanation for the decline in participation that we’ve been seeing.  What are the underlying forces causing that decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking an explanation from Dave Wilcox.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 70.
 MR. WILCOX.  It’s hard to know.  We’ve been surprised how weak it’s been.  We think it’s importantly driven by demographic or structural factors associated with the aging of the population, but it’s also pretty clear that there’s an important cyclical component.  And there’s a lot of disagreement, some disagreement among members of the staff here at the Board, lots of controversy in the economics profession.  Getting that decomposition right is very difficult.  But I’d like to ask Bill Wascher to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage states that there is a lot of disagreement and controversy among members of the staff and within the economics profession regarding the decomposition of factors related to the weak economy.


Passage number 71.
 MR. WASCHER.  Well, I guess I don’t have a lot to add to what you’ve just said.  We do think there’s a significant downward trend in the participation rate that’s been associated with the aging of the population, and that’s been going on for a while now, for the past decade or so.  We think there’s a cyclical component to the low participation rate that’s associated with the lack of job opportunities and some people dropping out.  That’s offset to some degree by the extended unemployment insurance benefits, which we think are keeping some people in the labor market who would have dropped out in the absence of those benefits.  But that cyclical component is pretty big now.  The unemployment rate is quite high; the labor market’s very weak.  And I think a number of people have dropped out because they’ve become discouraged about job prospects.  But as David noted, I think we’re a little surprised by how low the participation rate is, and we’re not quite sure why.  Much of the surprise is in the teenage categories, and that’s always been an age group that’s been difficult to understand.  [Laughter]  The participation rate is a few tenths lower than what we would have expected, given our models.  And we’re not quite sure whether that extra few tenths is just a bigger cyclical effect than we normally would see, given the labor market slack more generally, or whether there’s something special going on for teenagers or for some other particular age group that we don’t quite understand yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that there is a downward trend in the participation rate due to the aging population and the lack of job opportunities. They also mention that extended unemployment insurance benefits may be keeping some people in the labor market. The speaker expresses surprise at the low participation rate and mentions that the teenage category stands out as being lower than expected, but they do not argue or disagree about the reasons for this.


Passage number 72.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as only the name "President Plosser" is mentioned. Further context or information is needed to analyze any potential contention or disagreement.


Passage number 73.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Just to follow up with that a little bit.  In terms of the people who are dropping out of the labor force, you mentioned teenagers.  What about the 55- to 65-year-olds.  Are there people who have lost their jobs, with a large fraction of them just saying, “Well, I’m never going to get another job.  I’m going to go ahead and take retirement and move out”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is seeking clarification about the reasons behind people dropping out of the labor force, specifically focusing on the age group of 55-65-year-olds.


Passage number 74.
 MR. WASCHER.  For that group, the participation rate has actually edged up, I think, a little bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 75.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Oh, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.   The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement or question from Mr. Plosser.


Passage number 76.
 MR. WASCHER.  That effect could be going on, and some people might just get discouraged and take early retirement.  I’m sure that’s true for many people.  But there are others who have lost a lot of wealth, for example, in their 401(k) retirement plans, and they can’t afford to do it, so they’re staying in.  And more generally, in terms of the longer-term trends, older people are healthier and, I think, more generally likely to stay in the labor market longer.  That has only a small offset to the aging of the population because their participation rates are quite a bit lower than for the prime-age individuals.  But that does go the other way in a longer-term sense, in general.  And those factors are offsetting, I think, in the current environment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting different perspectives and factors related to the topic.


Passage number 77.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes a speaker expressing gratitude.


Passage number 78.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Mr. Chairman, a second question for Dave Wilcox.  I think I heard you mention that the rebound in auto manufacturing or assembly in this country in the second half that you anticipate is associated a lot with Japanese nameplates.  Was that the comment.  And do you mean by that foreign nameplates.  Does that include Koreans and others.  Or is it really specific to Toyota and Honda.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and asking for more specific information.


Passage number 79.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think, and Larry can correct me, that it’s specifically Japanese nameplates.  We’ve seen days’ supply, for example, for Japanese models just plummet to extraordinarily low levels.  This is one of the relatively few aspects of our projection that’s actually stayed on track.  Toyota’s quite confident about its ramping up its production.  Honda’s been running a little behind, but on net, its ability to ship autos to the United States has come in about in line with expectations.  We don’t have final assembly data yet for July; we’ll get that in the next couple of days.  At this point, we’re expecting a 10 percent increase, not at an annual rate, in motor vehicles IP, so that’s going to provide an extra five-tenths to top-line IP growth in July.  It’s a big piece of our output projection for the very near term.  And we think that consumer spending in the second quarter was held back simply by lack of availability on dealer lots.  And one might have thought that they’d go next door and shop for a Chrysler or something else, but they seem not to have done that.  Those other domestic nameplates had very soft sales in the second quarter as well, so we’re still thinking that that story is in place for the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information and observations about the Japanese nameplates and their impact on motor vehicle production and consumer spending.


Passage number 80.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses gratitude towards Mr. Lockhart for something.


Passage number 81.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Bullard without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 82.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is a question for Mike Leahy about the international work.  Your description suggested that expansion of the European Financial Stabilization Facility was a key issue.  Stories that I’ve heard out of Europe are that that was not expanded on the grounds that it might incite panic.  Perhaps that was unwise, but can the fund be expanded.  If it is, would that solve the problem or not.  And what should we expect as a Committee going forward on that issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely asking a question and seeking clarification on a specific issue.


Passage number 83.
 MR. LEAHY.  I think the markets clearly were looking for, and many others were also looking for, some greater political commitment to resolving the debt crisis that seems to be spreading around the euro area.  That took the form, for the most part, of the EFSF.  Right now, it isn’t even fully funded at this point, but it’s slated to have €440 billion.  And the July 21 plan expanded the range and scope of operations that it could do to try to provide more assistance to countries, but they did not expand the size of the fund.  And €440 billion is just not enough if we run into problems in Spain and Italy, who seem to be the next in line. Ultimately, the European situation is just really difficult—the debt burden is too high, there’s going to have to be some losses taken, and they have to decide how they’re going to allocate those.  Is it going to be done in a disorderly default, and they recover from that, or is it going to be socialized, in a sense, through government support.  And the Europeans have said that they’re going to do what it takes to hold things together and provide the funds, but it’s not obvious that the political rhetoric is being supported yet by the political decisionmaking.  So there is a way out, perhaps, but it’s difficult in one respect because the governments have too much debt.  They need to cut back.  It’s the same situation for the United States, I suspect.  Cutting back in the near term is going to slow economic growth and puts them in an even worse situation.  And it’s very difficult for them to commit to cutting back in the longer run, so it’s just very tricky.  And we’re in one of these multiple equilibrium situations, where if the markets can believe them, the rates might come down and they’ll get through, but if they don’t, it could be a little messier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing an analysis of the European debt crisis and discussing the difficulties and challenges involved in resolving it. There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented in the passage.


Passage number 84.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply shows someone expressing gratitude. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 85.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no mention of disagreement or contention in the passage. It only mentions President Hoenig without providing any context or information about a potential disagreement.


Passage number 86.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you.  Dave, I think I understand, but the equipment and software revisions that you did were pretty drastic, and given the balance sheets of some of the industry, this has to be, then, driven by confidence.  But my other question is, where are they redirecting this to.  Just Treasuries, or are they going overseas with it.  Because the BRIC countries still have demand growing—would they be investing there.  To see this kind of a drop-off, you wonder what their thinking is and where they’re going with this.  Do you have any sense of that in any discussions you’ve had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of questions asked by Mr. Hoenig to Dave, seeking clarification and information on the topic.


Passage number 87.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t have a detailed sense of what they’re doing with the liquid assets that they’ve been accumulating.  We’ve spent a lot of time debating whether this is, to some degree, the new normal.  We think that those assets are substituting for other forms of liquidity.  I don’t remember who it was who presented a nice briefing sometime in the past month or so that talked about the fact that these liquid assets that have drawn a lot of attention are a substitute for other forms of financial buffers that firms have been holding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that they do not have a detailed sense of what is being done with the liquid assets and that they have been debating whether this is the new normal.


Passage number 88.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Bank lines of credit, for example.  Unused commitments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions unused commitments in bank lines of credit, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 89.
 MR. WILCOX.  I guess I’d say that the downward revision to E&S is certainly notable, but by and large, it’s a pretty standard response to just a markedly softer general macroeconomic outlook.  The climate that businesses are facing is going to involve a lot less growth in business sales, and therefore we think they’ll be motivated to build a smaller stock of E&S capital.  That’s mostly what’s going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 90.
 MR. HOENIG.  You don’t think that much of it is going into foreign direct investment elsewhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, expresses doubt or skepticism about the amount of money going into foreign direct investment elsewhere.


Passage number 91.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox simply expresses his opinion.


Passage number 92.
 MR. HOENIG.  I mean, if I were them, I’d be doing something with this stuff, especially given the growth in the BRIC countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about what they would do in a given situation, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 93.
 MR. WILCOX.  That could be part of it.  But if that is part of it, I don’t think it’s coming at the expense of domestic investment.  And you’re right, I think there has been, to be sure, some reduction in business confidence, as reflected in the purchasing managers’ surveys, at both the national level and the regional level.  So I think there’s been, for sure, some wind taken out of the sails there.  But we still have E&S growing, now in the mid-single digits, through this year.  So to paraphrase President Fisher, it could be worse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging a potential aspect of the situation but ultimately agrees with the overall assessment that things are not as bad as they could be.


Passage number 94.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Stepping back from the recession and the slow recovery, it is true that well before we got into the recession there was a longer-run trend of very slow capacity growth in the United States in manufacturing.  And that was presumably—and in a lot of cases, you can track it down—growth in China and other places like that.  While that’s operated in the background, whether that shifting of production to other countries has really stepped up at the moment is much more difficult for us to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact and acknowledging that determining whether production is shifting to other countries at the moment is difficult. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 95.
 MR. HOENIG.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply acknowledges Mr. Hoenig's gratitude, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 96.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states the title or position of President Kocherlakota and does not mention any discussion, disagreement, or conflict.


Passage number 97.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t know if this is a question or a comment.  David, I thought this picture that you showed about households expecting an increase in income was extremely interesting.  I’m not sure that I’d be so quick to associate it with a change in demand conditions.  If households are expecting a slowdown in potential income growth, maybe even sharper than the markdown that’s occurred in the Tealbook, I think if you asked them this question, they would answer it in the same way—that they don’t expect as much income growth as they had in the past.  While I think it is consistent with the story you said about “Boy, this is showing up as a slowdown in demand,” it could also be a sign of the households realizing that potential is just not as good as it was in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in this passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is acknowledging that the picture shown about households expecting an increase in income is interesting and agrees with the explanation given by David. He further explains that the expectation of a slowdown in potential income growth could also be a reason for the households' response.


Passage number 98.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes, again, this taken alone is not dispositive, but I think that the main takeaway for us from this series is, boy, it looks like there’s something going on in the household psyche that has very persistent characteristics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Wilcox expressing his interpretation of a series of events.


Passage number 99.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I’m sympathetic to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, expresses sympathy towards something that is not specified in the given passage. Without further context or information, it is not possible to determine any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 100.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions for our colleagues.  [No response]  Seeing none, we’re ready for the economic go-round, and I’ll start with Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 101.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me say up front that I asked to go first today, not to parse economic data so much as to talk about cognitive dissonance and, specifically, to make a plea to all of us and to remind myself audibly how important it is to resist the temptation that we all naturally feel to cling to our own past beliefs and predispositions, even in the face of a slew of dissonant data. For a year or more, I think that the implicit debate in these go-rounds during FOMC meetings has been between those who argued that we are in an economic recovery that would be steady, though unspectacular, with occasional soft patches, and those who argued that we are in a weaker, halting recovery that would take a much longer time to return us to trend points in growth and employment.  Well, I think that debate is over.  The side arguing steady but unspectacular growth has lost, but it’s by no means clear that the side arguing that the recovery was weak and halting has won.  I think the meaningful debate today is whether even a weak and halting recovery can continue or whether we’re already at or below stall speed and quite possibly slipping into another recession.  Equity markets—which, as Brian mentioned, seemed to reflect for quite some time some of the more optimistic sentiment—have, in the past couple of weeks, been marking down economic prospects.  Yesterday they appeared to be siding with those who think the most likely scenario is a recession, a probability assignment that strikes me as somewhat high, or at least it would have last week. Despite the past year’s debate in which we’ve had different views, every member of this Committee is united in having been too optimistic.  I think that the most pessimistic among us, of whom I was one, certainly did not expect that growth over the past four quarters would be only about 1.6 percent, and would not have thought so even if we had been told about the impact of Fukushima.  Who among us today would stand behind the projections we made last year for GDP growth during this year—and particularly in the second half of this year.  Almost none, if any, I suspect. Most of us, I’m sure, still expect some increase in Q3 growth because of the resumption of auto production that David mentioned a moment ago, but it seems plausible that this impact itself will be transitory.  And to the degree that expectations for a pickup in economic growth in the remainder of this year and into 2012 were dependent on some assumed momentum from a decent first half of the year, they are clearly unfounded.  It’s not immediately clear what other factors will contribute to an acceleration of the underlying pace of growth.  Even the most sanguine view of current conditions must acknowledge that the economy is now sufficiently vulnerable that a modest shock could send us back into recession.  Needless to say, the euro zone situation described by Mike Leahy a few moments ago could be considerably more than a modest shock.  Many of us have been saying for some time that the Europeans had the financial and technical resources to solve their problems if only they would exert the political will.  I fear we are fast approaching the point when this will no longer be the case.  Plummeting equity markets and tightening financial conditions, along with the blow to confidence they bring, could surely also be more than a modest external shock to what is at best now a fragile recovery. Like investors rethinking their market positions, each of us needs to rethink our analytic and policy positions to question the assumptions that lay behind our past expectations, and not just to try to fit the most recent data into our prior views.  We will, I am sure, spend a good bit of time in future meetings analyzing, in the Tealbook’s rather understated formulation, the “forces imposing greater-than-expected restraint on the expansion,” into which an honest inquiry is likely to yield challenges to premises and beliefs held variously by most, if not all, of us in the past year or more.  This inquiry and the debates around it will surely be important in shaping our policies and response to these forces and eventually in deciding when and how to exit.  But I would suggest that there is a more immediate task for us today—that is, to consider just how perilous the current situation is and then, in light of the dangers identified by that assessment, to consider what measures could be taken to reduce the probability of those dangers being realized.  Given that the “steady growth” position has been thoroughly controverted and the “slow but halting growth” position seriously undermined, it seems to me that the cost–benefit analysis of additional monetary policy measures must have changed significantly.  After all, both the string of bad intermeeting data and the substantially reduced expectations, not to mention the recent declines in markets, suggest that the factual predicates for our policy dispositions during the past year were, to a greater or lesser extent, misplaced. Now, the economic go-round in a typical FOMC meeting is a pretty formal, almost—and sometimes literally—scripted affair, and even the policy portion of most of our meetings tends to play out in a fairly structured fashion, and properly so, since proposed language and alternative policy options will quite sensibly have been proposed, modified, and much discussed before we convene.  Today, I think, should be different.  The cumulative effect of the gathering evidence of stagnation, the psychological impact of the ratings downgrade, the growing concerns that euro zone problems may not be contained, and the global market drama of the past couple of days has made this a potential inflection point.  I hope that we can this morning operate in less scripted, less structured fashion so that we can formulate the most appropriate response to the delicate circumstances that confront us for actions that may be taken today or in the coming weeks.  I think we need to be a bit more nimble than we’re accustomed to being, and I hope that in the spirit of all of us questioning ourselves, we can do that for the rest of the day.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions that there has been a debate between those who believe in a steady but unspectacular economic recovery and those who believe in a weak and halting recovery. The speaker argues that the side arguing for steady but unspectacular growth has lost and now the debate is whether the weak and halting recovery can continue or if the economy is slipping into another recession. This shows that there is disagreement or contention among the members of the Committee regarding the state of the economy and its potential future trajectory.


Passage number 102.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a polite expression of gratitude from President Lockhart.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 103.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yesterday’s equity market selloff certainly gives pause, but I don’t think it obsoletes the views that I prepared as long ago as Sunday afternoon, the diagnosis that pertains to the context of policy.  I wanted to start by saying that President Bullard in an earlier meeting posed a good question when he asked if there was ever a time in the past 25 years when uncertainty did not seem higher than at other times, and he got quite a laugh when he asked about that.  I do think the context of this meeting really does present a lot more uncertainty than whatever the Committee could consider normal.  It seems to me that there’s simply a lot that we don’t know at the moment.  We don’t know if the growth-restraining effects of the first half will fall away as expected.  I think the Tealbook nicely captures the central forecasting challenge of the moment, which is determining the forces responsible for what it calls the “greater-than-expected restraint on the expansion.”  We don’t know whether the consensus base-case forecast of a stronger second half and stronger 2012 will materialize.  We’re one month into the third quarter, a quarter that the Tealbook projects GDP growth at 3 percent, with little indication in the data of that level of growth.  We really don’t know how the European debt situation is going to play out in coming weeks.  We don’t know beyond yesterday’s developments and this morning’s, if we’re tracking them without BlackBerrys, how the market will sort out the implications of the downgrade.  We don’t know whether the projection of inflation settling out will come true, and we don’t really know whether there are underlying forces at work, forces captured in the Tealbook’s phrases “persistent spending weakness” and “supply-side corrosion and damage,” that portend a longer and deeper problem of sluggish growth. The outlook, of course, always involves a lot of uncertainty, but it certainly feels to me that the combination of uncertainties at this juncture is unusual.  And, at least going into this past weekend, it inclined me, obviously excluding extreme financial instability, to emphasize an agnostic view regarding the outlook.  So I am holding to the base-case outlook that I submitted in my last forecast in June of stronger economic growth and subsiding inflation in the second half, but with less conviction.  The BEA’s NIPA revisions somewhat changed the narrative in my thinking.  The revisions, along with the negative tone of the incoming data, make it harder to sustain my previous forecast.  When I submitted my projections in June, I was thinking of restraints on economic growth primarily in terms of commodity shocks and the economic fallout from the earthquake and tsunami disaster in Japan.  I think now the list has to be expanded to the uncertainties associated with the ongoing government debt messes here and in Europe.  Friday’s employment report somewhat took the edge off of accumulating doubts, but at this point, I’m reluctant to entirely dismiss the possibility of an outright contraction, which is also a change in my thinking since June.  The Tealbook also references the possibility that “the self-equilibrating tendency of the economy has been greatly weakened by the damage resulting from the financial crisis” and/or that “the economic weakness reflects structural factors” that have lowered the potential path of GDP.  I think these are plausible scenarios as well, and they imply much longer periods of relatively slow growth than have been reflected in any of the projections I or the Committee has published at this point.  In many ways, that’s Governor Tarullo’s point.  So going into the past weekend and before yesterday’s market instability, I felt that a wait-and-see approach to the incoming data over the next weeks or perhaps months is especially warranted. Now let me turn to input from my District, and once again, there is some contrast between anecdotal reports we’ve heard and the picture presented by the incoming data.  Listening to reports from my directors and business contacts, I find it hard to identify major shifts in overall business conditions in my District.  Overall, activity appears to be growing at a modest pace.  Business sentiment has slipped a little since June, but I wouldn’t say there has been a significant deterioration in assessment of the near-term outlook of our various boards of directors and affiliated business contacts.  In fact, for the most part, the feedback across contacts was not qualitatively different from June.  Large firms are still reporting a favorable business environment, while small firms continue to struggle.  Improvements in residential real estate have been spotty by property type and region, though overall the housing market remains depressed.  Industrial activity is still expanding, but at a softer pace than earlier in the year.  Auto producers and sellers, however, are seeing a pickup in activity following tsunami-related supply disruptions, and the expectations for auto production and sales are reported to be favorable for the balance of the year.  Consumer spending has slowed, consistent with the national indicators.  Retailers continue to note significant differences between upmarket spending, which has been reasonably good, and middle- to lower-income spending, which has been exceptionally weak.  Many households appear to be reprioritizing their spending baskets in response to constraints on disposable income and heightened uncertainty.  The Atlanta Bank’s chairwoman, who represents the country’s largest home-improvement chain, reports strong sales across stores, with some emphasis on what might be called “home-value investment spending.” Wage and other compensation pressures in general remain very modest, and commodity price pressure evident earlier in the year has lessened.  The capacity to pass through price increases seems to be mixed.  The same home-improvement retailer expressed surprise at the willingness of customers to absorb price increases and noted that they expect to test the limits of that willingness over the second half of the year.  A firm that represents several thousand grocery products opposite supermarkets said their suppliers will be pushing through price increases in the coming months.  A major auto retailer, however, indicated that pricing power has largely played out in that business.  Although a few pieces of anecdotal feedback could cast doubt on the “subsiding headline inflation” scenario, on balance I detected no clear movement of price pressure in one direction or another. As regards the balance of risks, none of my discussions in the past several weeks have revealed sentiment that the economy is sliding back into a recession, but the tone of these discussions was decidedly cautious, and many acknowledged that the downside risks outweighed those to the upside.  I share the view that downside risks to the outlook for economic growth over the near term have risen, and regarding inflation, I still judge the risks as broadly balanced.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

There is contention or disagreement in the passage because Mr. Lockhart states that there is a lot of uncertainty in the current economic context, while the anecdotal reports from his District paint a more positive picture. This suggests that there is a difference of opinion or interpretation of the data.


Passage number 104.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude from someone called President Lacker.


Passage number 105.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The provided passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The phrase "Thank you. President Fisher" is a simple expression of gratitude, not indicating any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 106.
 MR. FISHER.  I’ll take a chapter from Governor Tarullo’s opening monologue and dispense with the average presentation.  I do want to note from my corporate contacts that, regardless of the sector, whether it’s rail activity, electricity usage, cargo hauled through the air or on the seas, airline traffic advance bookings, restaurant pricing, or even one of my favorite leading indicators, elective surgery—which, by the way, has declined significantly nationwide, but showing the difference between my District’s performance and elsewhere, cosmetic and elective surgery is up in Texas [laughter]—there is no question that we are seeing, in the reports given by business leaders, a mystically stated “slowdown in the pace of play.”  Also, in terms of not embracing shibboleths that are dear to some of us, I think I have been reporting that inflationary pressure, particularly as we look at it from a trimmed-mean standpoint, certainly seems well contained and within reasonable bounds.  It’s not an issue that I find myself preoccupied with any longer. I must say, Mr. Chairman, I’m a little concerned when I hear people talk about the way the markets—and they’re talking about the equity markets, but I think we’re also talking about broader market phenomena—have behaved in the past few days.  And having been a market operator, working under the strong sense that markets are manic-depressive mechanisms, I think we have to be very careful not to overreact.  We do know—as we mentioned earlier in the previous discussion we had, particularly with Brian—that we’ve had worse periods:  ’82, ’74, March of 2009.  So there is substantial downside here.  I would simply say that I think things have gotten worse.  I think we have to call a spade a spade. One of the things that I believe firmly has compounded the pessimism or, put it this way, the lesser enthusiasm I am hearing from my corporate interlocutors—which is one difference I bring to this table; whether it’s valid or not is to be decided by others—is that we cannot ignore the fact that the debt ceiling negotiations were an absolute debacle.  And we have, if not an incompetent government—and I’m not referring to the Administration, I’m talking about the structure—then certainly one that does not give rise to confidence.  Now, I spent 10 days in Italy, away from the lead-up to the congressional vote.  By the way, full disclosure:  President Pianalto was in Italy also.  We were not together; we were in separate parts of Italy.  And I was reading the correspondence we had through encryption in terms of possible alternative actions that might be taken in the event of a default.  One thing I did not see was any television for 10 days.  When I got back, I got off the plane, went to exercise to get over my jet lag the night before the House vote, turned on the television, and scanned through CNN, the networks—even Fox, which I don’t ordinarily watch.  I was taken aback by the frenetic nature of the discussion, but most importantly by what I felt would be a signal that would be received by average consumers, which is having been told by their President, their congressperson of either party, and their senator that the sky is falling.  My immediate reaction would have been to turn to my spouse, if I were an ordinary consumer, and say, “My God, we cannot take this trip.  We cannot buy X or Y, and we cannot do this or that.”  If I were a business leader—and this is what I did hear in my subsequent discussions with CEOs—I’d be standing, arms crossed, legs spread, saying, “Show me.  Where is the tax regime going to change.  What about the subsidies that I hold so dear for my industry—that I’ve lobbied so hard over generations to get.  How are spending patterns going to change.  And very, very importantly, what are you going to do to me on the regulatory front.” Here’s my point:  The problem we have now is, there’s no question we’ve had very weak demand.  If you look at mall traffic, which is aspirational goods largely—nothing necessary is sold in a mall—and talk to the interlocutors I talk to, it has dropped to zero from a pace in the first quarter of 3 percent.  Off-mall traffic has dropped to 2.6 percent over the past three weeks, largely owing to sales of food, which is a necessity.  But there’s been weak confidence.  There has been a very tenuous—and Governor Tarullo used the term—a sort of “halting” one step forward, one step back; it’s not continuous.  But we all know it’s been somewhat tentative in terms of confidence, and confidence has been undermined.  It has not been undermined by monetary policy.  It’s been undermined by nonmonetary factors.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea that inflationary pressure is a concern, stating that it is well contained and within reasonable bounds. The speaker also disagrees with the notion that the recent market behavior warrants overreacting, stating that we have seen worse periods in the past. Additionally, the speaker expresses disagreement with the handling of the debt ceiling negotiations, calling it an "absolute debacle" and criticizing the government for lacking confidence.


Passage number 107.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states gratitude and identifies the sender as President Evans.


Passage number 108.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply expresses gratitude to President Rosengren.


Passage number 109.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was struck over the weekend by how many articles mentioned the word “recession” while describing the economic outlook, and that was before the opening of financial markets on Monday.  The memo from Vice Chairman Dudley highlights how much the deterioration in incoming data since the spring has increased the New York Fed’s estimate of the probability of recession.  Many private-sector economists, using similar models, come to similar conclusions.  With real GDP for the first two quarters of the year averaging less than 1 percent, it is not surprising that these models are predicting an elevated recession probability, even ignoring intangibles such as congressional dysfunction, European political dysfunction, and the first downgrade of the United States in recent history. Recent data have been sufficiently downbeat that a relatively weak employment report is now viewed as a source of good news.  Yet, with the employment-to-population ratio the lowest since 1983, there should be little rejoicing.  It is interesting to note that even those with higher educational attainment had significant declines in their employment-to-population ratios.  When talking to people around New England, I hear that the only bright spot seems to be rental housing.  Buyers not convinced their home prices will increase, buyers with little or no equity for a down payment, buyers no longer qualifying for credit, and possibly a sectoral shift away from homeownership have all contributed to an improving rental market.  However, those same factors would indicate that the most interest-sensitive component of GDP, residential investment, is less sensitive to interest rate movements, requiring larger movements to have an effect. Housing finance is not the only area that has been disrupted.  Concerns about the debt ceiling and European financial difficulties have prompted investors to expand already substantial cash holdings.  As money market funds have significantly increased liquidity, indicators of dollar funding problems, such as the three-month currency swap rate, indicate an increase in dollar funding problems for European banks.  When European banks have trouble rolling funds with money market funds, they often return to the swap market to satisfy their dollar funding needs.  Stock prices for European and domestic banks have declined substantially.  In fact, Bank of America shares yesterday closed at under $7 a share, a low not seen since the bad old days of 2009.  Their credit default swap rate was over 200.  Note that with possible downgrades, uncertainty about lawsuits, and further deterioration in housing prices, there remains a possibility that the next financial shock could still be generated by a large, troubled domestic bank. Given the large degree of resource slack in the economy, it is quite possible that the inflation rate will soon be falling.  Businesses are worried and labor markets are weak—not an environment conducive to increases in prices or wages.  The Michigan survey measures of inflation expectations, both short term and longer term, were down.  In fact, the Tealbook forecasts that both total and core PCE inflation will hover at 1.4 percent by the end of 2012.  Models at the Boston Fed expect inflation to be a bit lower.  The evolution of the forecast in the Tealbook since the spring has been striking.  The economic growth forecast has been materially reduced, and unemployment is now expected to remain quite elevated through the forecast period.  Inflation is forecast to remain well below 2 percent in the medium term.  I unfortunately concur with this outlook.  I fear that, in fact, we are currently underestimating the risk of a recession, given the change in domestic and foreign financial conditions.  I concur with Governor Tarullo that this may require a more flexible and innovative approach to our policy discussion.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 110.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  It’s 10:00, and I understand coffee is ready.  Why don’t we take 20 minutes and come back at 10:20.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and suggesting a plan to take a break and come back later.


Passage number 111.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence.  President Plosser, if you’re ready, you’re up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply suggesting that President Plosser can proceed with whatever they were supposed to do.


Passage number 112.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" is simply expressing gratitude and does not involve any contradictory or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 113.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you. President Kocherlakota" shows gratitude and respect, but doesn't indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 114.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply contains a thank you message from President Hoenig.


Passage number 115.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A couple of things.  In our region, things are about as they were—modest economic growth.  We still have an energy boom.  Whether that stays, given recent events, we can all guess at.  It depends on whether it’s temporary or longer term.  Agriculture’s still doing well.  We’re still seeing very significant increases in the value of properties as people deploy their liquidity into any kind of a hedge they think they can find.  One thing we have found, in talking with some of the major railroads in our part of the world, is that traffic is up in the past month—pretty importantly up, using their words.  So we have this modest economic growth.  It’s at risk given all the world events that we see today, and who knows for sure. I realize, in terms of the comments that I’m making, that we’re all well intentioned, and I take the original comment that we have to be open minded about this, but we are products of experience.  As you mentioned, I’ve been through three recessions here, but it is actually more than that, since I was in the Fed before that.  The question I ask myself as we go through this stuff is, what’s wrong.  Is it that capital’s not available, that there’s no liquidity in the system, that we’re not able to deploy it because of the impediments that monetary policy might have contributed to.  Is the policy rate too high.  Is there a liquidity shortfall somehow.  Or, perhaps, are there other issues.  The consumer in America is highly leveraged and remains so.  The states are highly leveraged with their future promises, and they have to deal with that.  Do we have a U.S., but also a global, sovereign debt issue that people are thinking about—whether it’s real or not, they feel it’s real.  Is this affecting confidence, and is it inhibiting the deployment of capital around the world and especially in the United States.  And can we, as a policy body, increase confidence by actions we take.  Perhaps.  But I think we’re finding out that we tend to do it on a temporary basis as we revert to the real issues that are ours, our country’s, and others’ to deal with, and that is the highly, highly leveraged world economy today that needs to be worked through.  Our political systems—not just here, but also in Europe—are having difficulty coming to grips with that because it requires significant adjustments in how we use our resources.  And that’s really what we’re facing today. I suspect that we are going to struggle through this for some time to come, and I worry that what actions we take now, with our good intentions, will have longer-term consequences as they are deployed.  And I’m not just talking inflation.  I mean consequences for the allocation of resources—I think the misallocation of resources is a risk as much as anything.  President Evans, I understand what you’re saying in terms of, “Would we be reacting this way if inflation were 5 percent.”  But I will tell you, history and experience tell me, that over time, we—because we do care so much—tend to favor trying to bring the unemployment down over our inflationary goals.  We did it in the ’70s.  Inflation systematically got up because we were constantly pushing to try to keep unemployment lower, until finally inflation was so high that we had to take a pill, a very bitter pill.  Yes, I think we could easily find ourselves, if unemployment were to stay high or come down more slowly than any of us want, biasing our outcomes toward 5 percent inflation—not today, maybe five or six or seven years from now.  But I remind people that in economics that’s not a long time, actually.  And this housing crisis started in the 2002–2003 period and didn’t erupt until 2007–2008.  So my only point is to say that I agree.  I wish we could do more.  Don’t misunderstand me—I wish we could do more.  But I think flooding more liquidity into the market, while it may have a temporary impact, has intermediate-term consequences—not just longer-term consequences—that I think force us to be more careful right now.  And I think we would be wise if we are more careful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern and caution about the current economic situation and the potential consequences of certain actions.


Passage number 116.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude by President Pianalto.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 117.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic news since our last meeting has been very discouraging, and it’s getting harder to argue that the weakness that we saw in the first half of the year was an aberration.  After the GDP revisions, the recovery now looks like a tough slog with occasional bright spots that have been increasingly rare.  So, like many of you, I revised down my forecast for GDP growth over the next year and a half.  While a variety of inflation measures have been surprising to the upside, I think the sources of those pressures will prove to be temporary. I’ll briefly elaborate on my assessment of the outlook.  For some time now, I’ve projected a pace of recovery that’s been on the lower end of the Committee’s range of forecasts, but the incoming data have been even weaker than I have anticipated.  While some estimates of recession probabilities have moved into the danger zone, I don’t think a decline in GDP is the most likely scenario.  Instead, I expect output growth to pick up, albeit to a still-disappointing rate, in the second half of the year.  In my judgment, the key source of restraint on the pace of GDP growth is consumption.  Household spending is likely to remain soft while income growth is limited and households continue to repair their balance sheets.  The recent revisions to the NIPAs have highlighted these forces by significantly marking down income and consumer spending over the past three years.  My business contacts have long stated that retail sales have been unusually bifurcated, with lower-income consumers still struggling and behaving as if the recession hasn’t ended.  Still, my business contacts are reporting some growth, although most are reporting only small gains.  That said, on a more positive note, households are making grudging progress on debt reduction, and in my view, this progress will support modest growth in the economy and not lead to further deterioration. Key auto plants in my District are swiftly returning to normal production levels, which are about 50 percent higher than production levels were as recently as June.  This pickup in production is occurring despite some risks of a slowdown in overall retail sales, because dealer inventories have been left exceptionally low by the disruption in production stemming from the earthquake in Japan.  As the Tealbook suggests, the planned acceleration of auto production should provide a pretty sizable increment to output growth.  The last dramatic recovery of auto production was in 2010, and it was an important factor in one of those rare bright spots in the recovery.  Nevertheless, like the Tealbook, I’m concerned by the risk that this bump-up in manufacturing activity is going to prove to be transitory. Turning to the inflation outlook, I had been expecting to see measures of both total and underlying inflation moderate in the second half of this year.  And overall inflation has moderated, but inflation excluding food and energy has not.  I still consider underlying measures of inflation to be useful predictors of future headline rates, and the Cleveland Fed’s median and sticky price measures both indicate a lower underlying rate of inflation than does the measure excluding food and energy.  In addition, my downward revisions to the pace of economic growth induce me to expect reduced price pressures as the months roll by.  It also appears that financial markets are less concerned about inflation amid the signs of a global slowdown.  Inflation expectations, as measured in the Cleveland model, fell significantly across most durations following the debt agreement and the S&P rating announcement.  For example, the three-year expectation two years forward, which I think is perhaps the most relevant policy horizon, has declined 23 basis points to just under 1½ percent since the July CPI release.  It looks like inflation expectations could again be shifting, and if inflation expectations dip much further, inflation itself may move away from our price stability mandate. Turning to the risks surrounding my outlook, with the momentum to economic growth already so weak, I would put the risk to output as largely to the downside.  In recent meetings, I have viewed the inflation risks as skewed to the upside, in light of both inflation rates and expectations coming in higher than anticipated.  But today, the shift to lower inflation expectations that I’ve observed in the data has caused me to return the risk to inflation to being balanced.  These recent changes in risks have added to the challenges for monetary policy, and I think they suggest carefully exploring a range of policy options.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, presents a more pessimistic outlook on the economy, revising down her forecast for GDP growth. She highlights that the incoming data have been weaker than she anticipated and that household spending is likely to remain weak. However, she also mentions some positive signs, such as households making progress on debt reduction and auto plants returning to normal production levels. Overall, there is disagreement on the state of the economy and the risks and outlook for inflation.


Passage number 118.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Williams.


Passage number 119.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 120.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The deterioration in the economic outlook has been dramatic and equally disturbing.  Early this year, the economy downshifted to a rate of expansion that fell well short of the growth rate of potential output, which we’d traditionally call a growth recession.  Some of this weakness reflected transitory factors, and economic growth should pick up modestly in the second half of the year.  But even with that improvement, the pace of recovery will be insufficient to make meaningful progress on unemployment until next year.  Moreover, I see significant downside risks to the forecast.  Anemic growth and high unemployment leave the economy especially vulnerable to further adverse shocks and a double dip.  The debt crisis in Europe provides one example of such a shock.  Concerns regarding the recovery’s vulnerability have been a major reason for the recent volatility in financial markets, and I’m especially worried about the fragile confidence of households and businesses, which likely took another big hit with the stock market downturn.  Perhaps more worrisome is that the self-correcting process, key to past recoveries, appears to be largely AWOL this time around.  Despite our efforts to account for the effects of fallout from the financial crisis, we have consistently been too optimistic about the pace of improvement in the economy.  I have become increasingly concerned that we may not have managed to avoid a Reinhart–Rogoff pattern of weak and prolonged recoveries that have followed past financial crises.  Perhaps this time is not so different after all. The extent to which persistent headwinds are hindering the recovery can be quantified in terms of the medium-term equilibrium real interest rate.  In my comments, I will refer to a particular model that I developed with Thomas Laubach some years ago.  In this model, the equilibrium real interest rate equates supply and demand over the medium term of several years.  It changes in response to highly persistent shifts in aggregate supply and demand.  A decline in the equilibrium real interest rate would imply a negative shock to demand relative to supply.  I think this measure gets at the issue of supply versus demand shocks or persistent ones.  Since the outset of the recession, the estimated medium-term equilibrium real funds rate has fallen from 2.4 percent to nearly zero today.  And for comparison, before the current episode, the lowest reading that we had on our estimate was 1.8 percent during the headwinds period of the early 1990s.  Other measures of the equilibrium real interest rate that we look at, as well as those that are reported in the Tealbook, Book B, have also declined considerably over the past few years. I am also increasingly concerned that the sluggish pace of growth may permanently scar the economy.  The magnitude and duration of this downturn will mean that the millions of long-term unemployed are seeing their human capital deteriorate or actually be destroyed, along the lines of the comments of President Kocherlakota.  I found the alternative scenario “More-Persistent Spending Weakness with Supply-Side Corrosion” to be a very real risk, although not quite yet my modal forecast.  Turning to inflation, with oil and some other commodity prices having declined sharply from earlier peaks, headline inflation is moderating.  Core inflation also rose noticeably this year, albeit from a very uncomfortably low level.  Some of the rise in core inflation reflects temporary factors that, as mentioned in the Tealbook, should fade in coming quarters.  For example, our staff has looked at the issue of pass-through of import prices, and we find that pass-through of higher import prices likely contributed about 0.3 percentage point at an annual rate to core inflation in the first half of the year.  With non-oil import price inflation moderating, the impulse to higher core inflation should also diminish in coming quarters.  Indeed, my business contacts tell me that the pass-through of higher import prices to consumer prices either has already occurred or will be completed soon. In sum, I expect the recovery to continue, but at a frustratingly slow pace that leaves the unemployment rate elevated for many years.  I expect inflation in coming quarters to return to levels of around 1½ percent, below my preferred long-run goal of 2 percent.  Unfortunately, I don’t see light at the end of the tunnel.  The staff’s long-term projection sees us falling short on both of our mandates through the end of 2015, the final year reported in the table.  Apparently the long run is just not long enough to reach our goals, at least without additional monetary support.  But that’s a topic I’ll leave for my comments later.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their concerns and observations about the economy and offering their own analysis and projections.


Passage number 121.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a polite expression of gratitude. The mention of "Vice Chairman" does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 122.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  First, I’m going to talk about financial market developments, and then I’ll talk a little bit about the economic activity data we’ve seen. My view is very similar to Brian’s that the market reaction is really about the deterioration of the economic growth outlook.  If you look at the confluence of the market indicators—stocks down, credit spreads wider, flight into safe-haven currencies, drop in Treasury yields—all are consistent with anxiety about the growth outlook.  What’s dangerous about this, of course, is that there’s a risk that this becomes a self-fulfilling process—that markets weaken, which then causes people to revise down their economic growth forecast, which leads to further market weakness.  Letting this run unabated is not without considerable risk, and I think the risks are higher than normal because, one, the economy was very close to stall speed even before this, and, two, the market understands that there’s a lack of potent policy tools that can be used to arrest this. I think that the market developments that are most disturbing to me right now are what we saw yesterday with bank stocks falling very, very sharply and CDS spreads widening.  What was interesting was that the stocks that fell the most were those for the weaker institutions.  I guess that’s not really surprising because obviously they’d be hit most by a poor economic environment.  But we did hear something that was actually very interesting.  It was that the inability of some banks to buy back their shares may have been contributing to greater price weakness in their stocks.  This could be because people who were putting on short positions knew that these companies would not be able to resist as easily as other companies.  I think that the key issue in terms of this dynamic is that it’s not obvious what the banks can do to break it.  It’s not as if the bank could say, “I’ll go out and raise more capital,” and that’s going to make everybody feel better, because that’s going to be taken as a signal that the bank may actually be weaker than what people thought.  The key questions on this note are likely, one, will this dynamic continue, and, two, will it lead to funding pressures.  And where I guess I would be particularly nervous is among the broker–dealers.  So far we haven’t really seen much evidence of this, but that would be a very, very dangerous channel.  And, three, will this lead to credit rating downgrades.  In other words, if this process goes on long enough, will the credit rating agencies feel some need to respond to the deterioration in the stock prices and the widening credit default swap spreads by cutting the credit ratings, which then could feed back through in terms of the funding, which would be pretty dangerous.  Now, S&P said yesterday that the government downgrade would not lead them to mechanically downgrade the ratings of the major financial institutions, but that’s now, and things could change as we go forward. In terms of Europe, I think that it is disturbing, first, that we’re seeing renewed bank funding pressures.  Money market mutual funds are shortening their tenors, and they’re shortening them now to financial institutions that were really pretty protected and not being swept up by this a few months ago, especially some of the major French institutions.  We’re seeing it in markets more broadly in terms of widening in the FX dollar swap basis and a bit of upward pressure in dollar LIBOR rates.  It’s hard to know if this is it or if we’re going to see a lot more of that, but it is certainly disturbing.  The second issue in Europe is that there really is no long-term plan.  The ECB’s intervention—the fact that they’re willing to buy Italian and Spanish bonds—buys you some time.  But in some ways, the ECB intervention is very inconsistent with the commitments that have been made in terms of the EFSF because there has been no commitment made to increase the size of the EFSF beyond €440 billion.  If you really bring Italy and Spain into the picture, the EFSF needs to be orders of magnitude larger than that, and so far at least, the German officials have said that they have no intention to expand the size of the EFSF.  Until that changes, I guess I’m going to be pretty nervous about how this is all going to play out. In terms of the economic news, as President Rosengren mentioned, we decided to circulate a memo just talking about the conditional probability of recession given how weak output growth has been.  I’m not sure I would take those probabilities literally.  Obviously every business cycle is different, but it does, I think, show you that we are at a very dangerous point in terms of how slow the economy is growing and what that typically foreshadows regarding future outcomes in terms of recession.  The second thing I just want to say is that I wouldn’t take much comfort at all from the payroll employment data.  As David said, it wasn’t quite as horrible as it could have been, but it was pretty bad.  Aggregate hours worked were up only 0.1 percent; that’s not very strong.  And I would emphasize that this is not very timely information; this is the survey for the week that includes July 12.  To the extent that there was a deterioration in confidence and business activity in the run-up to the debt limit fiasco, we haven’t seen that yet in the employment data.  It’s very possible that the next employment report could actually be quite a bit weaker than that one.  And the last thing I would say in terms of the employment report is that the household survey was much weaker, with, as David mentioned, the drop in the unemployment rate due solely to the decline in the labor force participation. From my perspective, the weakness of the economy was very well established even before the market retrenchment.  On top of that, we have the risk that these market dynamics will continue, and that suggests to me that we should do more on the monetary policy front.  Now, I agree with President Hoenig that the problem is one of deleveraging at the household sector and at the government sector, and monetary policy cannot solve the deleveraging problem.  That’s something that has to take place.  But I would argue that the rate at which this deleveraging process takes place does matter, and monetary policy can affect the rate of deleveraging.  And by affecting the rate of deleveraging, it can determine how many things actually break in the financial system, and I think that can be important.  So I still think there’s a role for monetary policy, even though I agree with you that this is really mostly about deleveraging.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's views and observations on financial market developments and the economic activity data.


Passage number 123.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Yellen.


Passage number 124.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 125.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you, Governor Raskin" is a polite expression of gratitude and does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 126.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To me, the economy appears to be faltering, and the probability that this faltering exposes us to increased sensitivity and vulnerability has risen materially.  Labor market conditions are certainly weaker than in June.  Although the unemployment rate ticked down last month, I don’t see any good news in the labor market situation.  For one thing, I think discouraged workers are holding down the unemployment rate.  Indeed, the household survey indicates that the share of the working-age population that is now employed stands at 58.1 percent, the lowest level since 1983.  In addition, more-forward-looking indicators of labor demand, like the number of temporary employees or the claims figures, are not at all encouraging.  According to the Labor Department, there are 4.6 unemployed workers for every job opening, and these job figures were added in the middle of July before the debt ceiling debate and before stocks began their steep descent.  The economy may not be falling back into recession, but neither does it appear to be growing at the 3 percent rate many had hoped to see in the second half of the year. One of the theories suggested in the Tealbook to explain the notable weakness is that the self-equilibrating tendency of the economy has been greatly weakened by the damage resulting from the financial crisis.  This theory is only partially plausible to me, and here is my evaluation of it.  Consumer and business confidence are not recovering the way they usually do following a downturn, and this lack of confidence could be, as it seems to be already, snowballing into a self-reinforcing cycle of anxiety.  Businesses are hunkering down, weakening the job market further, and consumers, in turn, are launching their own programs of austerity, curbing the spending the economy needs to grow.  If you think through the usual determinants of consumption—disposable income, employment, stockholder wealth effects, housing wealth effects, and confidence—they all are currently a drag on consumer spending growth, and it’s not obvious to me how they are going to get turned around. Most disturbingly, the interactions among these factors seem to be dragging down economic growth even more.  For example, I have a neighbor with an elite MBA but a job that doesn’t need one, and she is so embarrassed about the real possibility of losing her home that she used to call me repeatedly when I was the banking commissioner, pleading for secrecy but needing a sustainable modification.  On this past Saturday morning, when I went to retrieve my newspaper in the yard, she drove by in her car and stopped to chat.  I asked her how she was doing, and she said something like, “Thank goodness I squandered my savings fighting foreclosure so I don’t have investments to tank after the debt deal that won’t get us anything.”  [Laughter]  That formulation kind of took my breath away, so we talked about the weather.  But her remark makes me wonder about the self-correcting part of the staff’s possible hypothesis.  If the components of consumption are weak and households don’t expect much improvement, what moves the economy back to its trend level of growth.  It may well be that the overhang of private debt needs to be reduced before we get a sustainable recovery.  After all, taking a long look back, personal debt had become a cornerstone of economic and capital market activity.  While initially consumer debt existed at the fringes of the economy, the prevalence of installment loans, national mortgage markets, and credit cards permitted consumers to borrow against money they did not have.  As the future of middle-class incomes becomes much less stable, the logic of borrowing against such hypothetical future incomes begins to unravel.  In the run-up to the crisis, credit was closing the gap between the haves and the have-nots, but without rising real wages and with a burst credit bubble, vast amounts of debt remain.  If debt deleveraging takes about seven years, we’re smack in the middle of slower growth, with more to come, and the question becomes less about what the outlook for the economy is and more about how monetary policy can help with the pace of this debt deleveraging. There are two dynamics that I think will hold back growth for a while.  First, households and businesses don’t have confidence in the future and so they’re not willing to spend money and take risks right now.  Second, households need to deleverage and aren’t willing to borrow in order to spend ahead of their incomes.  If I’m right about these, the economy isn’t going to recover quickly on its own and is going to need considerable policy support.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the theory suggesting the self-equilibrating tendency of the economy has been weakened by the financial crisis is partially plausible but expresses skepticism about how this theory can be turned around. The speaker also raises concerns about the lack of consumer and business confidence and the interaction of various factors dragging down economic growth. Additionally, the speaker questions the outlook for the economy and suggests that monetary policy may be needed to help with debt deleveraging.


Passage number 127.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there any questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement followed by a question and a greeting from President Lacker.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 128.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  The sentence that appeared yesterday, “Financial conditions have become more restrictive”—I can understand the equity markets’ behavior contributing to that characterization, but how do you think it’ll be interpreted against things like mortgage rates and other rates that have not risen and, if anything, have fallen.  Treasury rates, of course, more broadly have fallen precipitously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing disagreement or contention with the statement that "financial conditions have become more restrictive." He questions the interpretation of this statement in relation to mortgage rates and other rates that have not risen, but rather have fallen.


Passage number 129.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That’s right, though as you say, equity prices are down a lot, risk spreads are wider, and I think that on net, we view them as more restrictive in terms of their implications for economic growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. English agrees with the statement that equity prices are down and risk spreads are wider, indicating that they view these factors as potentially limiting the implications for economic growth.


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart, two hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply mentions the title and name of President Lockhart without any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 131.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I had the same question as President Lacker because if you think about the debt markets—the 10-year Treasury, the number of things that are priced off the 10-year Treasury—it’s hard to say that this has created financially more-restrictive conditions across the board.  I think it’s the equity markets themselves and potentially the wealth effect down the road.  But I had the same question, and I’m glad President Lacker brought it up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lockhart is expressing agreement with President Lacker's question and stating that he had a similar question himself.


Passage number 132.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there others with this concern.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking if there are others who share a certain concern. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 133.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes.  Why not say “financial conditions have become more volatile”.  I don’t believe, particularly after Governor Duke’s intervention and the point that Dennis just made with regard to Treasuries, that you could argue, other than the downturn in the equity markets and a slight widening in spreads, that financial conditions have become “more restrictive.”  Volatile.  Yes.  Restrictive.  I’d question that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Fisher disagrees with the statement that financial conditions have become "more restrictive" and suggests using the term "volatile" instead.


Passage number 134.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Shall we just delete the sentence.  Any objection.  President Kocherlakota, you were supporting that view, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a series of questions and statements seeking agreement or consensus.


Passage number 135.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I was supporting President Fisher’s view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker clearly states that they were supporting President Fisher's view, indicating agreement and support.


Passage number 136.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we just delete the sentence then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It proposes a suggestion to delete a sentence without any opposing views or arguments presented.


Passage number 137.
  MR. ENGLISH.  You could say financial conditions have been volatile as a way of acknowledging recent developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any sort of contention or disagreement. It simply states that financial conditions have been volatile as a way of acknowledging recent developments.


Passage number 138.
 MR. FISHER.  Everybody knows that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Everybody knows that" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that the information being mentioned is widely known or agreed upon.


Passage number 139.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we just delete it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking about deleting something.


Passage number 140.
 MR. FISHER.  Delete it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not seem to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward suggestion to delete something, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 141.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions for Bill.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no clear disagreement or contention in this passage. The statement simply asks if there are any additional questions for Bill, followed by President Plosser's name.


Passage number 142.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I have one question.  In the same first paragraph, I was puzzled a little bit by where we said the pace of recovery appears to reflect “in part,” and we added “although only.”  What does “although only” add to this discussion—what was the purpose of adding that.  Because “in part” is “in part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is simply seeking clarification on a specific phrase and asking for the purpose of adding a particular statement.


Passage number 143.
” MR. ENGLISH.  I think the intention was to downplay to some degree the importance of the temporary factors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion or interpretation of the intention behind something.


Passage number 144.
 MR. TARULLO.  Bill, wasn’t that intended in part to change the language from this last statement and to suggest that there’s been some shift since the last statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be contention or disagreement in this passage. The mention of "suggesting a shift since the last statement" could imply a change in perspective or opinion, but without further context, it is difficult to determine if there is any disagreement.


Passage number 145.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I agree.  The last statement certainly used “in part,” and so “although only in part” would suggest a downshift in that knob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 146.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  [No response]  Are we ready for the go-round.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The lack of response to the question "Any other questions?" indicates that there is no further discussion or disagreement on the topic. The following question about being ready for the go-round does not imply contention or disagreement either.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 147.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I consider the case for policy action compelling.  Even though transitory factors played a role in depressing growth during the first half of the year, the data we have received since June revealed broad-based weakness that is very likely to persist.  How can a forecast in which resource utilization and inflation both linger at levels below the Committee’s targets possibly be consistent with an optimal monetary policy.  At the very minimum, we should ease policy until our medium-term inflation forecast is centered on 2 percent.  The argument for policy easing becomes yet stronger when we consider the balance of risks to economic activity and inflation.  The downside risk to growth is particularly serious now because the potential for fiscal policy to respond in the event of a downturn is limited, if not nonexistent.  Should those downside growth risks materialize, we would likely be facing significant disinflationary risks, too.  Our arsenal is not empty, and we should avoid any inclination to save our ammunition until a later date. I strongly support your proposal to substitute the language related to “extended period” proposed in paragraph 3 of alternative A for that in alternative B.  As you mentioned, such forward guidance would be broadly in line with the implications of the staff’s estimated outcome-based policy rule and with FRB/US model simulations of the Taylor 1999 rule.  Both of those rules prescribe a funds rate trajectory that remains at the zero lower bound until the second half of 2013, at which point the unemployment rate would be in the vicinity of 7½ percent and inflation would be around 1½ percent.  I would also note that the optimal control rule calls for significantly later action to raise the funds rate off its lower bound at a significantly lower unemployment rate. To further enhance the clarity of our forward guidance, I believe it would be helpful to provide more-specific quantitative information about the economic conditions that are likely to warrant the continuation of exceptionally low levels of the funds rate.  For example, I would propose language along the following lines:  “The Committee anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 7½ percent and the medium-term outlook for inflation remains subdued.  The Committee currently expects those economic conditions to prevail at least through mid-2013.”  Such a formulation seems roughly consistent with the implications of our June economic projections, which had a central tendency of 7 to 7½ percent for the unemployment rate in 2013:Q4 and a central tendency of 1½ to 2 percent for overall PCE inflation in 2013.  Providing a quantitative threshold for the unemployment rate would also underscore the conditionality of our forward guidance and hence might help ensure that the public interprets the reference to a calendar date—namely, mid-2013—as a forecast, not an unconditional promise.  Indeed, this approach would help the markets and the public understand how a shift in the economic outlook would be likely to affect the anticipated timing of policy firming.  For example, if there were a further downward revision of the economic outlook, investors would recognize that the 7½ percent unemployment threshold would not be reached until a later date, and hence they would push back the anticipated time of policy liftoff. I’d also like to suggest one further change—to paragraph 4 in alternative B to make it a bit more forward leaning.  I would propose changing the word “will” to “is prepared to.”  In other words, I propose, “The Committee will carefully assess the economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ its policy tools as appropriate to promote a stronger pace of recovery in a context of price stability.” Looking toward September, without a clear improvement in the outlook, there are a number of reasonable options for policy action that we should consider.  For example, I think that extending the duration of our Treasury holdings along the lines suggested in alternative A has some merit.  Such a program is attractive because it might push down longer-term yields, including mortgage rates, and might offer greater support to the housing market.  Another promising approach would be to establish some sort of peg or cap on shorter-term interest rates.  Because capping rates at the short end involves buying at the short end, whereas lengthening the duration of our portfolio involves selling at the short end, we would need to analyze which alternative approach is preferable.  I’m somewhat less inclined to make further cuts in IOER, but I would certainly be willing to entertain such an approach.  At any rate, given the plethora of policy tools and the potential urgency of taking some further action in September, I hope we can plan on having a two-day FOMC meeting to ensure that we have enough time to consider the various options and to make specific decisions as appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage includes a discussion of different policy options and suggests that there may be disagreement or differing opinions on which actions should be taken. For example, the speaker suggests alternative A and alternative B, and mentions being "somewhat less inclined" to make further cuts in IOER. These statements indicate that there may be contention or disagreement among the participants about the best course of action.


Passage number 148.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards someone named President Evans.


Passage number 149.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman.  Excuse me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 150.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "Sorry. President Plosser" does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It appears to be a standalone statement without any clear context.


Passage number 151.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Can I ask Governor Yellen to read her revised sentence—just to make sure I got it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser is simply asking Governor Yellen to clarify and read her revised sentence.


Passage number 152.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Certainly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "certainly" does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It is an adverb used to confirm or emphasize agreement or truthfulness.


Passage number 153.
 MS. YELLEN.  “The Committee anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 7.5 percent and the medium-term outlook for inflation remains subdued.  The Committee currently expects those economic conditions to prevail at least through mid-2013.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of the Committee's anticipation and expectations regarding the federal funds rate and economic conditions.


Passage number 154.
” MR. PLOSSER.  Can I ask a question.  You attached a specific number to the unemployment rate, but inflation “remains subdued”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply asking a question about the unemployment rate and pointing out that inflation remains subdued.


Passage number 155.
 MS. YELLEN.  Correct.  The “medium-term outlook for inflation remains subdued.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the "medium-term outlook for inflation remains subdued."


Passage number 156.
” MR. PLOSSER.  Why—okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not have any contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser is thanking someone for something.


Passage number 157.
 MR. FISHER.  You wouldn’t be willing to put a number on that—2 percent, or a number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asked by Mr. Fisher.


Passage number 158.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We could talk about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is open-ended and does not provide any specific information or viewpoints that would indicate contention or disagreement among individuals. It simply suggests a possibility for discussion.


Passage number 159.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Certainly we can talk about it, or that’s a step we could take next time—either way.  Michelle, did anyone get this.  Is it possible to circulate that sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that they can discuss a certain topic or consider it as a next step without expressing any disagreement or conflict. The phrase "either way" emphasizes their openness to both options. The request from Michelle to circulate the sentence does not indicate any contention either.


Passage number 160.
   MS. SMITH.  I can get you copies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Smith, is simply stating that she is able to provide copies.


Passage number 161.
4 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Any other questions.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward response to a question.


Passage number 162.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Although it might be standard to say that another meeting’s worth of data might resolve uncertainty, the most recent NIPA revisions have answered enough of these questions for me.  Without substantial clarification of our policy intentions in line with our dual mandate responsibilities, I think there’s a distinctly high probability that we will continually revisit these periods of anemic growth without ever escaping the current malaise.  Consequently, I favor a strong indication today of additional accommodation.  I think alternative A is certainly a plausible demonstration of that.  Alternative B doesn’t do that.  I am quite attracted to the suggestion that you’re making today and to Governor Yellen’s proposal.  So let me talk about a few things in that regard. Governor Yellen says that she would entertain this accommodative monetary policy to better center our inflation forecast at 2 percent, which is our objective.  I would do more.  I believe clarifying our policy framework in order to better achieve our dual mandate  4 The material distributed by Ms. Smith is appended to this transcript (appendix 4). responsibilities would help provide further policy accommodation, at least along the lines suggested in Eggertsson and Woodford, and this helps by defining that as extending through mid-2013.  What is clarity.  Conducting monetary policy in accordance with our dual mandate should mean that as long as high unemployment is generating an extraordinary policy loss, the FOMC is willing to provide very large amounts of accommodation and tolerate medium-term inflation substantially above 2 percent.  I want to thank President Hoenig for listening to me earlier, and I certainly take your point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is expressing his support for additional accommodation and clarifying the policy framework in order to achieve the dual mandate responsibilities of the Federal Reserve. He agrees with Governor Yellen's proposal and appreciates President Hoenig for listening to him earlier.


Passage number 163.
 MR. HOENIG.  I’m listening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Hoenig simply states that he is listening, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 164.
 MR. EVANS.  As I mentioned earlier, a 9 percent unemployment rate against a very conservative natural rate of 6 percent generates a policy loss that is as large as if inflation were running at 5 percent against a 2 percent objective.  But my stronger point is this:  We talk and act as if 2 percent is an almost unacceptable inflation rate and a ceiling that limits further policy accommodation.  A couple of examples:  First, the common view seems to be that we will consider further LSAPs and more only if the risk of deflation is significant.  I’m glad there’s a floor, but the ceiling is too low.  Second, in an interview the other day, Don Kohn—for whom I have the highest regard—spoke in the following way.  He said that additional quantitative easing might be appropriate if inflation keeps coming down.  His option for QE3 was handcuffed by an inflation ceiling that’s too low in my opinion.  Today’s medium-term inflation pressures are overstated.  I do not see how this ceiling-like framework is consistent with our dual mandate responsibilities, at least not if the ceiling is 2 percent.  Our objective can be 2 percent.  We should average that, but it shouldn’t be our ceiling. In favoring alternative A, I’m attracted to the additional commitment—defining “extended period” to be at least mid-2013.  I certainly support that.  I suspect that we would have ended up there anyway.  So we should reap the benefit of reducing the uncertainty.  I’m also quite attracted to the additional language that Governor Yellen used in terms of stating that this could be appropriate as long as the unemployment rate is above 7½ percent.  But again—and I don’t have the exact language—regarding “as long as medium-term inflation is subdued,” I would agree with that if we understood better that “subdued” could include 2½ percent in the current environment or even 3 percent.  But I do like that type of language. I think we need to avoid signaling that we’re AWOL, and so I agree with your suggestion, Mr. Chairman.  One thing that does seem missing in the current formulation of alternative B, as I understand it, is that it doesn’t include the characterization that the downside risks have increased, and I wonder how that would be interpreted.  I really think that should be included.  Alternative A has language like that as well as, frankly, I think, a better description of the temporary factors.  I would have been happy to take paragraphs 1 and 2 from alternative A, but I’m quite happy to support your suggestion, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, disagrees with the current inflation ceiling of 2 percent and argues that it should be higher. He also disagrees with the formulation of alternative B and suggests that it should include a mention of increased downside risks.


Passage number 165.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude directed towards President Lockhart, indicating a positive sentiment.


Passage number 166.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I came into the meeting supporting alternative B, at least as of Sunday afternoon, and I am prepared to support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman, about transferring from alternative A to alternative B the language that basically employs the idea of it being explicit about the time frame of “extended period.”  I see that as a modest, almost minimalist, but probably meaningful recognition of what’s happening at the moment, and it certainly overrides the wait-and-see approach that, short of yesterday’s events, I might have recommended.  I think this is a well-calibrated action.  It’s responsive, concrete, but not overreacting.  In some respects, I think it buys some time for more-deliberate planning.  I very much support Governor Yellen’s suggestion.  Others have made the same suggestion of having a two-day meeting in September to have enough time to do that.  And I don’t mean to sound cavalier, but I also don’t think an explicit time frame on “extended period” is irreversible.  I think most observers understand the conditionality of our policies and statements.  I think that if we were surprised to the upside in terms of economic growth and the circumstances of the economy, we could certainly reconsider it. I have to be a little cautious.  I’d like really to hear more discussion regarding Governor Yellen’s suggestion of an explicit quantification of an unemployment trigger.  It just seems to me that being explicit on that while being more general and not explicit regarding the inflation situation may create some misinterpretation.  There may be a whole lot of questions about how we chose that particular number.  So at this particular juncture, I guess I just feel it’s better to be non-explicit than explicit on that.  I would like to hear more about what other people have to say. A small thing regarding wording in the statement.  I supported the idea of moving from “will act as needed” to “will employ its policy tools as appropriate.”  I understood that the drafters thought that was stronger language, and I supported it from the point of view of it being stronger language.  I think we need a very strong statement combined with a modest action at the moment.  And I do support the suggestion that Governor Yellen made—that is, to change the very last paragraph to “is prepared to.”  I think, again, the economy and the market are hoping to hear that we stand ready to act.  We will show that with the Chairman’s recommendation, but I think standing ready to act further is appropriate.  That relatively small change of verb conveys that.  Those are my thoughts, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker appears to be expressing support for the recommendations and suggestions being discussed.


Passage number 167.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you. President Rosengren" does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude toward President Rosengren.


Passage number 168.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  There is a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact about there being a two-hander.


Passage number 169.
 MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman.  Could I just intervene here.  I wonder whether, in order to crystallize points of agreement or disagreement, it might be useful—I don’t want to put the onus on either Charlie or Janet—for one or both of them to briefly describe what is, in effect, the transmission mechanism that they would expect.  That is, if we adopted your language, Janet, how would you see that affecting the economy.  And thus, why do you think it’s an efficacious step to take right now.  Because I think some of the points of disagreement arise because people are skeptical that a step will have an effect, and if we could specify that and maybe talk about that as well as language, it might be helpful in reaching some consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a way to clarify and reach a consensus on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 170.
 MS. YELLEN.  Okay.  Let me be clear that I would support the language in A.3 and think that the language I’ve proposed is consistent with what’s there.  And the reason for its being useful even though it coincides with market expectations is that it does show concern, and it does indicate that some transitory pickup in economic growth in the next quarter or something is not going to cause us to move off “exceptionally” or “extended period.”  It takes some upside risk off the potential that we would be raising the funds rate.  I guess the reason that I like the quantitative threshold pertaining to unemployment is that it gives a clearer rationale for how we came up with this particular date and, by making our reaction function clearer, shows that we want to see a sufficient improvement in the economy before we would consider lifting the funds rate—as long as, I wrote, “the medium-term outlook for inflation remains subdued.”  I’m not sure if that’s the best language.  One could say “as long as the medium-term outlook for inflation is consistent with the dual mandate.”  That might be more general, and President Evans might like that better.  The idea is that there’s an escape clause having to do with inflation, but we’re giving a sense of concreteness.  What do we expect to see before we would contemplate raising it.  And given that the outlook can weaken or it can strengthen, we’re bringing into play a helpful and stabilizing market mechanism.  Bad data.  Markets automatically say, “Wow, 7½ percent—that’s not going to occur until 2019.  The Fed’s going to be on hold for years and years.  It’s a lot longer than 2013.”  Or vice versa in the event that we get strong data.  That’s what I’m seeing is the advantage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 171.
 MR. TARULLO.  That’s helpful.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo expresses gratitude for the information received, implying a positive response.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without additional context or information. The passage only mentions "President Rosengren" without providing any further information or statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 173.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The staff studies on additional monetary policy options were quite helpful.  I would find it both timely and helpful to explore these options in detail, as, to date we have spent far more time managing risks associated with the exit strategy than managing the risks associated with the need for additional stimulus.  Unfortunately, we do not have time in a one-day meeting to fully discuss the memos.  I strongly support the September meeting being two days to more fully map out action should the economy continue along this path.  In particular, it would be useful to try to roughly calibrate the effects of the various policy options.  If we are looking to have an impact equivalent to at least a 25 basis point cut in the federal funds rate, which combination of staff suggestions meets this hurdle.  That way, the Committee could more clearly evaluate the options based on the impacts on the economy and the difficulties in unwinding the policy when that became appropriate.  This would allow a better assessment of the costs and benefits of further accommodation options.  I’m increasingly worried that what we viewed as a tail occurrence is becoming the most likely outcome, and we have not yet fully prepared for the policy options should that result. If we were not at the zero bound, I have little doubt that we would today be considering at least a 25 basis point easing.  Most of the reaction functions discussed in the Tealbook B, imply that we should be easier than we were in June.  I am not certain that alternative A provides the best way to achieve further easing.  I fear that the change in language we have discussed does little to signal further easing.  It says that exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate are likely to be maintained at least through mid-2013, but this matches the path of the federal funds rate that the market already expects, as described on page 53 of Tealbook A.  A statement that matches current market expectations is not likely to have much of an effect on market rates. My own sequencing of accommodation would be as follows:  Step 1, I would announce a fixed ceiling on Treasury securities through 2012 and a fixed floor on the balance sheet through 2012, with an escape clause if the unemployment rate falls unexpectedly below 7½ percent or the core inflation rate unexpectedly rises above 2½ percent.  I would couple this with lowering the interest on reserves 25 basis points.  Foreign branches hold many of the reserves, and reserves pay 25 basis points while three-month Treasury bills have paid close to zero.  This amounts to a subsidy for foreign branches.  I see no reason to subsidize foreign branches with our interest on reserves, and coupled with the new language, I would expect this would amount to the equivalent of a 25 basis point easing.  Should further easing be necessary, I would extend the period of the ceiling on Treasury securities and the floor on our balance sheet with communication that the floor and ceiling would continue unless the unemployment or inflation triggers were reached.  We could continue to extend out the period of ceilings and floors until we had greater confidence of achieving desirable monetary policy goals.  If the floor and ceiling were extended to three years and more accommodation was still needed, I would begin by first extending the maturity of the SOMA holdings by exchanging short-term securities for long-term securities.  If that proved insufficient, I would then expand our balance sheet with purchases of longer-maturity securities. In an unconstrained world, I would take step 1 today.  Given the limited time to fully discuss alternative options, I would prefer to take all of the language in alternative A but exclude paragraph 4.  I would include Governor Yellen’s language, and I would actually use core inflation of 2½ percent as the second trigger.  I view Governor Yellen’s proposal as changing something that is highly conditional to something that’s unconditional unless the triggers are hit, and so I think it is a much stronger statement to use Governor Yellen’s language.  Now, we’ve somewhat boxed ourselves in by using inflation at the medium term because we’re talking about a short period of time, and we’re talking about inflation.  We’re in effect trying to forecast oil prices.  So I would use core inflation at 2½ percent to take care of President Evans’s concern.  And I would use core inflation, but since I doubt I will get consensus on that, I would be comfortable with Governor Yellen’s language.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, expresses concern about the need for additional stimulus and suggests a specific plan of action. However, he also mentions that he is not certain that alternative A provides the best way to achieve further easing, indicating some disagreement or uncertainty about the proposed options.


Passage number 174.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of appreciation by the speaker, President Bullard.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 175.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B for today.  As I said earlier, our goal is to acknowledge the reality of slower-than-expected economic growth and the difficult situation in financial markets and to remain prepared for a policy move in the event that the expected rebound in the second half does not materialize.  More aggressive action than that today, in my view, could be counterproductive.  Number one, it will be viewed as trying to compensate for a failure of the Congress to effectively address medium- and longer-term fiscal uncertainties.  Number two, stronger action today will definitely emphasize the idea, already popular in financial markets, that there is a Greenspan–Bernanke put on the equity markets.  Both of these will be damaging to our credibility, in my view, and credibility is our most valuable asset.  Markets are not expecting much action at this meeting.  So I think we’ll be consistent with those market expectations if that’s the way we play this.  This does not prohibit us from having meetings during the intermeeting period if we think that the situation is deteriorating further or that we’re simply going to have to take action. Now, on the extended period through 2013, as I said earlier, I do not think we would be wise to tie policy action to the calendar.  We’ve already been burned by this twice, and if we do it today, we’ll be headed down for a third time.  The data have a way of contradicting what you expect.  If you track the macroeconomy for a long time, you know that there are wide bands of uncertainty, and the economy could be in a completely different place from what you expect two years out.  The 90 percent confidence intervals are so wide as to be laughable.  So I do not think you should tie it to a calendar date.  It will look very political to delay any rate hikes until after the election.  I think that will also damage our credibility.  I also doubt that we can credibly promise what this Committee may or may not do two years from now.  So I don’t think it’s all that meaningful.  I think that going with the 2013 language will put us in a box that we may not want to be in going forward.  Further, as I emphasized earlier, this move could backfire badly.  This would keep policy rates at zero for at least four and a half years, unless we decide to renege, which will cost us some credibility chips if we want to do that.  Japan has been at zero for a decade and a half, and that policy has definitely not produced price stability.  Instead, they got mild deflation.  There are good theoretical reasons for why they would get that and why that has occurred.  I think we have to be more cognizant of this than we are around this table.  Worse, if we do get on that kind of a track and inflation expectations start to drift down because of this policy, monetary policy will actually be getting tighter, not easier, exactly at the point where we’re trying to provide stimulus.  I also agree with President Rosengren that to be effective, a move of this type has to go beyond what markets already expect, and I think that we’ve established at this meeting that the markets are expecting the policy rate, given the recent data, to be at zero through 2013.  So this would only ratify market expectations.  It wouldn’t have any stimulative impact of the types emphasized by authors like Gauti Eggertsson and Mike Woodford. I also disagree with the Chairman on the QE3.  I do not think we will be able to avoid a discussion of QE3 going forward, as much as many of us may like to.  This is our most potent weapon, and it’s more promising as having effects on the economy—and we can debate what those effects are—than any of the other tools in our toolbox.  This is because the QE program influences inflation expectations and therefore has potential to drive real interest rates lower if that is what the Committee desires.  The most important aspect of a further QE program would be to purchase or sell securities in response to economic conditions instead of according to calendar dates.  If we had this program in place as of today, we could simply announce a certain amount of purchases today, and that would be a much simpler way to react to events than what we’re forced to contemplate, which are alternative policy actions.  We could behave much more as we would in an interest rate environment where we would lower the policy rate in reaction to worse-than-expected economic data. The new language suggested by Governor Yellen to tie the fed funds rate move to a 7.5 percent unemployment rate sounds super risky to me.  I might remind the Committee that Europe has not seen 7½ percent unemployment, except on rare occasions, over the past two decades.  We really have no idea where the unemployment rate may or may not be going as we go forward in time because we have that little of an understanding of what causes and perpetuates high unemployment.  The European example is one that should give us pause about tying anything to a specific number.  To me, that would be a very large move with very little thought behind it at this juncture.  I would certainly like to see a lot more study on that before we would tie it to a specific number.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the Chairman's views on policy action, the 2013 language, and QE3. They also disagree with Governor Yellen's suggestion to tie the fed funds rate move to a 7.5 percent unemployment rate.


Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you. President Fisher" is a polite expression of gratitude towards President Fisher without any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 177.
 MR. FISHER.  May I defer two or three slots until I have listened to others, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to hear some more arguments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It simply shows someone asking to defer their turn to speak in order to hear other arguments from others.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sure.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement.


Passage number 179.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  You know, I keep coming back to the fact that the fundamental problem is, we have issues outside of monetary policy that we’re not willing to address, and this country has a problem—an economy that has systematically consumed more than it produces.  And that means leverage has to continue to increase, and we have to move that forward.  If we’re going to take care of our employment problem, we have to increase production.  And I keep asking the question as I look at the projections—that’s why I was asking Dave about the investment outlook.  It’s going down, not up, even though we have dumped tons of money into this economy of ours, and here we are.  How is further quantitative easing or further guarantees of zero rates going to take care of the fundamental problems that we’re not willing to step up to as a nation.  I think that the central bank should be pushing other elements of this government to address long-term problems when it’s not.  The same thing is going on in Europe where you’ve got the central bank in Europe now doing a bridge loan so they can have time to get their bailout, which the markets are already saying isn’t going to be enough.  And we have a problem in this country where we need to be boosting investment, and it is languishing. I think that monetary policy that goes and says things about 2013 is going to have a temporary effect for today, which will die off very quickly, and we’re going to be back here again.  We are going to be talking about QE3 until we take care of these long-run problems.  And I think we’re in a box, and we need to be pushing other sectors of this economy toward longer-run solutions, and we’re not willing to do it.  So I’ll leave it at that.  My parting words, Richard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion on the current economic situation and suggesting that the central bank should take action to address long-term problems.


Passage number 180.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "laughter" indicates a light-hearted tone or moment of humor, without any indication of disagreement or contention. The mention of President Plosser does not provide any further information to suggest disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 181.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  On your point about communications, I do face a speech in a few weeks.  And I’d be more than interested, either now or in some other context, in taking instruction from this Committee about how you want me to phrase it.  And in particular, one thing I could do—I know there’s not unanimous agreement on this—is downplay that particular option in favor of continuing to look at options, et cetera.  But that’s something we could discuss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, the speaker mentions that there is not unanimous agreement on downplaying a particular option. This suggests that there is contention or disagreement on the topic.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply mentions "Governor Tarullo" without providing any information or context for any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 183.
 MR. TARULLO.  Charlie, could you just give us an idea of what kind of action you might consider in the event that you became convinced that economic growth was substantially slowing and that inflationary expectations were declining.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply asking for an explanation of the potential actions that may be considered in a certain economic scenario.


Passage number 184.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Well, I think I would respond by saying there would be two pieces to that.  One is why we think the growth is slowing.  If I thought that basically we were facing lower potential growth rates on into the future, I’m not sure monetary policy can do much about that—the right policy responses are probably different.  However, if I thought inflation was beginning to fall to unacceptably low levels—and President Evans and I could talk about when that trigger might be met, but certainly deflation would fall into that category—we would talk about policies where we would want to raise inflationary expectations to prevent that from happening, which would also help on the side of lowering ex ante real interest rates.  So those would be the ways I would think about.  But it would depend on the real side, what we thought the source of the shock was.  How temporary do we believe this is.  If we are moving into a world, as President Bullard suggests, of a European steady state of low economic growth and a very high unemployment rate, that’s going to call for a different set of policies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is discussing different scenarios and possible policy responses based on the specific circumstances. He is considering various factors such as potential growth rates, inflation, and the source and duration of the shock. There is no clear opposition or conflicting viewpoints presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 185.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage because President Evans is presenting their opinion or point of view on a certain matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 186.
 MR. EVANS.  If I could just ask a question, because I know that President Bullard mentioned that an unemployment trigger of 7½ percent could be super risky, and I thought you mentioned it this way earlier, President Plosser.  Governor Yellen’s proposal has jointly with the unemployment rate trigger the admonition that inflationary pressures ought to be—and we can disagree over what it is—subdued or some number.  In pointing to unemployment, do you have in mind some risk beyond the inflationary risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The mention of President Bullard's concern about the unemployment trigger being "super risky" suggests a disagreement with Governor Yellen's proposal. Additionally, the phrase "we can disagree over what it is" indicates that there are differing opinions on what level of inflationary pressures should be considered acceptable.


Passage number 187.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I didn’t say the word “risky.”  I just said I think we need more discussion about what that number ought to be.  If we want to talk about it in the September meeting, I’m willing to have that conversation.  But I think there’s more uncertainty, it seems to me, about what we think the path of the unemployment rate’s going to be and what’s appropriate.  I think that’s a subject for debate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser is simply expressing his opinion and suggesting that further discussion and debate is needed on the subject.


Passage number 188.
 MR. EVANS.  As long as you’ve got the inflation safeguard—I mean, I could say 6 percent unemployment.  And as soon as inflation got up to like 2¼ percent, that would come out of that conditionality.  So I’m not quite sure that’s such an issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans is expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification, but he is not expressing disagreement or contention with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 189.
 MR. BULLARD.  I called it risky, so let me clarify what I meant.  I think there’s a large literature that says, as I interpret it, that we don’t understand why unemployment is very high in some countries and states—there’s hysteresis in unemployment, and there are all these papers about comparing U.S. with European unemployment.  That tells me that unemployment is a difficult variable to understand, and I wouldn’t want to tie policy numerically to it.  Of course, we’re all very concerned about unemployment.  And I’m very concerned as well, but I wouldn’t want to tie policy numerically to unemployment for that reason, because I think it’s one of the least-well-understood variables of all the variables that we look at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their own interpretation and understanding of the literature on unemployment and expressing caution about basing policy decisions solely on the unemployment rate.


Passage number 190.
 MR. TARULLO.  But what’s the risk, Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 191.
 MS. YELLEN.  Because, if you’re right, you have an inflation escape clause there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Yellen is acknowledging the possibility of the person she is addressing being correct about having an inflation escape clause, indicating agreement or agreement in principle.


Passage number 192.
 MR. BULLARD.  Sure.  Having said what I said about the literature, I’ll also say that I agree with President Plosser that making it state contingent in that way is something we could study and look at, and I’d be willing to look at it further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard agrees with President Plosser and is willing to further study and consider the idea of making it state contingent.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m going to call on President Williams and then President Fisher, if he’s ready, after that.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a statement about the order in which two presidents will be called upon to speak.


Passage number 194.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as "MR" does not provide any context or specific information to discuss.


Passage number 195.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative A.  And given the significant downgrade to the outlook for output and unemployment, and the heightened risks to the recovery, I think an additional accommodation is needed for the very reasons that you said.  In this regard, I, too, very much appreciate the very helpful staff memos on possible policy actions for providing additional monetary accommodation.  In following Governor Tarullo, I have been changing my comments very much in real time, so let’s see if I’ve kept up with everything.  I support incorporating the more explicit forward-looking policy guidance as you suggested.  This step is a small one.  It may help markets better understand our policy framework and our intentions, and it may reduce uncertainty.  But as Brian pointed out earlier, if you look in the modal forecast, markets don’t expect us to raise rates until sometime in 2014, I think.  And of course, this is a conditional commitment, as the proposed language makes clear.  But I don’t think that’s actually enough.  Based on what’s going on in the economy and the forecast for inflation, I think we do need to go further, and I support extending the maturity of our Treasury holdings as described in paragraph 4 of alternative A.  Research by my colleague Eric Swanson on Operation Twist shows that that policy indeed did reduce longer-term interest rates.  His findings are completely consistent with the research that was done on the effects of the first stage of the LSAP program in the current episode.  So I think that it’s a small step.  I know it’s not a panacea, but I do think it’s a step that would help, and it would have relatively small downside risks.  I also think we should be thinking about all the other options, and I agree with the idea of a two-day meeting in September.  I think one option that I am also in favor of is lowering the target fed funds rate and IOER to zero, but I know that’s an issue that’s more complex.  We’ll have a good discussion of that at the next meeting.  I also prefer, by the way, when I said alternative A, the language regarding the downside that I think President Evans also mentioned—“Moreover, downside risks to the economic outlook have increased”—which was in paragraph 2.  I think that’s actually an important piece of the language that’s missing in alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 196.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 197.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I’m sympathetic to your concern.  We’re expressing, as you said, a general darkening of mood and expectations.  The issue is, what action do we take.  And there is a proposal on the table by Governor Yellen, which I’m not willing to support.  I’m not willing to support it because it’s asymmetric—that is, it talks about maintaining rates low as long as unemployment exceeds 7½ percent and a medium-term outlook for inflation remains subdued, undefined.  We have a lot of work to do to define our comfort level here.  I’m sympathetic to President Evans, but I think the asymmetry of it will create problems further down the path. I worry about paragraph 1 because there’s a lot that’s unspoken in here.  I would like to actually add a sentence—which I don’t think I’ll get, but I’m going to state it anyway.  That is, after we talk about how housing has flattened out, investment in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector remains depressed, which is true, I would like to add the following language:  “Uncertainty regarding non-monetary-policy initiatives appears to have added to the hesitancy of businesses’ willingness to expand payrolls, utilize existing capital, and add physical capacity, although business investment in productivity-enhancing equipment and software continues to expand.”  I would further insert that “uncertainty has been compounded by financial developments in Europe.”  For some reason, we’re not mentioning this.  I think these are significant factors. I think there are risks to us going further than we’ve already gone.  I understand the desire to act, but I think we have to think through those actions, and presently I don’t think we have a consensus at the table that we should do more.  I am not willing to vote in favor of doing more.  I think the proposal that Governor Yellen has put forward, which I’m somewhat sympathetic to, is too asymmetric.  I take President Bullard’s point seriously—that is, that pushing things out to 2013 looks too politically convenient—and I just think we don’t have enough information at this juncture.  I would endorse alternative B with the enhancement or complication that I’ve added, and I’m not willing to support much more than that.  I think we have to be extremely careful here.  We need to conduct monetary policy in the most deliberate way, not a reactionary way.  We have had a significant market selloff, which we talked about earlier with Brian.  In terms of valuation levels, we could have a great deal further to go.  I think the tool kit that we have in place has limited potential because we’ve exhausted much of what we have still in our pocket.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher expresses disagreement with the proposal on the table by Governor Yellen and states that he is not willing to support it. He also disagrees with the asymmetry of the proposal and expresses concerns about taking further action without enough information.


Passage number 198.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I need to interject here.  I guess it won’t help to argue for my position any further.  We have two dissents, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the need to interject and expresses their resignation about further arguing for their position, but the presence of two dissents suggests the possibility of differing opinions or perspectives. However, without more context, it is difficult to determine the exact nature of the dissents and whether they lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 200.
  MR. FISHER.  At this juncture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Fisher.


Passage number 201.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser, do you intend to dissent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is simply asking President Plosser about his intention to dissent.


Passage number 202.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’m inclined to, unless I hear something different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses a personal inclination and openness to potentially changing one's opinion based on new information or perspectives. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 203.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  That’s a very difficult position for me, obviously.  Just to get a sense of the Committee’s preferences so that I understand them, if we were to go back to alternative B as written with the forward-leaning language of the last paragraph, without the “financial conditions”, how many dissents would I have.  Any dissents.  [Simultaneous speakers]  I’m asking the question, just so I understand Committee preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and understanding from the Committee.


Passage number 204.
 MR. EVANS.  No reference to mid-2013.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is no reference to mid-2013.


Passage number 205.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s right.  Alternative B as written, except we take out the “financial conditions” language and we use the more forward-leaning paragraph 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply states a decision to remove certain language and use a different paragraph. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 206.
 MR. TARULLO.  So no action at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there was no action taken.


Passage number 207.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No action at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It states that there is no action being taken, indicating a lack of any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 208.
 MR. EVANS.  Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply introduces a person named Mr. Evans.


Passage number 209.
 Chairman— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m trying to get preferences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The chairman is simply stating that they are trying to understand people's preferences.


Passage number 210.
 MR. EVANS.  I could not.  I mean, it just seems clear that we would simply be postponing that very discussion until September, when we would have the very same outcome.  And so I could not support that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion about a particular situation.


Passage number 211.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  We have to get this done by 1:30.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges the request to get something done by 1:30.


Passage number 212.
 MS. YELLEN.  You might have other negative votes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the possibility of "other negative votes," without specifying any specific disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 213.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I’m going to stick with what I have.  Let me just make a comment, and I understand your concerns, but I just need to say a couple of things.  Number one, I’m perfectly willing to accept the argument that monetary policy is not the main tool, that this is not the main thing wrong with the economy, but it’s our duty to do what we can, to be palliative, to help where we can, even if we can’t solve fiscal, structural, and other problems.  Number two, we have a mandate that says we should look at employment and inflation.  We’ve had a very marked reduction in the outlook since the last meeting.  Not responding in any way not only raises a question of whether we’re following our mandate, but it also makes the markets uncertain because they don’t know what we’re doing.  They can’t follow our logic.  Again, to put out a much darker statement and not to do anything strike me as being inconsistent.  I believe this step is the most modest possible step we could take.  It’s completely conditional; it could be offset by any change in conditions.  It could be offset by asset sales, if necessary.  We will elaborate going forward exactly what the conditionality is, and I will look forward to our discussions around the table.  We will have a two-day meeting.  I think I can accede to that point, at least, for September.  [Laughter]  And we will discuss all of this, and we’ll continue with the subcommittee’s discussions about the appropriate use of an inflation objective, which I do not believe is in any way inconsistent with this perspective, because what we’re saying is, we believe that conditions will warrant, and “conditions warranting” means that we meet our objectives.  I don’t see any inconsistency of this with the inflation objective or that framework.  Again, I feel that not signaling to the market and to the public that we are at least engaged in understanding that there is an issue here and that we’re trying, at least in a palliative way, to respond to it, risks a real disconnect in terms of our communication, which I’m unfortunately not willing to accept.  It would be very unpleasant to have three dissents, but I guess if that’s where we end up, that’s where we end up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage indicates some disagreement and contention, as the speaker expresses a different perspective and disagrees with the possibility of not taking any action. They mention potential dissenting opinions and express their unwillingness to accept a lack of response.


Passage number 214.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman, I have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Plosser has a question.


Passage number 215.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the passage being provided, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 216.
 MR. PLOSSER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about the speaker "MR. PLOSSER" or any potential contention or disagreement. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 217.
  Your proposal for my question about paragraph 4, the language—what was your— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, when I was talking about going back to the old version, I was going to take the most aggressive language.  But if you will not dissent, I will certainly listen to your suggestions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking input and alternative suggestions from the other person involved in the conversation.


Passage number 218.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I need to think about that a little bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Plosser needs some time to think about something, without indicating any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 219.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Let’s go to President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply suggests moving on to the next topic, President Pianalto.


Passage number 220.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support your recommendation of alternative B with the firmer “extended period” language from alternative A.  As I noted during our economic go-round, I revised down my outlook for economic growth, and I see further downside risks since our last meeting.  In addition, I have greater confidence than I did at our last meeting that inflationary pressures are gradually subsiding.  If we had a fed funds rate well above zero, given my outlook, I would be supporting a rate reduction.  But instead, we have to contemplate using tools that are less well understood and are more difficult to explain to the public.  Clearly, as many have said, and as you have just repeated, monetary policy can’t solve all of our problems.  But we should do what we can on the margin.  So I am open to providing further accommodation using nontraditional tools.  As others have said, I look forward to our meeting in September, where we can carefully weigh the costs and benefits of the options that were laid out in the staff memo.  In my view, Mr. Chairman, you have clearly laid out the reasons for taking some actions today.  I also agree with your comments regarding your desire to control the QE3 speculations. As others have noted, I have a strong preference for our policy responses to be contingent on evolving economic conditions rather than a date specific; however, I think it’s going to be difficult in the short time we have left today to come up with that language and those measures, although I like the language that Governor Yellen has suggested.  In fact, if the FOMC was currently publishing the fed funds rate path that underlies our current economic projections, then the public would already know that we don’t expect to raise the fed funds rate until about mid-2013, that we expect at that time the unemployment rate is going to be at 7½ percent, and that we anticipate having subdued inflation until mid-2013.  I would encourage you, Mr. Chairman, to use the Jackson Hole speech to elaborate on some of these economic conditions, and I also think it would be helpful for you to articulate how the firmer “extended period” language, and perhaps some of the other policy options, would be expected to affect our economic outlook.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for the recommendation and agrees with the Chairman's comments and desire to control speculations. They also provide suggestions for further elaboration and clarification regarding economic conditions and policy options.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude from someone named President Lacker.


Passage number 222.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think we find ourselves in uncharted waters, and that’s a phrase we’ve been using for four years now.  But we’ve again veered farther away from the charts we have.  I welcomed Governor Tarullo’s opening of this round, which I interpret as an appeal for humility and openness to question how we know what we think we know about things.  My question, as you know, is whether monetary policy can have a big effect on economic growth right now.  I think the key question for us is, why is growth so low.  And I’d just remind you that our traditional approach to this—loss functions like the one President Evans referenced—rests on a dichotomy between the determinants of longer-run trend growth and fluctuations around that, where technologies and preferences and population growth are viewed to influence the former, but policy is the tool that moves around things in the meantime.  And I don’t think we really know that that can never change.  The 20th-century trend growth in the United States is remarkably constant, but it’s also a fact that many other advanced countries with access to the same technology as us, and presumably the same types of human preferences involved, have converged to growth paths that are markedly lower than that in the second half of the 20th century.  And it’s not obvious to me that we’re not capable of shifting from the path we were on in the 20th century to one more like Europe’s, and it’s not obvious they can’t shift up.  Given that, I think we should be circumspect about taking measures of the output gap, measures of the unemployment gap, as measures of how much further policy has to go.  My sense of things is that further monetary stimulus at this point is unlikely to change real outcomes very much at all.  If you look back at QE2, we didn’t have much of an effect on economic growth.  The effect we had was temporary, and we got a more sustained increase in inflation.  This is the classic prediction of what happens after a monetary policy impulse.  I think that in hindsight August is likely to be a Romer date.  You look at the impulse response after that, and it looks like the classic thing:  temporary effect on real activity, sustained effect on inflation. So I think we should be sitting pat.  I think we should avoid encouraging people to look to us, to look to monetary policy, to fix economic growth problems.  And so I favor alternative B.  And I guess a lot of options have been put on the table.  I strongly oppose putting in numbers for unemployment.  I share President Bullard’s discomfort with putting in a calendar date as well, just for the reasons he said.  I don’t think we can be sure that we’re not in the situation in which Europe found itself in the ’80s, and that we’re not going to see unemployment well above 8 percent for a decade or more.  And it’s through no fault of monetary policy.  So I don’t want to hang our hat on unemployment.  I don’t think we should.  That concludes my remarks.  Oh, and about the two-day meeting, can I get back to you when I see my BlackBerry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing one person's opinion and there is no clear disagreement or contention between different perspectives.


Passage number 223.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of laughter suggests a light or positive tone, rather than any form of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 224.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Our position is incredibly uncomfortable.  Many around the table have pointed out that the factors contributing to the disappointing results are not monetary in nature, and that it’s not clear that monetary policy can cure the ills.  Well, it might not be our fault, and it might not be our job, and we might not be in the best position to act, but I still see our responsibility as taking whatever action we can that we believe will result in the best outcome, regardless of how it fits with our own preferences or comfort level.  But we have to weigh carefully the costs and benefits of our options.  I don’t see the change in our guidance as high risk.  It communicates our best estimate of the future outcomes.  And even though the statement might not be different from market expectations today, it could keep markets from prematurely anticipating our exit if this uneven recovery results in a spurt of good data as a result of those same temporary factors.  And I do see the rewards of this action as not raising expectations for QE3.  As to the clarification proposed by Governor Yellen, I could support it but would prefer to take more time to think about it.  I do support a two-day meeting and perhaps an intermeeting conference to give us time to assess the relative costs and benefits of all of our options.  As I said in the economic go-round, I believe our remaining ammunition is limited and therefore must be carefully aimed.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker acknowledges that there are differing opinions about the effectiveness of monetary policy and the appropriateness of the proposed actions. They also mention the need to weigh the costs and benefits of options, indicating a potential disagreement about the best course of action.


Passage number 225.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President Bullard was first, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement expressing gratitude and a personal opinion. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 226.
 MR. BULLARD.  I just wanted to make a small suggestion in an effort to try to round up some consensus.  Instead of “2013,” could we change “an extended period” to “a period substantially longer than previously envisioned”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is making a suggestion to change specific wording in order to try and reach a consensus.


Passage number 227.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I don’t know that that helps, really.  Tell me if it does. President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is unsure if something helps and seeks clarification or confirmation from President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 228.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I’m not sure that helps, unfortunately.  I was just going to point out that while it is true that using “extended period until 2013” accords pretty much with our estimates of what our mean would be—or actually, I think, it’s even to the left of that—the reason it’s useful policy from one perspective—why it’s accommodative—is that you’re shearing off the possibility of raising rates or reversing accommodation before that.  We can’t both argue that it’s not going to have any effect and view it as increasing accommodation.  That’s my only point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is simply explaining why using the phrase "extended period until 2013" can be seen as accommodative policy.


Passage number 229.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, that’s not true because, first of all, it is conditional.  It’s absolutely conditional.  But even if it’s not an ironclad commitment, it’s communicating an expectation and to the extent that there’s a misunderstanding or a disagreement it can be effective.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining that something is conditional, but still effective in communicating an expectation. There is no indication of disagreement between individuals or conflicting ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 230.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m sorry, because we do have two more to go, and then we should probably have a discussion, but I’d be extremely cautious on “2013,” Mr. Chairman.  It just looks so politically convenient.  I really think that through your good efforts of communication, through the actions taken by this Committee, we’ve in essence, removed ourselves from the heat of the political debate.  I think we’re less suspect in the eyes of our critics than we have been.  And I think the attention is rightly focused on getting this fiscal situation under control.  I might have different prescriptions than what has been suggested, but the focus is back on the Congress, with the assistance of the executive.  The “2013” just looks too politically convenient, and I don’t want to fall back into people being suspicious about the way we conduct our business.  So I just want to plead on that front.  I think it’s a mistake.  I think it would then allow those who are trying to squirm out of their duties of actually getting their act together on fiscal policy—whatever that act is—to put the finger back on us.  And it’s unfortunately after an election, and it’s a declaration before we know what the outcome is of what’s likely to happen on the fiscal side, which is critical here.  So I wanted to plead that we do not adopt that specific date, given that it is ultra-inconvenient and given that we have worked very hard—and you have taken special personal risk in terms of your communications—to lower the temper and suspicion about monetary policy.  I think this would raise the suspicion and make us look like we’re way too politically acquiescent, whatever our personal politics may be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage shows that there is contention or disagreement regarding the adoption of the specific date "2013" to address the fiscal situation. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, argues against adopting that date because he believes it is politically convenient and could make them look acquiescent. He expresses concerns about raising suspicion and being seen as politically biased.


Passage number 231.
 MR. TARULLO.  President Fisher, would you be happier with “2014”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only includes a question asked by Mr. Tarullo and does not indicate any disagreement or contention between the parties involved.


Passage number 232.
 MR. FISHER.  No. PARTICIPANT.  “End of 2012,” then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The participants are simply providing a timeframe for their statement.


Passage number 233.
 MR. FISHER.  It depends on the conditions.  But look, again, we have restored our integrity to a great degree, and I don’t want to put a dent in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a conditional statement ("It depends on the conditions") and then states their own perspective ("I don't want to put a dent in it"). There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoint being presented.


Passage number 234.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Some may interpret it that way, I suppose.  But that’s the appropriate date given our information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 235.
 MR. FISHER.  Right now you have “extended period.”  “Extended period” is indefinite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 236.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s two or three meetings according to some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "two or three meetings according to some" simply suggests that there is different information or perspectives regarding the number of meetings.


Passage number 237.
  [Simultaneous speakers] MR. EVANS.  We really should let everybody else have an opportunity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is suggesting that everyone else should have an opportunity to speak, which implies a cooperative and considerate attitude rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 238.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We have a couple more people who’d like to speak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there are a few more individuals who would like to speak without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Could I turn to Governor Tarullo, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply addressing Governor Tarullo, showing a polite and respectful tone.


Passage number 240.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to begin, again, by invoking the legal authority under which we act every time we gather around this table.  And that legal authority gives us a dual mandate.  One, it doesn’t say we are supposed to promote price stability and maximum employment so long as the rest of the government does what we’d like them to be doing.  And it does say that we have to promote both price stability and maximum employment, and you cannot read one of those phrases out.  How one balances those has obviously been a centerpiece of U.S. monetary policy at least since the late ’70s and probably before, but it is our responsibility.  Point two, if what I said earlier about this being a possible inflection point is correct, I’m actually a bit concerned that simply changing the understanding of “extended period” to what was already anticipated is not going to do much.  And Mr. Chairman, I do agree with Charlie Plosser that we’re not going to dispense with speculation about QE3 by either making or not making that change in the language. I’ve been listening to everybody and trying to figure out how we could maximize the support for a particular statement here, and I’m not at all sure that I’ve got the way to do it.  But rather than state further my views on where the economy is and what monetary policy would do, let me see if I can at least offer two suggestions that might help.  First, I wonder whether there is a way to add a qualifying or descriptive phrase that reinforces the sense that this date already accords with our expectations for when we’d be converging on an appropriate moment to either begin to remove or no longer grant accommodation, and thereby make it more obviously contingent and more obviously predictive.  I suggest this, Richard, mindful more of Jim’s points about setting a date out there arbitrarily, no matter what it is, because I’m not as concerned about the political implications of saying “2013.”  Second, in trying to respond to, I think, some of Charlie Plosser’s concerns and some that I heard from other people, I wonder whether inserting an additional sentence in paragraph 4 might help give the public a more accurate sense of what we did today, and thus tamp down a little bit of unwarranted speculation.  We might think about adding as a first sentence that “the Committee discussed the range of policy tools available to”—whether it’s “promote a stronger pace of economic recovery in a context of price stability” or “best foster maximum employment and price stability”—and then say, “It will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ these tools as appropriate.”  The purpose for inserting that first sentence is to make clear (a) that a lot of things other than QE3 were discussed and (b) that precisely because there’s a range of things under discussion, action may be forthcoming, but there is by no means a commitment to do so.  I think the purpose is also to just accurately reflect to the world before the minutes come out, which is in three weeks, that a lot of what we did today was to talk about what we might do and why we might do it.  I would hope that that could address the concerns of people who don’t want us to seem too passive, while not going over the line with the concerns of people who think that we’re not ready or that we don’t know enough to take some more tangible step right now.  Having said that, I’m going to withhold a judgment on anything because I’m not sure what’s on the table right now.  But I trust, Mr. Chairman, you’re going to try to come back, distill everything, and give us a concrete proposal on which you can again solicit people’s opinions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is offering suggestions and discussing possible ways to address concerns raised by other members of the group.


Passage number 241.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "CHAIRMAN BERNANKE." It is simply a statement or identification of someone.


Passage number 242.
  Well, I’m still with the “2013,” unless I have a suggestion that will accommodate— MR. FISHER.  That’s an interesting suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing openness to suggestions and finds the other person's suggestion interesting.


Passage number 243.
   MR. TARULLO.  Okay.  I’m not sure what the right language is to try that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is unsure of the appropriate language to use.


Passage number 244.
 MS. DUKE.  What if it said, “The Committee currently projects,” rather than “anticipates”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 245.
 MR. TARULLO.  “Projects”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No disagreement or contention


Passage number 246.
 MS. DUKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without any additional information about the content of the passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. The simple "yes" answer only confirms that there is indeed contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 247.
 MR. TARULLO.  Ask the guys at the end of the table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement or directive to ask the individuals at the end of the table for their input or opinion.


Passage number 248.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think people are very much overstating the degree of commitment in that language.  It says “currently anticipates that these conditions are likely to warrant.”  It’s qualified all over the place.  I don’t understand why people view this as some binding commitment.  It’s not a binding commitment.  There are all sorts of escape clauses.  I don’t understand why people view this language as so binding that they’d be willing to dissent.  This is the Committee.  The Committee has a forecast.  Now, people may disagree with the forecast, but is it unreasonable for the Committee to have a view, that the Committee, in its totality, today anticipates that this is what is likely.  That’s not binding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their own understanding and perspective on the language used by the Committee, expressing confusion about why others interpret it as a binding commitment. They also acknowledge that people may have different views on the forecast but argue that it is reasonable for the Committee to have its own view.


Passage number 249.
 MR. TARULLO.  Bill, maybe that’s the point.  I think this is what Betsy was trying to get at.  If the sense of the forecast, and the forecast-dependent nature of this statement, were a bit more explicit, that might give a little bit of comfort to those who worry that a date is being placed out there absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there is a slight difference in opinion between Mr. Tarullo and Betsy, it does not escalate into a full-fledged contention or disagreement.


Passage number 250.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “The Committee currently projects that economic conditions”.  Would that help anybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a projection made by the Committee regarding economic conditions. However, it does not provide any specific information or context, so it may not be particularly useful or helpful to anyone without further details.


Passage number 251.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  If the projections change, then the date could change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the date could change if the projections change, which does not imply any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 252.
 MR. EVANS.  Were we working on Governor Yellen’s language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question.


Passage number 253.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 254.
  [Simultaneous speakers] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it’s off the table for now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers seem to agree that something or a certain topic is off the table for now.


Passage number 255.
 MR. BULLARD.  First of all, I agree very much with what Governor Tarullo said about saying that we had discussed a lot of options.  That’s very helpful, I think.  The other thing is to get rid of the “2013,” how about something very simple.  Instead of “for an extended period”—“for a very substantial period”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard expresses agreement with Governor Tarullo's statement and suggests a slight modification to the language used, but there is no indication of any argument or dispute.


Passage number 256.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, that doesn’t change anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given statement does not provide any context or information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Therefore, it cannot be determined if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 257.
 MR. BULLARD.  I think if you move off the “extended period” language and switch it to something else, you’ll get a lot of market attention, and they will see that as a further commitment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 258.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Does that help anybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking if something is helpful. It does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 259.
 MS. DUKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without more context.


Passage number 260.
  No CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement without any context.


Passage number 261.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m confused as to where we are right now, Mr. Chairman.  Maybe I’ll let Governor Raskin finish, but I think Governor Tarullo’s suggestion is worth thinking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker admits confusion about the current situation and expresses interest in considering Governor Tarullo's suggestion.


Passage number 262.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I only heard one suggestion—the thing about the range of tools—which is useful but doesn’t address the controversy here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the usefulness of the suggestion about the range of tools but notes that it does not address the controversy at hand.


Passage number 263.
 MR. TARULLO.  No, Betsy and I together, I think, are trying to address that by changing the words to make it clearer that we’ve picked the date because of our current projections.  Maybe that’s what I’m suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is not expressing any disagreement or contention in this passage. He is simply suggesting a change in wording to clarify the reasoning behind the chosen date.


Passage number 264.
 MS. DUKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without any further context or text provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 265.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How about this:  “Based on current projections, the Committee anticipates that economic conditions . . .”.  Is that all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement evident in the given passage. It simply presents a statement or opinion without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 266.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: 


Passage number 267.
  MR. EVANS.  I’m sorry, I don’t know what we’re talking about.  This is critical to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, simply expresses his lack of knowledge about the topic being discussed, emphasizing that it is important to him.


Passage number 268.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We’re going to the sentence now—about the “2013.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating what is going to happen next and does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 269.
” MR. EVANS.  I’m sorry, we’re on alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they are on alternative B without any indication of opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 270.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Paragraph 3 of alternative A, which says now, “The Committee currently anticipates that economic conditions . . .”, and would say “Based on current projections, the Committee anticipates that economic conditions . . .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states the contents of Paragraph 3 of alternative A.


Passage number 271.
”   MR. EVANS.  But still “through mid-2013”.  It’s the date that matters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and emphasizing the importance of the date.


Passage number 272.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Will that help.  At all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question and response, without opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 273.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’ll have to think about it more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they need more time to consider the topic.


Passage number 274.
  MR. FISHER.  Me, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Me, too" indicates agreement rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 275.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right, you have five minutes.  [Laughter]  All right.  Governor Raskin, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a request for Governor Raskin to begin speaking, and the audience's reaction is laughter, indicating a lighthearted atmosphere.


Passage number 276.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Now, before we take alternative B off the table with the statement on forward guidance, I want to say a couple of things in support of it.  First of all, I think it’s appropriately forceful but accurate in its characterization of the incoming data.  It now slightly de-emphasizes the role of temporary factors in the first-half slowdown.  I think the slow economic growth in the first half of this year extends beyond the factors that we’ve labeled as transitory.  Weaker growth in disposable personal income, to me, signals a protracted slowdown in consumer spending, particularly given the persistently low level of consumer confidence.  Nonetheless, I think that the pickup in inflation over the first half of this year is a transitory phenomenon, and I think that inflation will be subdued over the medium term.  In fact, it appears to me as if a moderation in inflation is already under way, especially given that energy prices have decreased significantly from their peaks during the spring.  And as we’ve heard today, both survey- and market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have changed little, on balance, over the course of the year.  There’s going to continue to be considerable slack in labor markets over coming quarters, which will continue to exert significant restraint on wages and prices. Now, the statement of forward guidance.  Like you, Mr. Chairman, I think that alternative B without the statement of forward guidance runs the risk of communicating that the Committee is unable or unwilling to merely clarify its anticipation of responding to this protracted slowdown.  Because I think that an important source of the weakness in the economy is that households and businesses don’t have confidence that things will get better, I have reservations about a statement that leaves the impression that we cannot or will not clarify our anticipation.  If we choose not to clarify our anticipation, as in alternative B without any additional language, I think we need to explain why more clearly.  Otherwise, we run the risk of creating confusion. I recognize that one problem is that not everybody on this Committee agrees on the diagnosis or the treatment plan for the ailing economy, but we can’t let our lack of consensus cause us to confuse the public.  At this point, we run the risk of giving the impression either that we can’t do anything or that we won’t do anything, and that we will not clarify our anticipation, which I fear would exacerbate the lack of confidence in the economy.  So I think we should consider sending a stronger signal with our language about how long we are prepared to keep rates low.  I’d be very supportive of clarifying our forward guidance and believe that this would be a significant step, not in terms of monetary accommodation, but in terms of providing greater transparency about our overall strategy and about the policy path that we see as most appropriate for fostering our dual mandate.  So I think it would be helpful to include something.  And here, again, this language that was circulated—to me, all that it does is really describe with more specificity the economic conditions that are likely to warrant the continuation of an exceptionally low funds rate.  It also provides some loose indication of the time horizon over which we expect those conditions to prevail.  In sum, even if I thought that not clarifying our anticipation would most likely end with us successfully fulfilling the dual mandate in the future, I find it prudent to clarify now, not because the language is going to have a big impact, but because the fragile state of the economy at the moment makes it very vulnerable to any new negative shocks or the worsening of ongoing shocks, and clarifying our anticipation may help on the margin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's thoughts and opinions on the topic.


Passage number 277.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  All right.  Well, let me get a proposal—sorry.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Instead, it seems to be a polite and cooperative conversation.


Passage number 278.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thirty seconds.  First, we have to do what we can do.  I completely agree with Governor Tarullo.  This notion that “It’s someone else’s fault, so that means we get to abdicate our responsibility”—that’s just ridiculous in my opinion.  Second, I think that what you proposed is the absolute minimum of what we need to do today.  I’d be prepared to do more, but that’s the absolute minimum.  And third, I think people are dramatically overstating the degree of commitment in saying that “we anticipate that something is likely based on our current projections.”  It just doesn’t bind us in any meaningful way.  All it does is provide more clarity to the market and replace something that today is completely empty.  The “extended period” language today is absolutely empty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their agreement with Governor Tarullo and sharing their own opinion on the matter.


Passage number 279.
 MR. EVANS.  Come on, you can’t say empty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is likely asking someone to clarify or provide more information about something called "empty," but there is no clear indication of disagreement or contention in this statement alone.


Passage number 280.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, it’s empty in the sense that it means that we’re going two or three meetings out, that’s it.  So the “extended period” language today doesn’t really add very much.  This actually provides a lot more than that, so I completely support you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their agreement and support for the statement made by someone else.


Passage number 281.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  All right.  Let me—Michelle tells us we need to get this done as soon as possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging the information provided by Michelle and expressing their willingness to complete the task promptly.


Passage number 282.
 MR. FISHER.  Let’s get it right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to ensure accuracy.


Passage number 283.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Could I clarify one thing, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a request for clarification.


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation:
Without providing the passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 285.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I would not be able to support the alternative, even as rewritten with Governor Duke’s proposed change of language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The phrase "I would not be able to support" suggests that there is a disagreement or contention between Mr. Kocherlakota and Governor Duke over the proposed change of language.


Passage number 286.
 MR FISHER.  Which is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: not a iarringious,is a larcenous act perpetrated with force and coercion. MR. SMITH. I respectfully disagree. I believe that larceny can be committed without the use of force or coercion.


Passage number 287.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Based on current projections”.  Can you conceive of any language that would help you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Based on current projections" simply implies that the following statement or conclusion is derived from the information and estimates available at the present time.

It is difficult to determine the presence of contention in a single phrase without having further context. However, if there were contradictory projections or conflicting opinions regarding the topic, then the existence of contention would be apparent.


Passage number 288.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Not at this time, no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 289.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  So what I’m proposing is alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as the speaker is simply stating their proposal.


Passage number 290.
  In the first paragraph, we’ve struck the sentence— MR. EVANS.  Mr. Chairman, can I just say that a number of people have preferred alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The sentence being struck does not show any contention or disagreement. It is merely an introduction to a statement being made.


Passage number 291.
  I mean, if you’re going to take three dissents— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, alternative A involves the lengthening of the portfolio, and I’m not going to introduce that discussion at this time.  I’m sorry, but I promise we’ll do that at the two-day meeting, which everyone has agreed to. So in alternative B, we’re scratching the “financial conditions” sentence from the first paragraph.  The second paragraph is unchanged.  The third paragraph—let me ask President Plosser now.  Is there anything we can do for you in the last paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining different alternatives and discussing plans for a meeting.


Passage number 292.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I prefer the old language for paragraph 4, but I’m not sure doing that is sufficient offset to the “2013” language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is stating a personal preference and expressing uncertainty about whether the suggested change is enough.


Passage number 293.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What about the language in paragraph 3, where it says now, “The Committee continues to anticipate,” we’d say, “Based on its current projections, the Committee anticipates that economic conditions . . .”  Does that help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a suggestion or proposed change in the language used in paragraph 3, but there is no conflict or disagreement present.


Passage number 294.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’m sorry to be slow here, but this very difficult.  Putting that, along with the change in paragraph 4, would be an improvement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is simply acknowledging the difficulty of the topic being discussed and suggesting a potential improvement by combining information from two paragraphs.


Passage number 295.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A sufficient improvement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states that there is a sufficient improvement without indicating any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 296.
 MR. PLOSSER.  That’s what I’m struggling with.  I’m not sure it would be, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows that Mr. Plosser is struggling with something and is unsure of his own opinion, indicating a form of disagreement or contention within himself.


Passage number 297.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "okay" does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 298.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, could you read the full sentence for me, please.  I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 299.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  With the proposed change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions a proposed change without indicating any conflicting perspectives or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 300.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The response given by Mr. Fisher is a simple affirmation of agreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 301.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It would be, “Based on its current projections, the Committee anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.”  “At least two years.”  How about “for at least two years”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The phrase "for at least two years" contradicts the statement "at least through mid-2013." The phrase suggests a longer time period than what is stated in the previous sentence. Therefore, there is a conflict in the duration of the anticipated low levels for the federal funds rate.


Passage number 302.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, again, I think we have labored mightily to make clear that we are as politically independent as possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that they have made an effort to be politically independent.


Passage number 303.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s not political.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The statement "It’s not political" does not express any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement that does not take a stance on any particular issue or viewpoint.


Passage number 304.
 MR. FISHER.  But sir, it may well be interpreted as that by our critics.  We have mitigated our critics substantially.  Why don’t we just say “for a substantial period”.  I mean, we’re putting a date on here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is proposing a suggestion to avoid potential misinterpretation and adjust the phrasing to "for a substantial period." However, this does not create a conflict or disagreement with anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Bernanke without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 306.
  “Extended,” “substantial”— MR. FISHER.  The date happens to be right after the election—I cannot support that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher simply states that he cannot support something without providing further explanation or justification for his stance.


Passage number 307.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Fine.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging and agreeing with President Rosengren.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 308.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  If you’re going to take three dissents, then I think we should go to the language of alternative A and take out paragraph 4, because I think there was enough support for that.  So if they’re going to dissent anyway, I think we should have much stronger language, because I think that was the consensus of everybody else other than the people who are dissenting.  If they really feel so strongly about that, I think we should go to alternative A, take out paragraph 4, and that would characterize how everybody else is viewing the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Rosengren is expressing disagreement with the idea of including paragraph 4 in the language and suggests an alternative approach.


Passage number 309.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there any objections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking if there are any objections without presenting any arguments or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 310.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Sorry, that’s alternative A, paragraphs 1 and 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. English is simply apologizing for his response and clarifying that he was referring to alternative A and paragraphs 1 and 2.


Passage number 311.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about disagreement or contention regarding Chairman Bernanke.


Passage number 312.
  Alternative A— MR. ROSENGREN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Alternative A without providing any additional information or presenting any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 313.
  But take out the— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Take out “financial conditions” in the first paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Removing "financial conditions" from the first paragraph would not lead to any conflicting or contradictory statements.


Passage number 314.
 MR. ENGLISH.  But take alternative A, paragraphs 1 and 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 315.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  1, 2, and 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context. The passage only includes numbers (1, 2, and 3) without any accompanying information or statements.


Passage number 316.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And 3, which is identical now.  Get rid of 4 completely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. The statement is simply instructing to get rid of "4" completely.


Passage number 317.
 MR. ENGLISH.  You can’t take paragraph 3 of alternative A because there has to be the reinvestment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact or a requirement related to paragraph 3 of alternative A.


Passage number 318.
 MR. LUECKE.  That’s two sentences of paragraph 3 in alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 319.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 of A—but just add the sentence “The Committee also will maintain . . .”—and then paragraph 4 of A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The addition of the sentence "The Committee also will maintain..." in paragraph 4 of A does not create any sort of disagreement or conflict with the previous paragraphs.


Passage number 320.
 MS. YELLEN.  So we’re putting in the reinvestment—“maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions a policy of reinvesting principal without any opposing viewpoint or disagreement.


Passage number 321.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  So it’s alternative A as written, eliminate the “financial conditions” sentence, and insert at the end of paragraph 3 the material on reinvestment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their preference and suggesting a specific change to be made.


Passage number 322.
 MS. DUKE.  Do you have Dan’s change to paragraph 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not showing any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking if the person has made changes to paragraph 4 of Dan's work.


Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Paragraph 4 is as in alternative A, which is exactly what we had.  What did you want to say, Governor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for clarification on what the Governor wants to say.


Passage number 324.
 MR. TARULLO.  I think somebody’s got it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Tarullo believes someone has the answer to a certain question or problem.


Passage number 325.
  [Simultaneous speakers] MS. YELLEN.  This is Dan’s proposal for 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers are identified as MS. YELLEN, suggesting that they are likely in agreement or working together.


Passage number 326.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The beginning of the last paragraph is, “The Committee discussed the range of policy tools available to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.  It will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ these tools as appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about the Committee's discussion and future plans, without indicating any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 327.
” MR. WILCOX.  Do you want the last sentence from paragraph 3 in B—about the Committee being ready to “regularly review the size and composition”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a question asking if the last sentence from paragraph 3 in B is desired, without expressing any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 328.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, exactly what’s in B.  The last two sentences in B.  Dan, I don’t know.  Is it worth the effort at this juncture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Dan, I don't know." is simply expressing uncertainty and does not involve a disagreement or conflicting opinion. The rest of the sentences in the passage also do not contain any contradiction or contention.


Passage number 329.
 MR. TARULLO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is insufficient information to determine the answer.


Passage number 330.
  Unless there’s an objection— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that unless there is an objection, they will proceed with something.


Passage number 331.
 MR. TARULLO.  I think that first sentence really does help us a little bit with that “range of policy tools.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Tarullo expressing his opinion or perspective.


Passage number 332.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Let’s go through it now.  So paragraphs 1 and 2 from alternative A—and 3 from A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a course of action and proceeding with a plan.


Passage number 333.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Paragraph 1 in A less the “financial” sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in paragraph 1 of the text. It is not related to any specific topic or argument, but rather introduces Mr. English as a speaker or participant in the conversation.


Passage number 334.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Paragraph 1 in A less the “financial” sentence; then paragraphs 2 and 3 from A and add to paragraph 3 the last two sentences—“The Committee also will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings.  The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate.”  And then add the new 4:  “The Committee discussed the range of policy tools available to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.  It will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ these tools as appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage primarily discusses the actions and intentions of the Committee regarding its securities holdings and policy tools, without presenting any conflicting ideas or viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 335.
”  [Simultaneous speakers] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m a little concerned about whether the market will jump to the view that we’re going to do QE3 because you have this language:  “The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings.”  I just think you might want to be aware of that potential.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

The passage contains two simultaneous speakers expressing their concerns about whether the market will jump to the view that they will do QE3. One speaker expresses concern about the language used in the statement, suggesting that it could give the impression that more quantitative easing (QE3) will be implemented. The other speaker warns the first speaker to be aware of this potential implication. This disagreement suggests a contention between their views on the market's reaction to the language used in the statement.


Passage number 336.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  We’ll use communication to downplay the QE3.  All right.  Any further comments.  Would you please read the current statement.  And I apologize, everyone, for the rush.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 337.
 MR. LUECKE.  Paragraph 1 in A less the “financial;” paragraph 2 from A, explicitly as is; paragraph.3 from A plus the last two sentences of paragraph 3 in B; and paragraph 5 from A, with the new language, which I don’t have written down in full.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is disagreement in the passage. It is indicated by the phrase "which I don't have written down in full," suggesting that there is a lack of agreement or clarity on the specific language mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 338.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states a neutral response.


Passage number 339.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let’s get the new language read, if we could.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that the new language be read, and there is no indication of any opposition or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 340.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Michelle, are you taking this down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking if Michelle is taking something down.


Passage number 341.
 MS. SMITH.  Yes.  It would help if you would read me the last paragraph of A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the full context and the rest of the conversation, it is difficult to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage itself does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement since it only mentions a request to read the last paragraph of something.


Passage number 342.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Here it is:  “The Committee”—capital C—“discussed the range of policy tools available to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.  It will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ these tools as appropriate.”  Have you got it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a discussion and states that the committee is prepared to use policy tools as appropriate.


Passage number 343.
 MS. SMITH.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. The presence of "Yes" indicates that there is disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 344.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the word "Okay" by itself. However, if the word is used in a larger context where there is a disagreement or contention being discussed, then it may have a different meaning. The word itself, in isolation, does not convey any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 345.
 MR. SACK.  The last sentence of 3 seems very repetitive, doesn’t it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 346.
 MR. TARULLO.  This is Bill’s concern again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is referencing someone named Bill's concern, indicating that there is a difference of opinion or contention between the two individuals.


Passage number 347.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Bernanke without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 348.
  The last sentence— MR. SACK.  “The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate.”  Isn’t that one of the tools that’s covered now in paragraph 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents a statement made by MR. SACK, without any conflicting opinions or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 349.
 MR. FISHER.  It would be nice to see the whole thing so that we know what we’re voting on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher simply expresses his desire to have full information before making a decision.


Passage number 350.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, let’s just leave it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The statement "No, let's just leave it" suggests that there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is proposing to avoid further discussion or debate and leave the topic as it is.


Passage number 351.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s been standard.  That was in there last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is simply stating a fact and there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 352.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s standard.  Let’s leave it.  Okay.  Any further questions or uncertainties.  Are you okay.  Let’s call the roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statements are all affirming and agreeable.


Passage number 353.
 MR. LUECKE.  Okay.  This vote will be on the language that was just described, in addition to the directive that is on page 8 of the packet that was handed out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is describing what the upcoming vote will be about.


