Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  And without objection.  It is my unhappy duty to open today’s meeting by noting, as all of you know, that this will be Governor Tarullo’s last FOMC meeting.  Dan was appointed and confirmed as a member of the Board of Governors in January 2009, a time of tremendous upheaval in the global economy.  The events that have transpired over Dan’s eight-year tenure rank as truly astounding, and just as astounding has been the pivotal role that Dan has played in shaping those events. Dan, your accomplishments are far too extensive to enumerate here.  Importantly, you are widely regarded as the leader of the Fed’s comprehensive efforts to strengthen financial regulation and supervision, and you have been tremendously successful on that score.  But because this is a meeting of the FOMC, let me remark more directly on your contributions as a monetary policymaker, which are no less impressive. Three things stand out for me.  First, your contributions reflect outstanding economic and policy analysis.  Our deliberations have been greatly enhanced by your coherent perspectives and well-crafted arguments.  I would especially highlight your discussions of labor market developments. Second, your approach to policy analysis has been, let me say, “refreshingly skeptical” of many of the conventional tales told by economists.  Perhaps this is partly an advantage that  reflects your legal training.  Before simply accepting that monetary policy or the economy works in the ways that economists conventionally assume and incorporate in their models, you often want to see the evidence.  The ability to challenge conventional wisdom is always valuable, but it’s been particularly important in the aftermath of the crisis. And, finally, you have contributed importantly to this Committee’s deliberations by listening—listening carefully to your colleagues, questioning them on unclear points or on evidence for their claims, and resisting sometimes vague compromises proposed for the sake of consensus in Committee communications or actions.  While that trait may have caused a bit of consternation from time to time, it has made all of us think harder, consider different options, improve our arguments, and ultimately make better policy. Suffice it to say, Dan, you are leaving the place in better shape than you found it.  The economy, the financial system, and the Federal Reserve are all stronger because of your leadership and dedication to our mission.  On a personal note, I want to thank you sincerely for your work here and say how much I’ve appreciated your friendship and the opportunity to collaborate. On behalf of everyone in this room, let me wish you all the best. Now I’d like to turn the floor over to Eric, who would also like to say a few words.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage is discussing the accomplishments and contributions of Governor Tarullo, without any mention of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 2.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Just a very brief remark.  First, as a lawyer around the table, you’ve been in the minority, but I think that we’ve seen quite a value to having somebody who has a legal background.  During those times when we have agreed, I’ve loved your comments.  [Laughter] During those times when we didn’t, I have respected your comments.  And I would just like to conclude by saying that you’ve played a really significant role in supervision.  That’s not part of the FOMC, but getting supervision right is critically important for also getting the  macroeconomy right, and I think all the presidents who have had interactions with you have appreciated the changes that you’ve made.  So thank you very much. CHAIR YELLEN.  First Vice President Jim Lyon has also announced his retirement. And I would just like to say that he’s attending today’s meeting, and I’ll take this opportunity to make a few remarks to honor his service. At the Board and at each Reserve Bank, typically there are a handful of experienced and skilled staff members who are indispensable, and Jim has surely been one of them at the Minneapolis Fed.  Rarer still are the individuals who serve in that role at their own institutions and also contribute to important Systemwide initiatives, which is so vital to the effective operation of the Fed, with its decentralized structure.  Jim has been that rare person— indispensable at both the Minneapolis Bank and in the System.   Jim, you represent the very best of the Fed.  It’s been an honor and a pleasure to serve with you.  Thank you for 40 years of dedicated service, and all the best for a long and happy retirement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of expressions of gratitude, respect, and appreciation.


Passage number 3.
 And I understand that President Kashkari would like to— MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just to add to your comments about Jim, he has served almost 41 years at the Minneapolis Fed.  To put that in perspective, that is almost 40 percent of the history of the Federal Reserve.  And to also put that in perspective, I was two years old when he joined the Minneapolis Fed.  [Laughter] During his storied career, he’s had a wide range of responsibilities.  When he first joined the Minneapolis Fed in the Law Department, he made a contribution right away, but then, at the age of 29, he was recognized and became a senior aide to then-President Jerry Corrigan.  He’s had a variety of responsibilities at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis—overseeing banksupervision, becoming a senior officer in the early 1990s in supervision, then overseeing IT, and becoming our first vice president in 2000. Over the past 17 years as first vice president, Jim was literally involved in hiring, developing, and promoting nearly every officer at the Minneapolis Fed at one time or another.  The Minneapolis Fed has been exceptionally well run, in large part because of Jim Lyon’s leadership, and it was a great opportunity for me to step into a Bank that was so well run and to have him as my partner my first year or so at the Bank. I wanted to just share one story that I recently learned that I think all of you would appreciate. Jim’s family came to the United States in the 1600s.  They were laborers and farmers, and they gradually moved west, settling in Illinois.  His grandfather, Leverett Lyon, pursued an academic career.  He went to the University of Chicago, from which he got his bachelor’s degree, his law degree, and his Ph.D. in economics.  He actually had a very successful academic career, and he helped found the Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C.  And years ago, when Jim was across the hall during one of his many visits to the Board, he was in the Special Library.  I’ve never paid any attention to the books on the walls in the Special Library, but Jim happened to look on the wall and there were his grandfather’s books, and they’re there today.  And Jim shares that at that moment he knew he had made the right decision in joining the Federal Reserve for his career. In all, Jim has worked under six Reserve Bank presidents and six Board of Governors Chairs.  His career has been truly committed to advancing the public interest.  And on behalf of everybody at the Federal Reserve, and echoing the Chair’s comments, I just want to thank Jim for his extraordinary public service, his huge contributions, and the gratitude we all feel for him.   We could not be more excited for Jim, his wife, his kids, and his grandchildren as he enters the next phase of his life. CHAIR YELLEN.  Finally, I am pleased to note that Professor Raphael Bostic has been selected as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, effective June 5.  I’m also happy that First Vice President Marie Gooding will continue to represent the Atlanta Bank at FOMC meetings until Professor Bostic joins us. Okay.  Now let’s turn to our first agenda item.  I’d like to ask Simon to begin the Desk briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a series of statements acknowledging and praising the career and contributions of Jim Lyon.


Passage number 4.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Lorie, do you know what proportion of ON RRP take-up is from government-only money market funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for information from Lorie.


Passage number 5.
 MS. LOGAN.  It’s a large proportion.  I don’t have the specific numbers, but I would say around 70 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states her estimate without anyone contradicting or expressing a different opinion.


Passage number 6.
 MR. POTTER. For yesterday, about $209 billion out of $233 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states a financial transaction that occurred, without any sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 7.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay. You made reference during your remarks to a possible increase in ON RRP take-up, depending on what happens with bills and the debt ceiling.  Putting that aside, what are your expectations for ON RRP over the course of the next year or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for the expectations of the ON RRP over the next year without expressing any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 8.
   MS. LOGAN.  We saw an increase in the average overnight RRP take-up after money fund reform. But what was interesting was, in February we saw that number come back down to $70 billion. Market participants have said that that was because there was some movement away from government funds, some withdrawal of assets after the year-end, due to portfolio rebalancing.  And so they expected take-up to start to drift back up, but not to the levels that we saw just immediately after money fund reform.  I would expect the level to come back down toward the level we had seen before money fund reform, but not all the way, and then fluctuate in connection with the Treasury bill supply, of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating observations and expectations based on market participants' opinions.


Passage number 9.
 MR. TARULLO.  Right.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 10.
 MR. FISCHER.  Madam Chair— CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a conversation between Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 11.
 MR. FISCHER.  Simon, on chart 6 in exhibit 1, are these people telling you what they think is going to happen or what they would like to happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking Simon a question about the nature of the information presented in chart 6.


Passage number 12.
 MR. POTTER.  It’s hard to look into their heads.  What we hope they’re answering is their personal assessment of how uncertainty changed since the October 24 survey.  And we were trying to capture some of what we thought was a big change from the election in the United States. Not surprisingly, the result is that they think their uncertainty about U.S. economic policies is much higher.  If you look at the lower dot, you can read some of the comments as to why those people think it’s low.  But, overall, it’s their individual viewpoints.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply describing their goal of capturing changes in uncertainty and summarizing the results they obtained.


Passage number 13.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay, thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions. [No response] Okay.  Seeing none, I need a motion to ratify domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 14.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved.CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  Okay.  Let’s now turn to our next agenda item, which is reinvestment policy.  As all of you know, since we initially raised the federal funds rate in December 2015, we have stated our intention to continue reinvestments until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way.  I believe that policy has served us and the economy well. Back in 2014 when we debated and endorsed our Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, we faced a great deal of uncertainty about how financial markets and the economy would react to a tightening of monetary policy.  We also worried that some new adverse shock could force a return to the effective lower bound soon after liftoff, particularly if the economy slowed more than expected in response to a policy tightening.  By focusing on the familiar tool of the federal funds rate in the early days of the normalization process, we bolstered the public’s confidence, as well as our own, that we could scale back policy accommodation in a gradual and predictable manner.  And by being patient in our rate moves and by maintaining the size of our balance sheet, we helped keep financial conditions accommodative and reduced the risk of outsized market reactions or a misinterpretation of our policy intentions.  This approach has also allowed us to raise the funds rate somewhat faster than would have otherwise been the case, potentially giving us more scope to ease policy in case the expansion faltered. But now that we’ve begun raising the federal funds rate, and we can be reasonably confident that further increases will be warranted in coming quarters, it’s time to begin forging a consensus on when and how we will allow the balance sheet to contract. Given the current economic outlook, I do not believe we need to rush to take action.  The purpose of today’s discussion is primarily to get a sense of your views, which will inform our subsequent and more   specific deliberations and allow us to provide greater clarity to the public regarding our reinvestment policy over the course of the next few FOMC meetings. As we discuss potential changes to our reinvestment policy, it’s worth keeping in mind our overall normalization strategy.  In particular, our decisions on reinvestment should be consistent with the principles that unless constrained by the effective lower bound, the federal funds rate is the primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy, and that we intend to reduce our securities holdings in a gradual and predictable manner.  Given this strategy, which I think is well understood by the public, our decisions over when and how to end reinvestments are mainly tactical in nature.  This does not trivialize these decisions, however, and we need to proceed carefully, particularly in our communications about the balance sheet and reinvestment policy. With those opening remarks, I’m looking forward to hearing your views.  Let’s begin with the staff presentations, and David López-Salido will start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a statement made by Chair Yellen regarding the Federal Reserve's reinvestment policy.


Passage number 15.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.4  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will briefly discuss some of the results presented in the memo titled “The Macroeconomic Effects of State-Contingent Ending of Reinvestment” that I prepared with my colleagues Hess Chung, Cynthia Doniger, Cristina Fuentes-Albero, and Bernd Schlusche.  Then Jane Ihrig and Julie Remache will review several approaches for ending reinvestment. Our memo focuses on macroeconomic implications of two approaches to ending reinvestment.  The top panel of exhibit 1 outlines these approaches and our modeling assumptions.  Specifically, we consider a state-contingent policy under which reinvestment ends in the final quarter of the year in which the federal funds rate first passes either 1½ percent or 2½ percent; reinvestment then stops completely and permanently.  We compare economic outcomes of adopting such a policy to those of a fixed-date policy under which reinvestments cease in full at the end of the third quarter of 2017, as assumed in Tealbook B, regardless of macroeconomic conditions at that time. Previous staff analyses examined how different strategies for ending reinvestment would influence macroeconomic variables under the staff’s baseline economic 4 The materials used by Mr. López-Salido, Ms. Ihrig, Ms. Remache, and Mr. Clouse are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). projection and under an alternative, adverse economic scenario.  In this memo, we broaden the analysis by using stochastic simulations to construct probability distributions for future economic conditions and for the size of the balance sheet under alternative reinvestment policies.  We conduct the stochastic simulations using the FRB/US model, with a baseline for real activity, inflation, and interest rates, which matches the January Tealbook projection. The FRB/US model simulations are combined with the model used for balance sheet and income projections in Tealbook B, in which the term premium effects are endogenous.  In the simulations, the federal funds rate is governed by an interest rate rule that incorporates an intercept-adjusted inertial version of the Taylor (1999) rule. The middle panel of the exhibit summarizes the main results. Inasmuch as the federal funds rate in the January Tealbook baseline averages just under 1½ percent in 2017:Q4, about half of the simulations show the federal funds rate below 1½ percent at that time, implying a nearly 50 percent probability that reinvestment continues beyond the end of this year under the policy with a 1½ percent rule.  When we instead assume that reinvestment ends in the final quarter of the year in which the federal funds rate passes 2½ percent, the probability of having ended reinvestment by 2018 and 2019 is appreciably lower than under the 1½ percent policy, with the median date of ceasing reinvestment delayed until 2018.  Accordingly, across the entire set of simulations, under the 1½ percent policy, the median size of the balance sheet is about $525 billion larger than under the fixed-date policy.  Under the 2½ percent policy, the median balance sheet size is about $660 billion larger than under the fixed-date policy. Maintaining a larger balance sheet under the state-contingent policies implies that term premium effects are more negative than under the fixed-date policy.  The lower term premiums help stimulate the economy.  However, because the federal funds rate is set by the inertial Taylor (1999) rule, the stimulus provided by a larger balance sheet is partially offset by the endogenous reaction of the federal funds rate.  As a result, the state-contingent policies are associated with only modestly lower longer-term interest rates.  Accordingly, along the median outlook, macroeconomic outcomes under the state-contingent reinvestment policies differ only slightly from those attained under the fixed-date policy. The small size of these policy effects could stem from two sources:  The stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model may underrepresent economic conditions in which policy effects would be large, or we may underestimate the size of the policy effects given economic conditions.  A prominent example is when the effective lower bound is binding, when differences between outcomes under the state-contingent reinvestment policies are likely to be larger because there would be no immediate offset coming from the federal funds rate. For those simulations in which the federal funds rate returns to the effective lower bound, the state-contingent policies lead to a median difference in the size of the balance sheet of up to $1.5 trillion over the three-year period starting in 2018 relative to the fixed-date policy.  When the federal funds rate is constrained by the effective lower bound, the payoff associated with a flexible cessation date does appear in the real economy: Compared with fixed-date policy, unemployment runs about 10 basis points and 15 basis points lower under the 1½ percent and 2½ percent policies, respectively.  The differential effects on inflation outcomes are very small. Our simulations suggest that delaying the cessation of reinvestment until the level of the policy rate reaches 1½ percent or 2½ percent provides some modest insurance against the recurrence and length of effective lower bound episodes.  Accordingly, policymakers may judge that it’s prudent to end reinvestment only after the federal funds rate is reasonably away from the effective lower bound, leaving room to offset unexpected events mostly or exclusively by cutting the federal funds rate. I should note that our results are sensitive to assumptions regarding the structure of the FRB/US model and its historical distribution of shocks, the baseline projection, and the interest rate rule, as these assumptions play a very important role in determining the frequency and duration of effective lower bound events.  An alternative baseline with a noninertial interest rate rule and a lower federal funds rate than those in the Tealbook forecast might well imply a substantially larger probability of being constrained by the effective lower bound.  In such circumstances, policymakers might wish to consider resuming reinvestment or even undertaking new asset purchases to support improved macroeconomic outcomes.  Thank you.  I will now turn the briefing over to Jane.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is a summary of the findings presented in a memo, discussing the macroeconomic implications of two different approaches to ending reinvestment. The results are presented objectively without any contradictory viewpoints.


Passage number 16.
 MS. IHRIG. Thank you, David.  Julie and I would like to turn to the second memo distributed to the Committee on approaches to and considerations relevant for changing the reinvestment policy.  In order to help frame the Committee’s discussion of possible approaches, this memo examines four illustrative options.  These options are listed at the top of your second exhibit.  The scenarios adhere to the broad policy guidelines provided in the Committee’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans that notes that securities holdings will be reduced in a “gradual and predictable manner,” primarily by ceasing to reinvest.  As illustrated by the bar charts on the left, the monthly pace of redemptions varies across the four scenarios.  The first few columns of the corresponding tables to the right show the annual volume of securities that would be redeemed under each scenario. The first scenario—immediate cessation—assumes full redemptions of both Treasury security maturities and agency mortgage-backed securities paydowns starting in the fourth quarter of this year.  Under this scenario, MBS redemptions (the blue bars) are projected to total about $175 billion next year and then decline each year thereafter.  Note that MBS redemptions are dependent on the path of interest rates, and thus realized redemptions could differ significantly from what is shown here as Lorie highlighted in her briefing.  Treasury security redemptions (the red bars) would total $425 billion in 2018 and $385 billion in 2019, with an uneven pattern through the year featuring large redemptions in months in which the Treasury conducts its midquarter refunding auctions. Applying a cap to the total amount of monthly redemptions of Treasury securities could smooth this pattern.  The second scenario considers a $30 billion monthly cap on Treasury security redemptions—a cap that would avoid the largest spikes in maturing securities.  The rightmost table shows that using this cap would result in Treasury security reinvestments of roughly $100 billion per year. The third option considers a two-year phaseout of reinvestments for both MBS and Treasury securities—that is, the monthly amount of redemptions would increase in successive steps, moving gradually to full redemptions.  The phaseout strategy considered in the memo is constructed as a series of increasing caps on the size of redemptions, defined in dollar terms.  Next year, this strategy results in a very modest amount of MBS redemptions and a noteable reduction in the volume of Treasury security redemptions relative to the previous two options.  While this strategy initially limits any month-to-month variation in redemptions, as the phaseout period proceeds this effect diminishes.  Of course, other types of phaseouts could be chosen, either in terms of dollar amounts or percentages of maturing securities as well as the length of time to phase out. Finally, we bookend the scenarios with one that ceases reinvestments only in the MBS portfolio while maintaining ongoing Treasury security reinvestments. In your next exhibit, the memo considers the effect of these reinvestment policies on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and income statement.  The top-left panel shows the projected evolution of the balance sheet.  Assuming no securities are sold, immediate cessation, the black line, results in the quickest decline in the size of the portfolio, with it projected to reach its normalized size in early 2021.  The capped Treasury securities and phaseout scenarios extend this timing by a handful of quarters, whereas the MBS redemption-only scenario, the green line, has the slowest pace of reduction, reflecting only the projected runoff of MBS. These scenarios all embed the standard set of assumptions regarding the evolution of the balance sheet, including that currency growth matches that of nominal GDP and that overnight RRP take-up declines to zero as normalization approaches.  One key assumption that affects our estimates of the timing of portfolio normalization is the longer-run level of reserve balances—here we assume the amount is $500 billion.  The appendix to the memo provides details on the range of assumptions that influence the eventual size of the portfolio and suggests that the minimal amount of reserves needed to run a floor regime for policy implementation could fall between $300 billion and $1 trillion.  The assumed size of reserve balances has implications not only for the size of the balance sheet but also for the date of normalization.  The top-right panel illustrates that, for the first three scenarios, the timing of portfolio normalization would shift out or in by about one year depending on whether less or more reserves are held in the long run.  Meanwhile, if policymakers were to only redeem MBS, portfolio normalization would still most likely be several years away. A consideration with any scenario that continues Treasury security reinvestment after the first change in reinvestment policy would be how to reinvest the maturing funds.  As noted in the middle-left panel, the current policy is to invest in a manner that’s proportional to new Treasury security issuances.  The Committee could instead   invest all maturing funds into shorter maturities, perhaps bills.  Such a change would serve to reduce the weighted average maturity of the portfolio and move the long-term composition of the portfolio to one that is more reflective of the composition of Treasury securities outstanding.  Of course, if bill rates are below the interest on excess reserves rate, as is currently the case, this approach to reinvesting would also reduce remittances.  But compared with the current policy, such an approach would likely also reduce the variability of income in the event of an interest rate shock, and if facing an adverse economic shock near the effective lower bound, the short-dated securities could enable a modest-sized maturity extension program instead of a large-scale asset purchase program. Regarding the behavior of the Federal Reserve income under each scenario, the middle-right panel reports projected remittances under the modal outlook for interest rates.  The four paths are not that different, though the trough is the lowest for the MBS redemptions-only scenario because it continues to hold sizable reserves over the next few years.  The memo reports the results of stochastic simulations to provide some measure of interest rate risk on remittances; we find that the MBS-only scenario is three times as likely to result in a deferred asset over the next several years than the other scenarios.  Julie will now review how these policies could affect financial markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting different scenarios and options for changing the reinvestment policy, without expressing any disagreement or debate.


Passage number 17.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  An observation and, I guess, two questions.  In the memo, I didn’t get a sense of what the staff would prefer to reinvest into if we decided to phase down the reinvestments.  Right now, we’re investing sort of out along the curve.  Does the staff have a preference in terms of what would we reinvest into if we were phasing down the reinvestments. It just wasn’t clear to me on the basis of the memo if there was a preference one way or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and expressing a lack of understanding regarding the preference of the staff in terms of reinvestments.


Passage number 18.
 MS. REMACHE.  We didn’t intend to convey, I think, a preference but rather to indicate that under the scenarios in which we would be maintaining ongoing reinvestments, it would be important to also consider the assets that we’re buying in those scenarios.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage indicates that there is no contention or disagreement. MS. REMACHE's statement is explaining a point without expressing any preference or disagreement.


Passage number 19.
  And one of the points, I think, that we were trying to convey is that those choices could influence the relative risks or— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Term premium effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a point they were trying to convey, without expressing any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 20.
 MS. REMACHE. —term premium effects, the ability to run the balance sheet down more quickly in the future, the constraints you face at the lower bound, and the effect on income.  All of those evaluation criteria would be affected by the choice of securities that you purchase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement as it only lists different factors that can affect the evaluation criteria.


Passage number 21.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So, presumably, part of the solution that we’d like the Committee to devise is to also include a judgment on that piece at some point, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their desire for the Committee to include a judgment on a certain piece as part of the solution.


Passage number 22.
 MS. REMACHE.  That’s right, and the staff could do more work on that on the basis of the feedback given at this meeting.  If the Committee would like to consider running down the portfolio at a somewhat slower pace and maintaining some level of ongoing reinvestments, we could evaluate a range of options and articulate the tradeoffs more specifically for a subsequent meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 23.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The word "okay" does not contain any contentious or disagreement-inducing content. It is a neutral term indicating approval, agreement, or acceptance.


Passage number 24.
 MS. IHRIG.  I think one of the things we thought of is that, on the first page, we specifically put the rollover column there so that policymakers realize, depending on their choice of a phaseout or a cap, that the dollar amount you’d be rolling over could be small or it could be larger.  So that might weigh into your decision about whether you actually want to think about a change in your current policy and having to communicate that to the public.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage describes a suggestion regarding the rollover column on the first page, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement among individuals.


Passage number 25.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  My second observation was that I found the inertial Taylor rule on the downside not very convincing.  If you really thought that the lower bound was potentially a risk of being binding, why would you want to follow the inertial Tylor rule.  Because it does lead to very distinctive results in the memo, right.  You get pinned at the lower bound very infrequently because it just takes so long for the inertial rule to take you there, and I was just curious what the staff thought.  Is that a realistic assumption, that the Committee would actually behave in that manner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of observations and questions.


Passage number 26.
 MR. LACKER. You’re asking the staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 27.
  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I just find it not very credible myself, but I’d like to hear you defend it, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses their skepticism towards a certain idea and expresses a desire to hear the other person's defense of it.


Passage number 28.
  [Laughter] MR. LOPEZ-SALIDO.  So, you’re absolutely right.  In describing past cycles, you tend to predict a tightening cycle that is pretty shallow and smooth, which is captured pretty well by inertia in Taylor-type rules.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement and describes how it is captured well by inertia in Taylor-type rules.


Passage number 29.
  And when you think about an easing cycle, you’re pretty— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It simply states that when thinking about an easing cycle, one is pretty-VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.


Passage number 30.
 I mean, I even went back and looked, and that’s really true—very slow to tighten and pretty fast— MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  It’s pretty fast in the easing, so this sort of asymmetry is not built in the model right now, and you’re totally right.  If instead of using an inertial Taylor-type rule, you get rid of the inertia component, within the context of the FRB/US model, there probably would have been a substantial increase in the likelihood of hitting the effective lower bound.  So instead of binding by 5 or 6 percent of the time, you get closer to 25 percent of the time, which makes sense on account of the unconditional quality of being at the lower bound.  So that is something that is important to bear in mind.  On the contrary, the idea of the memo is actually to emphasize that regardless of how you get to the lower bound, it’s important to understand what the relationship is between these two policies once you’re there.  It’s true that we’re  underestimating the probability of being at the lower bound, but once you think about it, you kind of capture some of the elements that you want to put in the discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 31.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of acknowledgments and a request for further questions, indicating no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 32.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I have a question on the reinvestment box—and this actually gets to the Vice Chairman’s first question—where the alternative is to “invest all maturing funds into shorter maturities, perhaps bills.” If the alternative strategy was to let the U.S. Treasury only issue Treasury bills instead of us holding the Treasury bills, would there be any difference in the interest rate effect of that.  So just let it roll off, and if the Treasury decides to issue bills rather than at longer maturities, is there an interest rate effect.  And that gets to a second part to the question, which is the Treasury’s debt management policy.  Under each of these policies, the Treasury debt management team is making choices on maturity, on issuance, on timing.  Have we discussed with the Treasury how any of these options would alter their own strategies on debt management. So rather than us trying to manipulate the Treasury securities held by the public, has the Treasury been brought into this discussion.  And have they raised any concerns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is questioning the effectiveness and impact of the alternative strategy of reinvesting all maturing funds into shorter maturities, specifically Treasury bills, instead of holding them. He is also questioning whether the Treasury's debt management team has been consulted and whether they have any concerns about these options.


Passage number 33.
 MR. POTTER.  Obviously, the people responsible for debt management at the Treasury know that we have large redemptions potentially coming up.  The way that we’ve described it to them is a bit similar to what we would say to a member of the public—that is, that we will be communicating clearly sometime this year so we don’t expect there to be any surprises.  The one thing I’ve emphasized is, for example, you wouldn’t expect to come out of an FOMC meeting and suddenly find out if you’re a Treasury debt manager that you have to issue, say, $60 billion or $70 billion more that month. But I’m not sure whether we’d find it appropriate to get into real details with the Treasury until we’ve given those details to the public.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the communication between the Federal Reserve and the Treasury regarding debt management.


Passage number 34.
  MS. REMACHE.  To the first part of your question, President Rosengren, you’re right.  Of course, the market effect will depend on the Treasury’s issuance decisions, and to the extent that they were to make up the increased financing needs through the issuance of bills, we’d expect that to have a smaller effect on market rates. That would probably be similar to the effect if we were buying Treasury bills and maintaining the larger size of the portfolio.  Of course, depending on how they manage the issuance in the future—our understanding in conversations with them is that they would eventually look to increase issuance at longer-term maturity points—then that would affect the overall effect on market rates and you’d see that the term premium in longer-term Treasury securities could increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging the potential market effects of the Treasury's issuance decisions and anticipating different scenarios based on the type and maturity of Treasury securities being issued.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 35.
 MS. IHRIG.  I just wanted to note that there was a Board briefing in May of last year by Erin Ferris in which she looked at how the Treasury would respond to the Federal Reserve’s redemption policy, and depending if they issued, say, bills only or only long-term bonds, our model suggests there could be an effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of "our model suggests there could be an effect" implies that there is a difference of opinion or uncertainty about the potential effects of the Treasury's response to the Federal Reserve's redemption policy.


Passage number 36.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Just a quick follow-up.  But they have the option, of course, to start with all Treasury bills and then, over time, go long.  So, in effect, if we’re worried about the effect on markets, rather than us doing it, they would have the option of doing it over time.  Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying that the option exists for someone to start with Treasury bills and gradually transition to long-term investments.


Passage number 37.
 MS. REMACHE. That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "That's right" simply confirms or agrees with something mentioned earlier.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
 MR. POTTER.  But if they act in an independent way from us, then we don’t control their decisions.  And currently there is interest in extending the maturity of Treasury debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter believes that if they act independently, their decisions will not be controlled by "us." This implies that there may be another party or group that disagrees with Mr. Potter and wants to control or influence their decisions.


Passage number 39.
 MR. FISCHER.  Sorry.  Whose interest. CHAIR YELLEN. The Treasury’s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer apologizes for his interruption and asks a clarifying question about whose interest is being referred to. Chair Yellen then simply answers by stating "The Treasury's."


Passage number 40.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The Treasury’s.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The reference to both the Treasury and Chair Yellen and Governor Fischer does not imply any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 41.
 MR. FISCHER.  Did I understand you to say we tell the public what we’re going to do before we tell the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply explains a procedure or practice, without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 42.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s not the way I completely tried to say it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply stating that his words did not come out the way he intended them to.


Passage number 43.
 MR. FISCHER.  No, but what did you say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply questioning what the other person said without any clear indication of disagreement.


Passage number 44.
 MR. POTTER.  Well, what we try to do is say that there wouldn’t be a one-day surprise, but in the conversations, we’ve made clear that this is an FOMC decision. The one issue that’s come up is that it’s very hard for them to adjust their auction schedule over a short period of time.  So we want them to have a period of time to do that, just as we would want the private sector to have some time to understand that they would be holding more long-term securities than they are right now.  That would be true in the mortgage market and also the Treasury securities market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply explaining the decision-making process and considerations involved in adjusting the auction schedule and holding more long-term securities.


Passage number 45.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen are having a conversation without arguing or contradicting each other.


Passage number 46.
 MR. LACKER.  Why would they have to alter their auction schedule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is a simple question raised by Mr. Lacker.


Passage number 47.
 MR. POTTER.  Because the size would go up.  Remember, right now we’re an add-on to the public.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact or offering an explanation. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 48.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know, but what difference does it make what day we do it on. You’re saying the size has to change, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "what difference does it make what day we do it on" is a question seeking clarification, rather than expressing disagreement.


Passage number 49.
 MS. LOGAN. The Treasury traditionally follows a regular and predictable approach to their fund issuance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the Treasury traditionally follows a regular and predictable approach to their fund issuance. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 50.
 MR. LACKER.  Right, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply acknowledging and agreeing with someone's point.


Passage number 51.
 MS. LOGAN.  So they typically would only increase the coupon size to the public by a couple of billion each time, and they would phase that in over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of facts about how the coupon size is typically increased gradually over time.


Passage number 52.
 MR. LACKER.  I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "MR. LACKER. I see" is a statement that simply indicates understanding or acknowledgment.


Passage number 53.
 MS. LOGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or information about the content of the passage.


Passage number 54.
  So they would start by issuing a larger amount of bills, and then they would—over months or a year or two—extend the weighted-average maturity back toward what their initial target was through coupon issuance, because they don’t like to go from an increase in the 10-year note from $30 billion to $40 billion to make up— MR. LACKER.  And what’s sold to the public as opposed to the add-on is what drives that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 55.
 MS. LOGAN.  They focus on the amount to the public.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that "they" (presumably a group or individuals) focus on a specific aspect (the amount to the public). There is no conflicting opinion or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 56.
 MR. LACKER.  I see.  I think that’s why President Williams was puzzled.  You said something about them increasing the amount they issued to the public.  But they’d be issuing the same amount, but we would just be taking less of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is simply expressing his understanding of the situation and explaining why President Williams may have been puzzled.


Passage number 57.
 MS. LOGAN.  Right.  Their communication is always to the amount that they will auction to the public, and they like to keep that amount only moving marginally over time.  Even during the crisis when they had to do that, they did that slowly.  They may also add a midquarter reopening if they need to increase the total amount by any larger amount, and it will take them a longer period of time.  So they may add a reopening of that security.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about how the communication and actions of a certain group are conducted. There is no disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 58.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions. [No response] Okay, then, let’s begin our round with the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The absence of response to the statement "other questions" suggests a lack of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 59.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 60.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I found the FOMC discussion we had on the size of the portfolio during what was almost an impromptu session in July 2016 to be extremely interesting and productive.  Then we had another session on the issue in November, and we’re still using the same statement in paragraph 5 of the FOMC statement.  It’s time to move on.  The   work that we’ve received, as President Mester mentioned, is really very interesting and very good, and we owe thanks to the staff for it. Our discussion obviously takes it for granted that the large balance sheet is in part the stock counterpart of past flows of QE and has the same effect on market interest rates. I know there’s skepticism about this in parts of the academic community, but it’s kind of hard for me to believe that when you increase the supply of something, the price doesn’t go down. Now, when we first started discussing this, I and possibly others among us were quite taken with the notion that it was really a major, so to speak, insurance function for the Federal Reserve, as we could use our balance sheet and structure it so that it sort of was balanced like an insurance company should balance its balance sheet and to be ready to intervene here, there, and everywhere with different securities suitable for such an intervention.  It was very interesting, but I don’t think any of us should consider going down that road.  We use monetary policy, which is powerful because it covers the whole economy.  And I will refrain from references to Jeremy Stein at this point. Monetary policy is a macroeconomic instrument, and I don’t think we should try to go further than to use open market operations of the traditional sort except in a major financial crisis.  So what should we do about reinvestments.  I think we’re getting close to the point at which we need to start ending them, and before the end of this year would be a good idea.  In part it’s because of all this nagging we’re getting from the private sector, which is not really necessary.  I think we can figure out what we want to do reasonably soon, and—except for the 2½ percent interest rate scenario—we will also be in a position to move reasonably soon. Let me just go to changes in minutes, et cetera.  If we want to move before the end of this year, the time we have for both formulating what we want to say to the public and moving is   rather short because I think we’re going to have to have several discussions.  So we’d have to get on with deciding what we need to tell the public and get on with making the relevant decisions. I’d like to mention one other thing.  The big disadvantage I see in not saying that we would resume reinvesting if economic conditions warranted is, I believe, that quantitative easing works.  I believe that saying, as a principle, “I’m not going to use this tool” at a time when you might want to use it and you have the tool in your hands, you’re sending a message that it doesn’t matter that much to you and it’s not particularly useful.  That’s not, I think, a precedent we should want to set, that we forsake this tool in certain circumstances, although it might turn out to be useful and it might even turn out to be important if we’re getting close to the effective lower bound.  So I’d be wary of not saying what I think every one of us has said so far—namely, we should make it clear that we’ll adjust our plans to run off the portfolio if it is necessary to help deal with an unexpected event that would be relatively important to handle by stopping the runoff of our assets and to add that, of course, we hope that such changes will not be necessary. With regard to the size of the reserves and so forth, I think we’ve got to agree on the principles that we need for determining how large excess reserves would be.  I don’t know whether you all got this $100 billion number in your mind.  I saw $1 trillion for excess reserves as the steady state level and thought, “Gee, I hadn’t thought of that.”  And I wonder whether there is any sense that that’s a large number.  I know the economy will catch up to it someday, but is that a number we actually should be thinking of.  Let’s see.  Obviously, that will depend on the interest rates we pay on reserves as well.  I think I agreed with almost everybody here, so I’ll stop.  I’ve got a few other comments, but nothing that hasn’t been said three times.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 61.
   MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I also want to thank the staff for the memos, which were very helpful. My read of the memos is that basically it doesn’t matter which of the options we choose in terms of the macroeconomic effects.  I’m not in favor of the MBS-only option because it’s so slow.  I’m agnostic among the other three. I think, overall, our goal should be to surprise the markets as little as possible and do everything we can to avoid any kind of a tantrum.  That to me says we should separate the announcement of what our plan is from the actual implementation—I think Vice Chairman Dudley suggested maybe a white paper.  I think a detailed announcement six to nine months or longer in advance of the actual implementation would be very helpful, just to give markets plenty of time to prepare for it. In the memo, you have this notion of date based versus state based—it is something I talked about a lot with my staff.  I actually come out in favor of date based, and I’ll tell you why.  If we announce a detailed plan sometime soon, that itself could be a trigger event for some type of market reaction.  But if we then have a state-based actual implementation, that’s a second trigger event.  And that FOMC meeting, when we decide to actually get to our threshold of 1.5 percent or whatever it is, becomes a momentous event.  Are we actually going to move the federal funds rate and not only raise rates, but now trigger the ceasing of reinvestment. The thing I like about a date-based plan is there’s one possible trigger event well in advance of implementation, and then, basically, the balance sheet is on autopilot.  And if the economy goes south, if the euro zone breaks up or something happens, we can always hold.  We’ll always have an excuse if we need to press pause and delay the actual implementation of the policy. So I’m in favor of date based because I think it minimizes the risk of an adverse market reaction.  The last comment I’ll make is, there’s been discussion of needing to raise rates in advance of doing any of this so we have room to cut them.  I always struggle when I hear that argument.  To me it’s like driving down the highway and saying, “Well, we may have a hill approach, so let’s let off the gas now so we can floor it if the hill comes.”  It’s better to just maintain your speed than let off the gas in advance so you can floor it when the hill comes. And I think about the notion of, if we raised rates, are we really going to cut them if this balance sheet announcement triggers an adverse market response.  I doubt it.  I think it’s much more likely we’re just going to hold our policy and maybe defer our federal funds rate hike.  If I’m right that in response to an adverse market reaction we’re just going to hold, I would rather hold at a lower federal funds rate than hold at a higher federal funds rate while that tantrum subsides.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Kashkari, is expressing his thoughts and preferences regarding different options, but there is no indication of disagreement with others or an opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 62.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I start with the premise that the Chair actually articulated in the beginning, that interest rate policy is the Committee’s preferred tool for affecting broader financial conditions in the pursuit of our mandates.  The Committee has incomparably more experience in using policy rate changes to affect financial conditions than it does in using the balance sheet. To me, the implication of that preference is that, in the absence of other considerations, which I’ll return to in a second, the Committee would ideally not begin to allow the balance sheet to shrink until the federal funds rate is at least approaching a level that would allow the Committee to react to a downturn aggressively and effectively through interest rate reductions. I don’t see this view as located on the “hawkish–dovish” spectrum, but rather as being prudently bearish in the spirit of hoping for the best and preparing for the worst.So the question is:  How high should the federal funds rate be before the Committee moves away from full reinvestment.  I don’t have an exact figure, but I’ll just point out that over the past 50 years, the average total policy rate reduction associated with a recession has been over 5 percent, and the smallest such reduction has been more than 4 percent. If the Committee raises rates three times this year, the federal funds rate will be at 138 basis points.  And even with a neutral rate that could be a full point lower than it used to be, a rate of 138 basis points is not high enough, in my view, to actually begin to reduce reinvestments.  On the current path, the middle of 2018 seems to be about the right time to seriously consider moving away from full reinvestment, and that timing is also consistent with market expectations, diverse though they may be.  And I would echo others that I personally am not particularly attracted to a specific date or to a threshold. I would rather keep it qualitative for the time being. There are plausible reasons why the Committee might go sooner, and one such reason is that moving sooner would send a healthy signal that the Committee is intent on shrinking the balance sheet. That could add some legitimacy to future use of the balance sheet, although it is hard for me to see big or lasting incremental gains on that front from moving in December 2017 rather than two or three meetings later. Another question is, how many rate increases are you forgoing in order to move the shrinkage of the balance sheet forward in time. It’s very hard to say, but I think we should assume that it’s two or three rate increases. In effect, the choice now is, do you want to move the end of reinvestment forward by two or three meetings, or would you rather have 50 or 75 basis points more on the federal funds rate.  I guess I come down on the side of wanting to have a higher federal funds rate.  That is partly just the near presence of the effective lower bound.  AsDavid López-Salido suggested earlier, the memos do estimate a very low probability of hitting the lower bound.  The probability drawn from the postwar period is actually much higher than that, and, therefore, I think the memos understate the value of having more powder if we do hit the lower bound. Another consideration is the path of the economy.  If the economy does surprise to the upside, I guess my first preference would be to raise rates even further.  If the economy grows even stronger than expected, to the point at which the Committee feels that it’s getting “behind the curve,” then that would strengthen the case for doing something sooner on reinvestments.  In any case, I think it’s wise to reduce reinvestments at a moment of relatively high confidence about the strength of the economy. If the Committee is persuaded that reinvestment policy should be changed this year, about half a year before the market broadly expects, then I think that would argue for a more gradual phaseout of purchases along the lines of the third option laid out.  I also think there will be a need to manage our communications very carefully.  In the world of the memos, the public perfectly understands that if we reduce the balance sheet more quickly, then we’ll raise rates less quickly. In the actual world, as we know—indeed, as we have proven—communicating tapering decisions is a tricky business.  I think the market is highly likely to take the dot plot as a given and take a change in reinvestment policy as additional policy removal or a “hawkish surprise.” I’m not particularly concerned about another taper tantrum, but I do think we need to be clear whether that is the Committee’s intent. I also agree that once the Committee begins to reduce the balance sheet, the process should be on automatic as far as possible and that we should not be in the business of using thebalance sheet as a meeting-by-meeting tool.  However, I do see it as relatively straightforward to resume reinvestments in the event of a downturn that required us to cut rates, and our communications should clearly state that a decision to cut rates is likely to be accompanied by one to resume reinvestments. Finally, this is a highly timely discussion.  It would be good to reach a consensus on guidelines.  And I think if we’re going to make a decision to taper this year, I guess I would be in the camp of wanting to have that be a delayed effect and then to be phased in gradually over time.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the author's views and preferences on interest rate policy and the balance sheet.


Passage number 63.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I really appreciate the staff’s work and the timing of this discussion.  To date there have been strong arguments to delay the start of balance sheet normalization, but, as others have said around the table, many of those reasons are fading in importance, and we are steadily approaching a time when normalization should begin.  Doing so will reduce the risk for Federal Reserve remittances; create some policy space for ourselves, as others have said; and perhaps reduce a source of volatility in the markets.  It’s also consistent with our stated normalization principles, and I believe that staying consistent with those principles is also quite important. Like others, the factors I see influencing the timing of normalization involve the level of the funds rate, the state of the economy, and the balance of risks.  I would like to see two or maybe three more rate hikes and that the economic risks are roughly balanced.  And there’s a possibility, as Governor Powell said, that we may be in an economy that is very different, one in which those risks are actually to the upside, and so we’d have to take that into account.   Now, work by my staff and also, of course, the Board memos indicate that with proper communication the “when” and the “how” of normalization will have relatively small effects on yields and market functioning.  Risk considerations are, thus, central to the way I think about this.  The memos distributed prior to the meeting discuss at length the risks associated with future macroeconomic or financial shocks. The FOMC, though, always has the option to change course in response to tail events, so these are not the types of risks that most concern me.  Related to President Williams’s comments, the risk I worry about the most is model uncertainty.  We are far from certain with regard to the effects of SOMA holdings.  Current models may underestimate the effects of redemptions and perhaps even miss some channels that prove crucial after the fact. If, say, we find out that redemptions increase yields by substantially more than estimated, we would also have to revise upward the amount of accommodation SOMA holdings have been providing since 2014 and revise downward the strength of the underlying economy. In the worst-case scenario, we would find ourselves moving faster in the wrong direction.  Therefore, I think we need to be cautious.  A sociologist, Charles Perrow, describes as normal accidents those to be expected in complex systems that are, one, interactive; two, have tight coupling; three, firm cascading failures; and, four, are opaque. Financial markets clearly qualify, and we should be cautious.  Therefore, it seems prudent to me to start with a cap on redemptions, as shown in the staff memo, and possibly gradually raise it as we become more certain of the effects of normalizations.  We could start, say, at $30 billion and perhaps bump the cap up by $10 billion a quarter if everything goes as planned, soon then ceasing all reinvestments.  There are other ways we could do this, but I think to me the cap approach and being flexible about that makes some sense. I’m a bit more wary regarding our knowledge of normalizing MBS and whether that market is as robust as the market for Treasury securities. It may be even more worthwhile to consider phasing in the normalization process with MBS.  My staff and I were just curious why that option was not considered, and if you could answer that question I would appreciate it. To reiterate, the conditions for starting normalization are roughly those I expect to prevail close to the end of this year, 2017, when the target range for the federal funds rate is likely to be 125 to 150 basis points.  However, I think explicitly linking the level of the federal funds rate with the start of the normalization process would be problematic on several counts. First, communications would need to be carefully crafted to avoid confusion over whether the condition on the federal funds rate level necessary to start balance sheet normalization is a threshold, a trigger, a hint, or a sign.  Exactly what is it.  In addition, the timing between the level of the federal funds rate and the start of normalization would raise the stakes, as others have said, on what would be or should be a relatively mundane 25 basis point increase.  So I am also supportive of the idea of separating the reinvestments decision from a decision we would make on raising the federal funds rate.  I just think it adds too much drama to the situation that we can avoid. Also, it seems preferable to rely on the data-contingent language in a manner analogous to that deployed for the federal funds rate until the Committee comes to a consensus, at which point I am supportive of some clear communication, whether it’s a clear statement of policy, a white paper, or some other form—but we’re not there yet, and we have to form a consensus in the Committee.  Although using data-contingent language will not remove all uncertainty regarding the start date, I view data dependence as a guiding principle of monetary policy.  Despite what critics say, and I know they hate that phrase, I actually think it has served us well  with interest rate adjustments, and for similar reasons I believe it should be adopted with respect to the normalization of the balance sheet as opposed to any other start date or trigger or threshold for the federal funds rate.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Instead, it presents the speaker's views on the timing and approach to balance sheet normalization and discusses potential risks and uncertainties. There is no explicit disagreement with other members of the committee.


Passage number 64.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would like to thank the staff for useful background memos on this topic before I begin.  I’ll start with an overarching consideration.  I think we should end reinvestments in a way that avoids conveying that we intend to use the timing, pace, or nature of the reduction in our balance sheet as a distinct discretionary policy instrument. I think others have made that observation.  I agree it is hard to have much confidence in the estimates of the incremental macroeconomic effects of changes in the balance sheet size or composition.  I endorse President Williams’s suggestion that further attention should be paid to that issue. I think we are better off relying on traditional interest rate policy and setting our balance sheet on a path that is formulaic and predictable.  I also think we want to minimize the extent to which market participants are preoccupied with conjectures about our balance sheet plans.  Today’s discussion will appear in the minutes.  I think it is likely to trigger a great deal of speculation about the timing and nature of our decision.  I would prefer to commence running off our balance sheet sooner rather than later, and to make doing that as simple as possible. I would like to see us simply announce at an upcoming meeting, in paragraph 5 in our statement, that we are ending reinvestment of both Treasury securities and MBS.  We can make it effective a short time in the future.  To me, a month seems perfectly adequate.  That should put the discourse to bed fairly quickly.   Among the options presented by the staff, I favor the first scenario, in which we immediately cease all reinvestments.  When we get close to having normalized our balance sheet, we should sell off the residual MBS holdings, as we said we could in our normalization principles and plans, and, if necessary at the time, reinvest the proceeds into Treasury securities. These MBS would be a nuisance.  Besides, I think we should try to get to our objective of achieving a Treasury securities-only balance sheet sooner rather than later, again, consistent with our principles. I will comment here on the size of our normalized balance sheet.  To say that an estimate that is stated as $500 billion to $1 trillion is an imprecisely estimated quantity is sort of an understatement.  In looking over the analysis, I’d urge the staff to maybe dig a little deeper. I brought to the subject the intuition derived from our pre-crisis operations that it only took a couple of billion dollars of excess reserves on Wednesday afternoon in surplus relative to what the market needed to drive the funds rate fairly low.  So something is wrong with that intuition if we need $500 billion in excess reserves to run a floor system systematically.  I suspect it is much less than $100 billion.  But, anyway, we can probe as we get there and figure that out, but that, I think, needs a lot more work. I think we should actually consider, and the staff should analyze, a hybrid approach in which we set a floor under the rate at which our MBS holdings decline rather than letting the pace of MBS runoffs be governed by just the vagaries of the principal repayment flows.  We can set a minimum monthly rate at which we would reduce our MBS holdings.  Whatever we don’t achieve through principal and interest payments we could achieve through outright sales.  That way, we could set our MBS holdings on a more or less predictable path, or occasionally repayments might spike above that minimum amount, but we could set it at an amount that gives  us confidence we can achieve our announced objective in a reasonable amount of time.  We could have the proportion of MBS in our portfolio when we get to normalization be much smaller than it is here, which is almost half. Now, I realize that the scope of today’s discussion was limited to reinvestment policy, and that’s consistent with us having decided some time ago to avoid asset sales.  I think it might be worthwhile to revisit that decision, to open that up.  My recollection is that a decisive factor was the potential effect on remittances—the possibility of negative remittances, of realizing capital losses by selling long-dated securities in a rising rate environment and thereby the risk, as many people have alluded to, of recording a deferred asset.  That effect would be without any direct economic consequence of any significance, but the optics were viewed as potentially costly on the political front. I’d point out, though, that there are other adverse political optics associated with our balance sheet that deserve consideration as well, and many of these cut in the opposite direction.  For example, when long-term yields rise another 10 to 15 or 20 basis points, we will begin showing unrealized capital losses in our financial statements—granted, in the footnote, but they will be there to find.  And, as rates rise, they will rapidly swamp the book value of our capital.  I think that could easily get as much attention as a deferred asset on our balance sheet.  Avoiding sales is not going to protect us against adverse optics, in other words. I’d also mention that the dollar value of the payments we make as interest on excess reserves has gotten significant attention politically as well, and minimizing that is obviously aided by more rapidly running off our balance sheet.  The basic point is that considering asset sales shouldn’t be a taboo. Finally, I just want to say that I have the utmost confidence in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s markets group and their ability to be well prepared to buy MBS should we decide to do so in years ahead.  I see no reason to continue to buy or sell MBS for the purpose of “maintaining operational readiness.”  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and preferences, but there is no direct contradiction or argument with other viewpoints.


Passage number 65.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Glad you have so much confidence in us.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Glad you have so much confidence in us" is a statement expressing appreciation, and [Laughter] indicates that it is taken as light-hearted humor. The response from CHAIR YELLEN does not show any sign of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 66.
  MS. GOODING.  Deferring my thoughts on the questions posed in this discussion, I will go on record as saying I think the positions contained in the Committee’s statement of policy normalization plans and principles are still sound.  In particular, I support reducing the portfolio in a gradual and predictable manner, with the timing dependent on how economic and financial conditions and the economic outlook evolve.  I think the goal here includes minimizing market disruption as much as possible, as others have said.  I also support the goal of a balance sheet that is primarily composed of Treasury securities and is as small as is consistent with the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy. To jump ahead to one of the communications questions, I am for affirming the key elements of the policy normalization plans and principles, and I think it would be a good idea to decide on and communicate such an affirmation as soon as we can, perhaps even in the minutes of this meeting. With reference to the July 2015 FOMC discussion, I would have been in the camp favoring beginning redemptions on the basis of a qualitative assessment of economic conditions and a wind-down that engineers a smooth decline in the balance sheet.  Of the approaches to redemption policy in the staff memo, my preference is for a phasing out of both Treasury securities and MBS over time.  I think the loss and the speed of adjustment compared with a full redemption strategy is worth the insurance against unexpected market disruptions.  I am in favor of retaining the flexibility to adjust the pace of redemptions over time as we gain experience, though I acknowledge that this approach will involve some challenges with respect to communications. I should add that although I support retaining the option to adjust a taper over time, I think the presumption should be that the adjustments will be relatively few in number.One of the implicit themes in this discussion is whether the balance sheet adjustments should be considered an active policy tool and to what degree that tool should be considered substitutable with explicit interest rate policy. I think it is much simpler not to present balance sheet adjustments as an active policy tool in both public communications and Committee deliberations.  In other words, I think balance sheet adjustments should be on autopilot, as a couple others have said here, to the extent compatible with economic and financial developments.  I would let interest rate policies adjust to whatever effect balance sheet normalization requires, not vice versa. On a related theme, I would not favor communications that lay out conditions under which reinvestment would be restarted.  My thinking is, the conditions under which this would be appropriate—a downturn in the economy, for example—will be readily apparent.  The value of communicating this conditionality up front is, to me, overshadowed by the risk of seeing doubt about the Committee’s commitment to full normalization. Finally, I would like to see the Committee start the process of balance sheet reduction as soon as reasonably prudent.  Assuming the economy is still on track, I think the 1½ percent threshold on the federal funds rate would be the best time to begin the process of shrinking the balance sheet.  My forecast for the economy over the next three years, and the uncertainty surrounding it, put very little weight on the likelihood that we would find it necessary to restart reinvestment during that time.  Thus, I see limited benefit to waiting for a higher funds rate before acting.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. Gooding, expresses her support for the Committee's statement of policy normalization plans and principles and agrees with the goal of reducing the portfolio gradually and predictably. She also supports a balance sheet primarily composed of Treasury securities and a small size consistent with efficient implementation of monetary policy. She mentions a preference for phasing out both Treasury securities and MBS over time and retaining flexibility to adjust the pace of redemptions. She also expresses her view that balance sheet adjustments should not be considered an active policy tool and that interest rate policies should adjust to the effects of balance sheet normalization. She does not favor laying out conditions for restarting reinvestment and suggests starting the process of balance sheet reduction at a 1.5% threshold on the federal funds rate. Overall, she presents a consistent and supportive viewpoint.


Passage number 67.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’d like to thank the staff for the informative memos on our policy options.  For some time we’ve made it clear that we would maintain our   current reinvestment policy until normalization of the federal funds rate was well under way.  I believe this conditionality remains appropriate. It allows for policy flexibility against unforeseen developments. Of course, the question remains:  At what level of the funds rate should we begin normalization.  A higher rate might lower some economic risks and reinforce our strong commitment to a symmetric 2 percent inflation target.  But large reserve levels do make me nervous about the optics and political risks of the Federal Reserve making larger and larger IOER payments as policy rates rise.  I don’t want to unnecessarily delay our eventual normalization of the balance sheet.  Taking into account these considerations and in light of the outcomes described in the staff memos, waiting until the funds rate is somewhere in the range of 1½ to 2 percent before changing reinvestment policy seems like a good plan to me. Regarding communications, I believe it is important to reinforce that the federal funds rate is our primary policy instrument.  But if fundamentals were to change and we risked heading toward the lower bound again, I think we need to retain the option to change our balance sheet policy if necessary to achieve our employment and inflation mandates.  This is simply part of outcome-based monetary policy. As long as we have a low inflation objective of 2 percent and are in a low-growth, low-r* environment, we face a real risk of returning to the lower bound and having to use our balance sheet to provide appropriate monetary policy accommodation.  We should probably communicate this contingency.  I wouldn’t want to make too much of it, though, and would also indicate that active use of the balance sheet would be limited to more challenging economic conditions.  With regard to communication tools, the qualitative descriptions the Chair used in a recent testimony do a very nice job of describing the conditions for changing reinvestments and are worth repeating.  Of course, the minutes should describe the range of issues we discuss here today, and, as we move through the year, if growth and inflation evolve along the lines most of us see in our SEPs, we can use the press conference, minutes, and speeches to inform the public that we are closer to changing the reinvestment policy and to give a broad outline of our operational plans.  I see no need for any references in the FOMC statement until we’re quite close to acting. Turning to the illustrative options put forth in the staff memo, as long as we accomplish our macroeconomic goals and reduce the balance sheet over a three- or four-year period, I do not have strong feelings on the precise way we operate.  Assuming that we are achieving our dual-mandate goals, option four, which ends MBS reinvestments while continuing reinvestments in Treasury securities, does not normalize the balance sheet rapidly enough for me.  But the remaining three alternatives get there fast enough and produce relatively similar paths for the balance sheet and economic outcomes. I recognize each option has different implications for how we interact with the Treasury security and MBS markets.  I will look to the Board and New York Federal Reserve staffs for their advice about which combinations best address potential market disruptions.  My staff coalesced around a combination of options 2 and 3 in which we put a dollar cap on the amount of Treasury securities we redeem in any month and phase out MBS reinvestments gradually.  This seems to smooth out larger Treasury security redemptions and would provide time for MBS market participants to adjust to any changes in market dynamics.  I recognize, though, that wecould tweak the parameters a bit to achieve the same pace of balance sheet reduction as in option 2. One thing that came out in the presentation was the chart about the pros and cons and how the communication in one case is easy—that of immediate cessation—a bit more complicated in the case of capped Treasury securities, and complicated in the case of a two-year phaseout.  I almost asked the question, “Complicated to whom.” because we’re dealing with market experts.  I would think that at some point we’d just describe what this is going to be.  The larger, simpler point is, simply, we want to be at the point at which we can announce we’re now going to stop reinvesting, and our balance sheet will start to glide down, and there will be details about that.  I don’t really find the complicated argument to be that persuasive. Whichever option we end up with, our communications should focus on the macroeconomic objectives and the normalization principles that we’ve already stated.  We should emphasize the overall pace at which we are reducing our balance sheet and de-emphasize the details of how we’re accomplishing it. Indeed, when the time comes, many of the particulars could be described in the directive to the Desk or the implementation note rather than the FOMC statement.  This would highlight the technical market function nature of these decisions, and it would reduce the risk that market participants might mistake a particular operational detail as a signal about the overall stance of monetary policy or as a worry over some financial stability concern.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing various policy options and expressing his own opinion on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 68.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think the 1½ percent trigger is an appropriate conceptual place to start, subject to continued progress in meeting our dual-mandate objectives.  I think this trigger and our actions should be state dependent, and I do think our actions should be reversible, although I would prefer not to state precisely under what conditions we would reverse our tapering. The reasons I’d like to see us get started sooner rather than later are political economy reasons, in large part in that I do believe that in the future we’re going to need to use our balance sheet, and I think if we keep too large a balance sheet, we risk not being able to use it in the future when we most need it.  So, again, I would get started sooner rather than later. I would argue that when we do start, it should be done gradually, and in terms of the options of either a one- to two-year phaseout or a capping of securities or some combination thereof, I’ll defer to the Open Market Desk, but, for me, slower is likely to mean we’ll run off this balance sheet faster.  I think the period of greatest risk will be at the start, and I think once we get launched and rolling, we have a much greater likelihood that this will be a sustainable policy. It will also give us the greatest probability by going slower at the start of shoving off and making sure we’ve got market stability and we minimize the effect on the markets. In terms of when we announce this, my own view would be, conceptually, either at the meeting at which we raise the federal funds rate target range to 125 to 150 basis points or at the meeting after that meeting.  I would recommend we make an announcement and we begin one to two months later.  I actually would be in favor of shortening the time frame between when we announce this and when we implement it, because I think fear of the unknown may actually be the biggest factor in the market reaction. I think at that point when we make the announcement, we should write a public implementation memo or an amendment to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans and lay it out then.  And, for me, in terms of today, the main thing I’d want communicated in our minutes discussion is that we reaffirm the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans and that we  had a discussion.  But I would want to wait until a future meeting to give a detailed articulation of what we plan to do and then start again one to two months later and not leave too much time between announcing and starting.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kaplan, suggests starting the tapering process sooner rather than later, while also advocating for a gradual approach. However, he does not provide specific conditions for reversing the tapering. This suggests that there may be differing opinions among stakeholders on the appropriate timing and strategy for tapering.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Assuming the federal funds rate continues to rise toward its expected longer-run level on the SEP median path, we should be prepared to issue a revised statement of principles and plans for balance sheet normalization by the second or third quarter of this year. I would expect a revised statement to outline, in broad strokes, the conditions under which the balance sheet would start to be released, the relative roles of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet and their relationship in achieving the Committee’s objectives once that process begins, the process for allowing the balance sheet to run off, the framework that will govern the size of the balance sheet when it reaches the “new normal,” and any conditions that might warrant alteration of that path.  Let me take each in turn. First, the Committee should continue to follow a state-contingent and, more specifically, a rate-contingent policy in determining when full balance sheet reinvestment should be discontinued.  Although the staff simulations using the FRB/US model suggest little economic difference between state- and date-contingent approaches, the Committee’s judgment must also take into account the more complicated reality of the markets as well as any unexpected shocks. A policy that’s contingent on the level of the federal funds rate would enable the Committee to clearly communicate its intentions while retaining control over the timing in the event of changes in economic conditions or adverse shocks.   In contrast, a time-contingent strategy risks either time inconsistency or relinquishing that control in the face of adverse shocks.  For instance, a time-contingent policy of discontinuing reinvestment in the third or fourth quarter of this year could coincide with a time of unusual stress in the Treasury security markets in the event that uncertainty over the debt ceiling has not been resolved by then, as happened in the previous two episodes. By contrast, a policy that’s tied to the federal funds rate would clearly signal the intention to proceed if economic circumstances warrant while retaining the flexibility to adjust to adverse developments through adjusting the path of the federal funds rate.  Indeed, the policy adopted in December 2015 to rely solely on the federal funds rate to remove accommodation until normalization is well under way has demonstrated the value of this approach.  It has ensured that our most familiar and tested tool, the funds rate, will have reached a level at which it can be cut meaningfully to counter adverse shocks and thus help to guard against asymmetric risks associated with the effective lower bound. With regard to the SEP median, placing the long-run value of the federal funds rate around 3 percent, it would be reasonable to define normalization as well under way once the range for the federal funds rate has reached midway to its long-run equilibrium value, which suggests passing a threshold of around 1½ percent.  A threshold below this level leaves too little room to cut the funds rate if needed, while a threshold significantly above it risks delaying for too long balance sheet normalization.  Current SEP numbers suggest this threshold could be reached as soon as the third quarter of this year, such that full reinvestment could be discontinued in the fourth quarter if economic conditions continue to evolve in line with the median projection.   Once full reinvestment is discontinued, the FOMC effectively will have two tools to remove accommodation, which is a change from previous tightening cycles.  The revised policy statement should clarify whether the Committee will employ a strategy of complementarity in which the federal funds rate target and balance sheet are both used actively, as some have suggested, or a strategy of subordination, which would prioritize the federal funds rate as the sole active tool away from the effective lower bound. In this approach, once the federal funds rate rises sufficiently, the balance sheet would be set on autopilot, shrinking in a gradual, predictable way until a “new normal” has been reached, and then increasing in line with trend increases in the demand for currency.  Indeed, I would argue that predictability, parsimony, precision, and clarity of communications all argue in favor of focusing policy on the federal funds rate as the single active tool in circumstances in which the two tools are largely substitutes. Third, I favor a gradual and predictable phaseout of reinvestments, at least over the first two years when principal repayments are elevated.  While the background memo suggests there would be little difference in the economic effects of gradually phasing out versus immediately ceasing reinvestment, we cannot rule out that there may be material differences in how markets will react.  A phaseout should reduce the risk of an adverse market reaction because it would only gradually increase the amount of securities the market will be required to absorb.  It also aligns with the Committee’s desire to remove accommodation gradually and seems to risk a lower likelihood of misinterpretation by markets as a signal of impatience. As the smoothing effect of the initial phaseout would fade over time and then end, it might be prudent to develop additional guard rails for reducing any spikes in the amount of securities that need to be funded by the market each month, for instance, by a monthly cap.  Such an approach would further reduce the chances of adverse market reactions, and I’d be open to this type of approach if the staff felt the possibility of such disruptions were material.  In addition, I’d be inclined to apply the change in our reinvestment policy symmetrically to Treasury securities and MBS. Fourth, the revised principles will need to set expectations about the framework that will govern the size of the balance sheet once it reaches its “new normal.” The Committee’s deliberations in November suggest that there’s substantial support for maintaining the current framework, especially in view of its greater relative simplicity. The minimum level of reserves to efficiently and effectively implement monetary policy in a floor system depends on the structural demand for reserves and the variability of short-term changes in the demand and supply of reserves.  Because of changes since the crisis, it’s difficult to know with any precision how low reserves can be allowed to drop while still maintaining effective interest rate control.  Staff analysis suggests that regulatory changes and a heightened sensitivity toward risk on the part of financial participants may have moved the post-crisis demand for reserves up to a level between $250 billion and $750 billion, and a buffer capable of absorbing short-term variability might be about $250 billion. As we can’t be sure of the “new normal” level of excess reserves, the Committee may want to indicate that it will monitor money markets for indications that any further reduction in the supply of reserves would put upward pressure on money market rates as the balance sheet gradually declines perhaps below some amount, such as $1 trillion. Finally, it could be helpful for the revised principles to indicate circumstances that would call for exceptions to this approach.  Most obviously, during the period when the balance sheet is running down, if the economy encounters large adverse shocks, it may be appropriate tocommence the reinvestment of principal payments again, in order to preserve conventional policy space.  Informing markets of our intentions in this regard ex ante could promote stability in financial markets and resilience in the economy. In conclusion, the normalization principles released in September 2014, together with the December 2015 statement language, provided important clarity that was appropriate for the economic conditions of the past few years.  If progress toward our goals continues as expected, it will soon be time to revise those principles to clarify when and how balance sheet reinvestment policy will change.  I look forward to further discussion in meetings ahead.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Ms. Brainard argues for a policy that is contingent on the level of the federal funds rate, while also emphasizing the value of focusing policy on the federal funds rate as the single active tool. This contradicts the suggestion by others to employ a strategy of complementarity in which the federal funds rate target and balance sheet are both used actively.


Passage number 70.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, appreciate the staff memos addressing the issues related to our reinvestment policy, and I see them building on the Committee’s discussions going back to 2015. In terms of the factors that should influence the timing of the change to reinvestments, the staff analysis pointed to little difference in macroeconomic outcomes whether we start that process later this year or when the funds rate reaches 2½ percent.  From this standpoint, I see current conditions and the outlook providing an opportunity to adjust the reinvestment policy this year.  While precise market reactions are difficult to predict, I have some confidence that, with the right communications, we could be less concerned about market reaction of the sort we saw in 2013. In terms of selecting a date versus a level for the funds rate, I recall that most of us favored the state-contingent approach when we discussed this issue in 2015.  Assuming tomorrow’s decision will raise rates further, I would be comfortable viewing the normalization process as well under way and that, assuming no material change in the outlook or balance of   risks, by the time of our May or June meeting, it would be appropriate to tell the public what our plans are and begin ceasing reinvestments at the next meeting. My views about the principles for restarting reinvestments are guided by the discussion we had last November about the long-run implementation framework. What we reported in the minutes for that meeting was that most participants did not indicate support for using the balance sheet as an active tool in situations when short-term rates were not constrained by the effective lower bound. Away from the lower bound, my preference would be for balance sheet policy to be on autopilot.  On the other hand, we should be realistic that even if the economy unfolds as we expect, interest rates could remain relatively low for some time and a shock could bring policy back to the lower bound.  Under that scenario, restarting reinvestments may not be desirable but are certainly an option the Committee would have at its disposal. Regarding the options, assuming that the differences between the various approaches appear somewhat modest, I favor an approach that is relatively simple and aims to have minimal effects on market functioning.  I thought the option of capping Treasury security investments seemed to best fit that criteria, but I would certainly look to the Desk to guide the Committee’s evaluation of this and other options drawing on their experience and their own interpretation of market dynamics. In terms of communication, I favor reaffirming the 2014 principles for policy normalization in terms of reducing the balance sheet gradually and predictably and to hold Treasury securities in the long run.  With the minutes conveying the Committee’s discussion at this meeting, we could announce the change to the reinvestment policy at an upcoming meeting, preferably one with a press conference, with the actual change in policy to be implemented soon after. I would also be comfortable explaining that redemptions would continue at least until the level of necessary reserve balances are achieved and that reinvestments could be restarted in the future should economic conditions warrant.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Ms. George expressing her views and preferences.


Passage number 71.
 MR. FISCHER.  Steve, have you asked what would happen if France left the monetary union.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question being asked.


Passage number 72.
 MR. KAMIN.  What we have done—and we put it in a box in the Tealbook and a description there as well as an alternative scenario—is to look at what happens if Europe comes close to the euro area breaking up.  This is a scenario in which France holds a referendum, and there’s a period of uncertainty when people don’t know which way it’s going to go.  And that leads to huge financial stresses and a recession that lowers euro-area GDP 4 percent, which is pretty bad, and it has pretty material effects on the United States.  Now, you asked what happens if France actually leaves the euro area, and I guess my inclination is to say, “Well, at that point, all bets are off.”  But let me just say, I think it would probably lead to much more profound financial disruptions and contagion than in our relatively dire scenario that just shows the euro area coming close.  I think it’s unclear whether the euro area would survive France leaving, as it is one of its very major members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about potential scenarios and their potential impacts.


Passage number 73.
   MR. FISCHER.  As we know it, it won’t survive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is presented as a fact rather than a point of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 74.
 MR. KAMIN.  Exactly.  It is conceivable that it could, but even if it does survive in its smaller state, I think the disruptions for the first couple of years would be pretty drastic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion about the potential disruptions in the first few years if something were to happen.


Passage number 75.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 76.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m looking at the International Outlook, exhibit 2, which shows what happens under scenarios when different central banks try to normalize policy.  You have long-run nominal interest rates differing across countries and long-run real rates differing across countries.  Is there anything that would force those to be arbitraged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question for clarification and seeking information about whether there are any factors that would cause the nominal and real interest rates to be equalized across countries.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 77.
 MR. KAMIN. Let’s put it this way.  I don’t think there is as much arbitrage implicit, or at least of a material sort, in the inflation rates, which are going to be pretty similar across all three. We have the United Kingdom having the highest real rate of interest, and, in principle, that should motivate capital flows into the United Kingdom that, in the near term, should boost their GDP growth, but over time that arbitrage should lead to equalization of productivity growth in different regions and to some equalization in growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is disagreement regarding the extent of arbitrage implicit in the inflation rates and the equalization of productivity growth in different regions. While Mr. Kamin suggests that there may not be much arbitrage in inflation rates and that it should lead to equalization in growth, it is not clear if others in the conversation agree with this viewpoint.


Passage number 78.
  I would view that as a very long-term process and not something— MR. BULLARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and perspective on a subject (viewing it as a long-term process) but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 79.
  Well, you put “long run” here, so— MR. KAMIN.  Well, there’s “long run” and “really long run.”  Let’s put it this way. I think that our historical experience indicates that different economies can exhibit very different potential growth rates for very long periods of time as a result of a range of structural and demographic differences.  And it’s unclear that those are subject to all that much arbitrage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their belief based on historical experience and stating that it is uncertain if these differences can be easily resolved.


Passage number 80.
  MR. BULLARD.  Well, these are capital markets.  So I guess what you’ve got here is that this is more what I would think of as a medium term, and there would still be some transition dynamics going on even in the long run that you’re talking about here.  Is that fair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply providing an explanation and asking for confirmation if it is fair.


Passage number 81.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes.  Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Kamin is simply agreeing with something or expressing his strong agreement.


Passage number 82.
 MR. BULLARD. Okay. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange between Mr. Bullard and Chair Yellen without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 83.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Please provide the passage for analysis.


Passage number 84.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes. In the recent paper that Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and I did, we actually looked at this issue of what are real interest rates and equilibrium r*s in these different regions.  We didn’t include Japan, but we did include Canada, and it’s clear in the data that there are real rate differences across countries, and it’s also, I think, clear in the estimates that there seems to be some divergences—I would agree with you—over the short to medium term, in r*s across the countries, reflecting different developments. One of the challenges in this is that the theory would tell us, as you said, that in the long run we should see an equalization of r* across the countries, if they are measured in the same way, assuming we’re looking at the same concept.  But at least so far in our estimates, you definitely get some medium-term divergence in real rates and what we estimate to be r*’s across these countries.  And the ordering is like this, with the United Kingdom higher, and the United States, and then the ECB lower, and Japan’s at the low end.  So I think there is a medium-term versus long-run issue that you’re pointing out, and I think that this is consistent, at least with the research I’ve seen so far, again, with that caveat that it’s during a process of transition, maybe, to a long-run steady state.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents findings from a recent paper and discusses the observations and implications of the data.


Passage number 85.
 MR. KAMIN.  I should note that we looked at your paper, and its estimates helped inform our estimates here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 
Explanation: The passage states that Mr. Kamin looked at the paper and the estimates helped in forming their own estimates. There is no mention of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 86.
 MR. EVANS.  How do exchange rates behave during this transition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only presents a question being asked, without any expression of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 87.
 I kept waiting for that to be introduced somewhere in the— MR. KAMIN.  Oh, well, exchange rates are what we get to at the end of it, which is, as you have different countries normalizing and raising their rates, then capital shifts from the United States back to these countries as they’re raising rates, and that’s what leads the dollar to fall.  Did I miss something there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is offering an explanation and the questioner is seeking clarification.


Passage number 88.
 MR. EVANS.  No.  I thought that r* was going to depend on a bunch of real things that might not move, and so you’d have to have some longer-term exchange rate process throughout all of this— CHAIR YELLEN.  Do you mean that the difference in real rates would drive capital flows, which would cause maybe an appreciation—in a high real rate country, the exchange rate would overshoot and eventually it would compensate for the differential in real rates. But I think that is what theory would suggest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The individuals are simply having a discussion and explaining their understanding of how exchange rates and real rates may interact.


Passage number 89.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes.  I think that’s what happens over the longer term.  But, again, over the period shown here, in a situation in which market participants did not expect very much rise in interest rates over this next 10-year period, as those rates started to rise because the economic situation allowed the central banks to tighten, that should lead to some change in investor perceptions of relative rates of return, leading to capital flowing, in notional terms, from the United States to these countries and pushing up their currencies and pushing down the dollar. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no direct contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker (Mr. Kamin) is presenting his opinion on what may happen over the longer term, while also explaining the potential effects of rising interest rates on investor perceptions and currency exchange rates. Chair Yellen, as mentioned in the passage, does not express disagreement with Mr. Kamin's statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 90.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just for myself, I’m skeptical that this will all be arbitraged even in the very long run because you have all sorts of different risk assessments; political regimes; home-country bias in terms of investing; and saving propensities that could bevery, very, very long-lived.  There might be some forces that will try to push it together, but I think there are also some forces that are keeping them apart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be contention or disagreement between the idea that all the factors mentioned will eventually be arbitraged and the belief that certain forces will keep them apart.


Passage number 91.
 MR. KAMIN.  I should note that in the very broadest sense, the countries we’re talking about—the United States and these three AFEs—are all advanced economies and have a lot of similarities.  As a group, they are very distinct from the group that I haven’t talked about in this briefing, which are the emerging market economies.  And there you should also get a certain amount of monetary normalization because a lot of those countries have low rates, and you can see even more profound depreciations of the dollar against those economies. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 92.
 MR. FISCHER.  What’s happened to Mexico. Has it shaken off some of the effect of our election on it.  Or is it just steady with that avenue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The phrases "Has it shaken off some of the effect of our election on it" and "Or is it just steady with that avenue" suggest that there is a disagreement or debate about the impact of the election on Mexico.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 93.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, right now, let’s say its real outlook and its financial outlook are going in slightly different directions in the sense that following the election, there was a great deal of concern about Mexico’s situation.  The peso depreciated very dramatically in an environment of real uncertainty, and their yields went up a whole lot.  Over time, as it seems like perhaps the most dire expectations of people about, among other things, U.S. government policy, are not coming to pass, the peso has been strengthening.  It’s kind of returning.  It’s still pretty depreciated relative to pre-election, and financial conditions are getting more under control.  That is on the financial side. On the real side, a big hike in administered gasoline prices, a big fall in consumer and business sentiment, a drop-off in foreign direct investment into the country, and strong interest rate hikes by the Bank of Mexico are leading to a situation in which we’ve projected a pretty sharp slowdown in growth in the coming year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker discusses the diverging outlooks between the real side and the financial side in Mexico's situation. The real side is experiencing negative factors such as a fall in consumer and business sentiment, while the financial side is getting more under control. This contrast implies disagreement or contention between these two aspects of Mexico's situation.


Passage number 94.
  So— MR. KAPLAN.  I might just tag on at the end of that, taking into account all those trends, the threat of more political instability and the election of a government that is much more hostile to the United States, if we’re not careful, is a real possibility. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Further questions.  [No response] Let’s begin our round with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a continuation of the conversation and there is no indication of opposing views or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 95.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My economic outlook is quite similar to that of the Tealbook, with an assumption of both four increases in the federal funds rate and a tapered reduction in our balance sheet to begin in the third quarter.  I expect the unemployment rate to be 4½ percent and both total and core PCE inflation rates to be just under 2 percent by the end of this year.  I expect the economy will continue to grow at 2.3 percent in 2018, in part because of my assumption that stimulative fiscal policy will be enacted at the beginning of that year.  My assumption about the fiscal stimulus, like that of the Tealbook, is fairly conservative and results in growth next year being 50 basis points above potential.  As the stimulus could well turn out to be larger, I see upside risk to the growth forecast and the possibility that the unemployment rate will fall to unsustainably low levels. My baseline forecast already requires a somewhat faster pace of tightening than the Tealbook in 2018 in order to avoid the Tealbook’s predicted outcome of an even larger overshoot of full employment. For 2017, private forecasters provide quite similar forecasts.  The Survey of Professional Forecasters has the unemployment rate at 4½ percent at the end of this year and total PCE inflation at 2 percent.  Thus, private forecasters expect we will be at our target inflation rate but beyond full employment at the end of this year.  The Survey of Professional Forecasters then expects 2.4 percent growth in 2018, with payroll additions averaging more than 160,000 per month.  Such an outcome is associated with an unchanged unemployment rate, which would   require continued above-trend growth in labor force participation. While this could be interpreted as successful probing, the Survey of Professional Forecasters’ optimistic outlook for demand and hiring implies a significant risk that we will greatly overshoot full employment. The policy rate path assumed in the Tealbook forecast is still associated with a noticeable overshoot of both its and my estimate of full employment.  Such an outcome could be appropriate from a policy standpoint if there is a need to raise inflation and inflation expectations to the 2 percent level.  However, unlike the Tealbook, I am not confident that inflation will be so well behaved if the unemployment rate is approaching 4 percent. An unemployment rate so far below full employment is likely to produce a number of signs of fundamental imbalance.  First, I would expect that labor constraints would become an increasing problem.  There are currently 16 states with unemployment rates at 4 percent or lower.  Four of those states are in New England.  While some of the reasons for those low unemployment rates derive from the older population in those states, it is still the case that businesses in the more rural states, such as New Hampshire, Vermont, and Maine, are complaining that they are shelving expansion plans because of the difficulty in hiring and increasingly discussing the need to move to cities such as Boston, which has a large pool of young, well-educated workers. A number of asset prices are also showing signs of froth, which is notable in an environment in which monetary policy is widely assumed to be on a tightening path.  Emerging market stock prices have increased rapidly.  This is a sector that one might expect would be adversely affected by higher U.S. rates and the possibility of an appreciated dollar.  In addition, high-yield corporate bond spreads to 10-year Treasury securities have come down significantly.  Several research studies have highlighted the fact that narrow credit spreads can reflect ebullient  financial markets.  Finally, stock P/E ratios have risen well above their five-year average, and capitalization rates for commercial real estate are quite low by historical standards. I recently met with a group of executives of large commercial real estate firms to discuss current conditions.  Rather than defend current valuations, they emphasized that reaching-for-yield behavior was reflected in the willingness of domestic and foreign investors to continue to view commercial real estate favorably despite the high current valuations. While they had concerns with overall evaluations, they felt that their sectors, mostly high-rise buildings in major markets, were underwritten more carefully and had been selected so well that they thought they would be reasonably insulated from a potential negative shock.  Despite their assurances, I am not particularly comforted by the cranes that are now beginning to cap some of the new high-rise buildings in the Seaport District of Boston, providing a risk of softening prices as the new supply hits the market. In summary, I am concerned that a forecast of very low unemployment rates has implications beyond just tight labor market conditions.  Other imbalances are likely to appear, and asset valuations in exuberant markets are prone to disappoint.  I will discuss the implications for this in our monetary policy discussion tomorrow. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, expresses concern about the possibility of a significant overshoot of full employment and potential imbalances in the economy, while the Survey of Professional Forecasters and the Tealbook have a more optimistic outlook for demand and hiring.


Passage number 96.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I see this as a pivotal meeting for this Committee.  Some Wall Street commentary is describing the past two weeks as an abrupt change in FOMC communications.  I interpret this to mean that the hard data on the economy have not shown a marked change and yet the Committee has apparently, nevertheless, turned notably more “hawkish.”  I do not think that making a move at this meeting is the issue.  I think it’s all about the trajectory of rate increases a move at this meeting may set up. The tendency to viewthe Committee as more likely to move once per quarter for the foreseeable future will be difficult to combat and, in my opinion, would be too “hawkish” a trajectory. Much has been made of the distinctions between messages being sent by hard versus soft data in recent months.  My staff divided the available data into two groups, one characterized as “hard” and the other characterized as “soft.” We then made near-term real GDP forecasts based either on hard data alone or on soft data alone.  The soft forecast predicted 4 percent real GDP growth over the near term, while the hard data predicted just 2 percent growth.  Similarly, contacts in the Eighth District reported relatively weak activity so far in 2017 but, nevertheless, maintained a certain degree of optimism for the year as a whole.  My “takeaway” is that expectations are running well ahead of actual events and that we could do better as a Committee to focus more squarely on what is actually happening than on what may or may not transpire during the remainder of this year. Real GDP growth for 2016 was just below 2 percent, similar to 2015.  Many hard-data-based tracking estimates for Q1 real GDP growth and the Tealbook are below 2 percent.  Residual seasonality may again be at work on the Q1 numbers, but, on the other hand, this winter was exceptionally warm, not exceptionally cold as in previous years—today’s D.C. weather notwithstanding.  A weak Q1 will require significant bounceback in Q2 to rationalize the idea that the U.S. economy is growing at an above-trend pace. One might look to job growth as suggesting a different story.  The January and February jobs reports have been good, but still, year-over-year nonfarm payroll growth was 2.4 percent in January 2015 and has slowed to 1.6 percent today.  Year-over-year total private-sector hours was growing at a 2.8 percent pace in January 2015 and has slowed to 1.2 percent today.  Hours  growing at 1.2 percent year over year suggests an economy growing at trend if you add in ½ percent for productivity growth not above trend. It could be that the soft data are more forward looking and foresee rapid growth ahead, reflected in equity prices and expected fiscal policy.  But, in my view, there are reasons to doubt this.  First, equity markets are up considerably in recent months.  It is true that they may foresee higher growth, but more likely they foresee lower tax rates.  Lower tax rates alone, should they materialize, could cause a one-time upward revaluation of the U.S. corporate sector, and Simon Potter’s earlier commentary indicated some evidence of that. Second, concerning fiscal policy, the characterization of upcoming fiscal policy changes as traditional deficit spending stimulus seems like a misreading of the political situation to me. A more likely outcome is what I would describe as revenue neutral tax reform.  This change in the source of tax revenue may or may not be growth enhancing and is something we could certainly debate, but it does not increase deficit spending.  Any infrastructure spending, in my view, is further in the future, and, anyway, it would take a lot of time to have a major effect on growth. The bottom line is, soft data optimism may be running ahead of reality.  I think the Committee can take a wait-and-see approach to find out whether the hard data catch the softer data or vice versa.  I continue to think that we are better off with a regime-based forecast, which can be interpreted as something close to a steady state, with real GDP growing at 2 percent, unemployment fluctuating between 4½ and 5 percent, and inflation close to 2 percent, and very little change in the necessary policy rate to support that.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own interpretation and perspective, but there is no evident disagreement with others.


Passage number 97.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual text. The abbreviation "MR" does not provide any context or information about the content of the passage.


Passage number 98.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  We are still in a volatile and somewhat fragile period in the energy markets.  On the one hand, we believe global supply and demand continue to move toward balance, and early reports suggest OPEC nations are largely abiding by the agreed production cuts for approximately 1 million barrels a day.  On the other hand, this is all in the context of a record level of excess global inventory, which still hasn’t been worked off because we need to get to balance first before excess inventory can start getting drawn down. In addition, while OPEC is cutting production, U.S. production is increasing, particularly in the Permian and now possibly even in parts of the Eagle Ford.  We are also seeing major oil companies shift their capital spending away from larger long-lived projects to more flexible,  shorter-cycle, less risky shale projects.  As shale activity increases, we’re seeing growing demand for fracking, sand, and other production inputs. Although prices had generally firmed since the start of the year, we’ve seen a recent weakening, and it makes sense to us because the obvious tension in 2017 is likely to be whether OPEC participants will extend their reduced production output agreement into the second half while the United States continues now to increase its production levels.  Remember, over the past two years it’s been the opposite.  The United States has been cutting, and OPEC has been increasing.  We’ve now flipped, and our contacts are hopeful that, as long as U.S. production does not increase too quickly, the production cuts by OPEC are likely to be extended.  But this equilibrium may prove to be fragile and bears watching. In the meantime, one constraint to increased drilling is the shortage of production crews, particular in the Permian.  Crew and equipment quality is an issue for new drilling, and the cost of production is steadily increasing as a result. This increased cost and crew shortages may help temper drilling growth and may be one factor that helps maintain the current equilibrium in global supply and demand. Regarding the Eleventh District, our service-sector surveys continue to show strength, while the turnaround in our manufacturing survey has solidified.  Business optimism remains high, although most businesses note that this optimism has not yet translated into substantially increased consumer activity.  Businesses we talk to are increasing cap-ex and  increasing their hiring plans, but a lot of this—echoing President Mester—is based on what they perceive as a more favorable regulatory environment and a more positive attitude from government toward businesses, and that’s enough, at least for the time being, to sustain their optimism.  We expect 2½ percent job growth in 2017 in Texas, which is the highest we’ve had in three years, and our business surveys show intensifying wage pressures and reports of labor shortages, particularly in skilled trades.  One fabricated metals manufacturer commented regarding his recent interviews with prospective workers.  He only had one primary question, “Can you get yourself to work and be on time.” Another thing he asks is, “Can you breathe.” But I left that out.  [Laughter] A window manufacturer tells us that the ability to find qualified labor for manufacturing jobs has become extremely difficult.  He commented that even with increases in starting wages of 30 percent in the past two years, applicants are less qualified and less able to work a consistent 40-hour week.  And we are finding probably the same thing in our District that you’re seeing nationwide: Worker availability and slack is highly correlated with either less than high school or high school levels of educational attainment. Vocational training, which is ramping up, is certainly one positive help to this, but we’re also seeing that lack of adequate child care and lack of available transportation are significant impediments to getting workers back into the labor force. We really lack the ecosystem, at least in our District, and vocational training alone really isn’t enough to get people back into the workforce. Regarding the nation, our economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas forecast 2017 real GDP growth of approximately 2¼ percent.  This forecast is based on the expectation of solid growth in consumer spending and a more positive outlook for business investment.  Potential new fiscal policies and structural reforms have the potential to add to our forecast to the upside, but we also see, like President Williams, downside risks, which include policies that can impede workforce growth or create disruption for logistics, intermediate goods, and tradingrelationships—things which, we believe, improve U.S. competitiveness and add U.S. jobs.  We’re also monitoring the effect on certain segments of consumers of repeal of the Affordable Care Act, which we think could have a negative effect on consumer spending. As far as my SEP is concerned, my baseline projections are essentially unchanged from those I submitted in December.  For GDP growth and the unemployment rate, my projections are not very different from the Tealbook baseline forecast, maybe a little more positive. However, at this point I see room for a slightly flatter upward funds rate path than is assumed in the Tealbook, and I also anticipate a more rapid return to our 2 percent inflation objective.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 99.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The data have been coming in close to what we anticipated in January, and my directors and other contacts continue to be upbeat.  Much of this optimism is driven by hopes for the future.  In one way or another, everyone is still focused on developments in Washington.  This underscores the importance of greater clarity on fiscal, trade, and regulatory policies.  Uncertainty remains high. In terms of recent developments, the CEO of Discover Financial reported strong consumer spending in January and February.  This is starting to feel like a trend, he said.  Similarly, the CEO of a large diversified manufacturer remarked that his business had picked up further in the first quarter, and it was at the higher end of expectations. He also noted that the tone regarding capital spending had improved.  He remains cautious, however, having seen early promise of a strong first quarter fizzle out in three of the past four quarters. We also heard better news about economic activity in Europe and Asia from a variety of contacts.  That said, everyone remains attuned to the risk from potential European political developments. I was struck again by how most of the upbeat commentary continues to be based on expectations rather than actual sales.  The CEO of ArcelorMittal USA says he hasn’t seen this much optimism in 10 years, but despite many inquiries for steel products used in energy and infrastructure, few new orders have been placed. Caterpillar also reports some improvement in their sales trajectory, but not as much as one might have expected, in light of all of the happy talk.  And financial contacts were almost giddy about current equity valuations, with some describing possible additional upside potential.  Others, though, see valuations as “rich” relative to their assessments of longer-run earnings growth. A few more of my contacts talked about wage and price increases this round.  I heard reports of higher prices across a variety of manufacturing sectors, for example, and the CEO of Manpower said that wage growth for production and light industrial jobs stepped up in February.  These wage and price increases, however, did not appear to be generating any broad-based inflationary concerns for my contacts. Turning to the national outlook, the recent data have not meaningfully changed my projection for either growth or inflation from my December SEP.  However, the data do boost my confidence in these forecasts. In particular, we now assess the risks to the inflation outlook as balanced, an improvement over December, when we characterized the risks as tilted modestly to the downside. That said, we still project that inflation will not reach 2 percent on a sustained basis until the end of 2019.  My projection is premised on a gradual removal of accommodation as well ascontinued strong communication of our commitment to a symmetric 2 percent inflation target. Both are needed to solidify inflation expectations at our target, which should exert upward pressure on actual inflation. As in December, our SEP submission—I’m number three—calls for two increases in the federal funds rate in 2017, four in 2018, and three in 2019, with no change in reinvestment policy this year. After eight-plus years below target and a projection that doesn’t deliver 2 percent inflation on a sustained basis until 2019, I don’t want to be changing my policy assumptions on the basis of small adjustments in the outlook.  It would take a more meaningful upgrade to the inflation path to call for a fast removal of accommodation. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Gooding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker's observations and statements about various economic indicators and projections.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 100.
 MS. GOODING.  Overall business activity in the Sixth District appears to be little changed since our previous meeting.  Most contacts report steady activity consistent with modest growth.  Although many District retailers noted a sharp pullback in consumer activity in February, that slowdown apparently gave way to a rebound in early March.  Our contacts believe February sales were adversely affected by the IRS delay in distributing refunds and attribute the early March bounce to the resumption of a more typical pace of IRS payouts. If tomorrow’s retail sales report is soft, we may want to look through that weakness. Across a wide array of sectors and businesses, we get the picture of a labor market that appears to be at or very near full employment. Challenges in finding and attracting qualified labor is a persistent theme among our contacts. Although this is not a new story, concerns about actual or potential labor tightening have spread to almost every type of business and worker skill level.  There were more reports of turnover this cycle, particularly at the entry level.  District businesses are responding by offering more bonuses and off-cycle merit increases, increasing flexible time or other quality-of-life policies, and, in some cases, raising their company-wide entry-level wages. We have yet to hear anything that would suggest a widespread acceleration of wage pressures beyond the moderate increases in wage growth that we are seeing in the aggregate data, but my sense is that labor market conditions are on the minds of our contacts and are increasingly a factor in business planning. For example, we hear more and more stories of businesses developing new in-house training programs to expand their potential base of qualified workers. While the wage bill for Southeast businesses appears to have increased moderately, staff survey data suggest that nonlabor input costs have not accelerated appreciably, and profit margins have remained relatively stable.  We are not yet detecting anything in our report suggesting a broad pickup in price-level growth. The risks to my outlook on both the upside and downside revolve around continued uncertainty about fiscal, regulatory, and trade policies.  Remarks from our directors and District contacts on the outlook continue to be optimistic.  However, this optimism is tempered by growing uneasiness about the timing and nature of the policies that will come from the Congress and the Administration.  As one director put it, uncertainty will rule the year. That sentiment was shared by others at the table and echoed by many contacts.  As a result, they are in wait-and-see mode until they gain clarity on potential policy changes.  In other words, our contacts consistently report that their own behavior and thinking exhibits the same disconnect betweenhard facts, reflected in spending and production data, and the strength in the soft data that includes consumer sentiment and business optimism. I do want to emphasize that while most of our contacts are looking to upside risks from potential policy changes, there are downside risks.  Several contacts voiced specific concerns about potential changes to U.S. trade and immigration policies.  Two large retailers with global footprints say they have postponed their planned investment and employment activities until it becomes clear what those policy changes will be. Overall, I have left my projections of growth and inflation mostly unchanged since January.  Last week’s job report gives me a bit more confidence that some of the incoming weakness in the spending and production data is transitory.  But I am not yet taking on the pickup in momentum suggested by the improvement in sentiment since early November, nor do I assume in my projections any particular changes in the path or nature of fiscal policy.  I see real GDP growth continuing at around 2 percent over the next few years.  The recent data on retail prices may be a bit overstated as a result of residual seasonality, but it seems apparent that the trend has moved closer to target.  I’m keeping the risks to my outlook weighted to the upside for the time being.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  I suggest we take a short break to grab some coffee for about 15 minutes and then resume. [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN.  Let’s get started again.  Our next speaker is President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains both agreement and disagreement. The speaker agrees with the overall business activity in the Sixth District being little changed and steady, with modest growth. They also agree that the labor market appears to be at or near full employment and that challenges in finding qualified labor are a persistent theme. However, there is disagreement when it comes to wage pressures and the potential acceleration of price-level growth. The speaker states that they have not detected widespread acceleration of wage pressures or a broad pickup in price-level growth. This contrasts with the concerns expressed by some contacts about potential changes to trade and immigration policies.


Passage number 101.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Tenth District economy expanded in recent months despite some continued weakness in those areas dependent on energy and agriculture. Our manufacturing contacts reported substantial improvement over the past three   months, with activity now above year-ago levels after contracting for much of 2015 and 2016.  Many District contacts also anticipate higher levels of employment, sales, and production in the coming months.  The survey’s measure of expectations for future activity is now at its highest level. Services-sector activity likewise expanded in February, according to our District contacts and our services survey.  But even as surveys show high levels of optimism, I noted several of my business contacts since the previous meeting expressing more caution and even concern for potential trade policy changes and health-care reforms. In some cases, capital expenditures were being shelved until government trade policy was clarified, and those in health care reported potential significant challenges to their business model. For our states with a significant federal government workforce or private contractors with government contracts, the hiring freeze and potential for funding cuts loom large. Energy activity has picked up and is expected to provide some boost to the District economy in 2017.  As U.S. supply is increased, the OPEC-led production cuts kept range-bound crude oil prices above year-ago levels.  And although rising inventories recently pulled prices lower, the higher prices compared with a year ago are supporting continued drilling activity in the District, and several contacts noted significant difficulty rehiring rig workers even with substantial wage premiums. In the ag sector, low commodity prices continue to weigh on farm income.  To date, loan delinquencies have been manageable, as producers sell stored grain inventories to keep their loans current.  Farm land values, an important source of collateral at ag banks, continue to edge lower, but valuations remain quite high by some benchmarks, given cash rent-to-price ratios.   Even though manufacturing and energy activity are recovering, the slowdown in these sectors over the past few years and ongoing headwinds for ag have put several District state budgets in a bind.  In addition, exports declined in almost every District state last year. On account of the strength of the dollar and potential changes to trade policy, some of my contacts continue to have concerns about export activity. Turning to the national economy, my SEP forecast is largely unchanged compared with last December.  I continue to see the national economy growing at a trend-like pace, and the risks associated with the real GDP growth outlook appear to be roughly balanced.  I expect first-quarter real GDP growth will show softness that is largely driven by weather-related weakness in utilities consumption and the first-quarter pattern that has been described as residual seasonality. There may also be some temporary near-term softness in consumer spending due to the expected delay this year in issuing tax refunds. As we look through these temporary factors, the economy seems to be on solid footing.  Last Friday’s jobs report showed continued strength in labor markets, bringing employment growth to just under 200,000, on average, per month over the past six months.  New orders are up strongly in both of the domestic ISM surveys, and the global growth outlook has brightened.  For example, the Citigroup Economic Surprise Index for the G-10 rose to its highest level in almost four years. I agree with the Tealbook’s assessment that downside risks appear to be less pronounced than in the past, but I find gauging upside risks associated with the prospects of tax and regulatory reforms or infrastructure spending still murky.  Because of that, I have yet to incorporate any fiscal effects in my outlook without more specifics.   January’s inflation reading reinforces a continuing move toward strengthening price pressures.  Other measures confirm this upward momentum.  The New York Fed’s median increase in consumer expectations three years ahead rose sharply in February, and the Philly Fed’s Survey of Professional Forecasters’ median expectation for the next 10 years ticked up to 2.1 percent in the first quarter.  In addition, the Atlanta Fed’s survey of businesses showed a sharp increase in the first quarter in the mean expected increase in unit costs over the next 5 to 10 years.  Finally, market-based measures of inflation expectations also moved up in the past several months, especially for 5- to 10-year-ahead TIPS compensation.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker provides a summary of the Tenth District economy and discusses various factors such as manufacturing, energy, agriculture, and trade policy. They also give their outlook on the national economy, inflation, and other measures. While there is mention of some caution expressed by business contacts, it does not constitute a direct disagreement or contention.


Passage number 102.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Incoming data since the January–February meeting continue to support the outlook of 2 percent growth in real GDP, a labor market that is close to full employment and still tightening, and inflation moving gradually up and ever nearer to 2 percent. My SEP is little changed from December.  I have written down, again, three rate increases, although the continued strength of the job market does put four in play for me if this strength continues going down the road. Real GDP has expanded at around 2 percent over the past two years, and I see very similar prospects for 2017.  The increase in the last two years can be fully accounted for by increased personal consumption, which has been supported by above-trend increases in employment, moderate wage gains, and rising wealth.  These same factors should continue to support consumption this year. In addition, the upbeat readings on consumer sentiment provide some upside potential, although this improved sentiment has not left much of an imprint so far.  In fact, real PCE fell  .3 percent in January, much of that reflecting fluctuations in energy services due to warm weather.  With the strong fundamentals, I assume that the January softness will prove fleeting. Private fixed investment, the other component of PDFP, was flat in 2016, providing no support to growth.  Business investment was held down in part by the lagged effects of falling oil prices, a factor that is reversing itself now.  Both the stock market and business surveys suggest that a brighter outlook will produce moderate growth in business investment this year. Meanwhile, residential investment looks to be solid at the moment, with some risk that rising interest rates may hold back construction and home sales this year.  All told, I see the economy as evolving close to the Tealbook forecast, albeit with a lower rate path.  I guess I would recharacterize the alternative view on page 24 of Tealbook A—rather than saying the staff forecast is too strong, I would say the staff forecast is about right, except the rate forecast is too high. A range of labor market indicators suggest that we are near full employment, including moderate increases in real wages and compensation (in line with lackluster productivity gains), survey evidence from households and businesses about the availability of jobs and job candidates, and inflation moving up toward trend. It’s also quite possible that the natural rate is lower than current estimates or that trend participation is higher than current estimates.  I did, in fact, lower my estimate of the natural rate by one-tenth, to 4.7 percent.  Employment is still growing at above-trend rates, which over time will drive unemployment lower unless participation improves further.  Over the past two years, participation has been trending up among nearly all age groups, and perhaps that will continue as the labor market tightens further and as growth picks up. While the economy is close to full employment, still-modest wage growth suggests to me that there is probably some additional slack either in participation in those working part time for economic reasons or in the form of a lower natural rate.  As a result, I continue to see it as appropriate that unemployment fall modestly below current estimates of the natural rate and remain there for a while. Inflation has continued to move up gradually to 2 percent.  I expect this pattern to continue and inflation to reach 2 percent next year and remain around that level.  I see only small risks of materially overshooting the inflation target as long as inflation expectations stay anchored despite undershooting the natural rate of unemployment.  This view receives support from simulations shown in the Risks and Uncertainty section of the Tealbook over the past year.  Persistently high inflation is only generated in scenarios in which inflation expectations are not anchored.  Plain vanilla demand shocks simply do not generate much inflation.  You have to go back to the late 1960s when inflation did take off, but that was a different time, with a steep Phillips curve and unanchored expectations and before global supply chains emerged and began to hold down wages and prices. Finally, I see the risks to the outlook as, overall, fairly balanced.  Risks from abroad have diminished over the past year as economic conditions have broadly, if modestly, improved.  Global risks do remain to the downside, with political uncertainties in Europe and the continuing saga of rebalancing in China.  The domestic risks seem to me to be more to the upside—in particular, the chance that tax cuts and upbeat sentiments, as reflected in surveys and ebullient equity markets, will produce stronger demand. I also continue to think that there is a clear risk of a correction in equity markets at these levels.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no obvious contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their analysis and outlook on the economy, outlining their views on GDP growth, labor market conditions, inflation, investment, and risks. They also mention alternative views and considerations, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 103.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Ninth District economy continues to grow moderately.  The latest Minnesota state government estimates indicate the state may have lost jobs in January, but unemployment remains low at around 4 percent.  The owner of several staffing offices in Wisconsin and Minnesota said January job orders were a little bit sketchy, but February seemed to pick up.  North Dakota seems to be generally slowing, though a modest rebound in the oil patch continues. Anecdotal evidence suggests wages in the District are rising at about a 3 percent rate, and manufacturers remain optimistic.  We have asked all of our directors and their contacts and our other contacts if the market’s optimism is translating into actual real economic activity and changes in investment.  And like many of you have articulated, the answer is “no”—it is more just excitement, but no follow-through yet. In terms of the national economy, not much is new.  The expansion continues, but growth remains pretty disappointing.  As others have indicated, the labor market continues to show strong employment gains, with those gains mostly coming from rising labor force participation rather than declining unemployment.  I think, as Governor Brainard mentioned, prime-age labor force participation is now at 81.7 percent—up from a low of 80.6 percent in September 2015 but still significantly below pre-recession levels of around 83 percent. In my view, it is very uncertain how much labor slack remains.  I have only been on the Committee for a little over a year, but I keep hearing us declare that we’re at the natural rate of unemployment, and that this labor force participation story is just temporary and it can’t continue, yet it keeps continuing.  And I don’t know how much longer it can continue.  I have been studying prior tightening cycles over the past three or four decades with my staff, and it is very hard for the Committee to know what the level of maximum employment is, and the Committee is often wrong.  It often overestimates the natural rate of unemployment only to find out that unemployment can go lower without triggering inflation.  And that may well be happening again, I’m not sure. In terms of inflation, again, not much has changed since our previous meeting.  There was little change in core PCE inflation over the intermeeting period—as others have indicated, a strong January at 0.3 percent, but the prior January was also strong.  On a year-on-year basis, core PCE has barely moved.  I find it interesting that so many of us are declaring victory that we are back to our inflation target largely because energy prices have gone up.  We ignored energy prices on the way down.  Why are we declaring victory on the way back up.  Core PCE inflation basically hasn’t moved. What about the inflation outlook.  It’s a mixed bag.  Survey and market-based expectations remain low by historical standards, the dollar remains stable, and nominal wage growth largely remains stable.  Now, it is possible that expansionary fiscal policy may push up inflation, but that doesn’t look like it’s happening anytime soon.  Financial markets—no change in long-term rates since the previous meeting, no change in the value of the dollar.  Stock markets continue to rise, and prices do seem high relative to standard valuation measures. As others have indicated, uncertainty remains high.  Risks to the upside: lower taxes, lower regulation.  And to the downside: protectionist trade policies, restrictionist immigration policies.  How that uncertainty is resolved will affect the outlook and the appropriate path of rates. So, in conclusion, little real change since the previous meeting.  The economy is headed in the right direction, very slowly.  It’s too soon to declare victory on the inflation front, and it seems like the job market may still have some slack left in it.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The speaker expresses disagreement with the notion that the market's optimism is translating into actual economic activity and changes in investment. They also express uncertainty regarding the level of maximum employment and the inflation outlook.


Passage number 104.
 MR. LAUBACH.8  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will be referring to the handout labeled “Material for the Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.” 8 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 6).  The key questions for the Committee at this meeting are whether the available information warrants raising the federal funds rate and whether the economic outlook and associated risks indicate that the funds rate path suggested by recent FOMC statements remains appropriate or call for signaling a somewhat different path of rate hikes.  The three draft alternatives differ in their answers to these questions.  In my remarks, I will briefly discuss how the draft alternatives address recent inflation developments and then turn to how your recent communications appear to have affected the public’s understanding of “gradual increases in the federal funds rate.” I will close with an update of an analysis shown in the Monetary Policy Strategies section of Tealbook A that applies optimal control simulations to the median SEP outlook. As you know, recent inflation developments called for adjustments to the inflation language not only in paragraph 1, but also in the paragraphs concerning the economic outlook, the policy decision, and the policy outlook.  These adjustments were intended to address two issues. First, the revised language recognizes that headline PCE inflation on a 12-month basis has now moved close to the 2 percent objective and may well rise above 2 percent over coming months, but the substantial increase of headline inflation over recent months contrasts with the stability of core inflation. Furthermore, as shown in the upper-left panel, the staff projects that headline inflation is likely to drift below 2 percent in the second half of this year, and that core inflation will not move materially closer to 2 percent this year.  Your SEP submissions suggest that many of you agree.  Accordingly, the language in paragraph 1 of alternative B explicitly distinguishes between headline and core inflation to convey that the job of returning inflation to 2 percent on a sustainable basis is not quite complete—a view apparently shared by several private-sector forecasters, as shown in the upper right. The same thought is conveyed by highlighting, in paragraph 3, the Committee’s intention to foster a “sustained” return to 2 percent inflation. The second issue is how to convey that, with headline inflation having moved close to 2 percent, the fact that monetary policy cannot perfectly stabilize inflation at that level should not be construed as a lack of commitment to your 2 percent inflation objective.  While the previous diction, in paragraph 2, that inflation will “rise to” 2 percent indicated the desired direction, paragraph 2 in alternative B now expresses the expectation that inflation will “stabilize around,” not “at,” 2 percent over the medium term.  However, to signal that persistent deviations in one direction or another would be a concern, paragraph 4 in Alternative B now points out that the inflation goal is “symmetric.”  Alternatives A and C include some but not all of the language changes in alternative B in various combinations. Regarding policy expectations, as Simon noted in his briefing, a rate hike at this meeting is now fully priced in by markets.  The fact that the markets were rather slow to come to this conclusion may mean that market participants had become accustomed to observing the “gradual” language in combination with a very slow pace of rate increases. Now that the message has been better understood, the middle-left panel shows that the market-implied probability distribution of the federal funds rate at the end of the year has shifted to the right, with most of the odds now on two,  three, or four hikes this year, rather than on one, two, or three at the time of your previous meeting. However, as indicated by the parallel shifts of the lines in the middle-right panel, the expected number of rate hikes in 2018 through 2020 has not changed.  In addition, from the perspective of the staff’s OIS-based term structure model, which takes the effective lower bound into account and which incorporates information from survey forecasts of the federal funds rate, some of the shift in the market-based path reflects a slightly less negative term premium rather than an upward revision to the expected funds rate path. Of course, the public will continue to look to the SEP for information about how to interpret “gradual increases in the federal funds rate.”  One question you may ask is how your individual projections for the appropriate path of the federal funds rate compare with some notion of an “optimal” interest rate path.  To answer this question, we need three ingredients: a criterion for optimality, a baseline outlook for the economy and the federal funds rate, and a model that governs how changes to the federal funds rate path translate into changes of your goal variables.  In the Monetary Policy Strategies section of the Tealbook, we regularly show you the results of this exercise using the staff’s projection, using FRB/US and a variety of loss functions, each corresponding to a different notion of optimality.  In this Tealbook, we applied optimal control to a baseline outlook consistent with the December SEP medians, and in the bottom two panels of my exhibit, I update this analysis using the March SEP medians as the baseline.  The black lines show the medians of your federal funds rate and unemployment rate projections, interpolated to a quarterly frequency and extended beyond 2019 to converge to their median longer-run values.  I am omitting the inflation rate; as you can see in the chart on page 96 of Tealbook A, the optimal control simulations applied to the SEP baseline induce minor changes to the inflation paths. The red dashed lines show the optimal paths for the federal funds rate and the unemployment rate when optimality is defined by the loss function that places the same weights on deviations of the unemployment rate from its median longer-run value, deviations of PCE inflation from 2 percent, and changes in the federal funds rate.  As is the case when applying this definition of optimality to the staff baseline, the prescribed path of the federal funds rate is above the median SEP path because, with inflation already close to 2 percent, the optimal control policy aims to reduce how much the unemployment rate undershoots its longer-run normal value.  But in the SEP, this undershoot is substantially smaller than in the Tealbook projection, and, accordingly, the path of the federal funds rate runs only modestly above the SEP median by about 25 basis points, on average, through 2022. The blue dash-dotted lines present the results when the criterion for optimality is modified so that undershooting of the unemployment rate below its longer-run value is not penalized.  In this case, because the median unemployment gaps in your current projections are all negative and thus are ignored by the loss function, and with these unemployment gaps having small effects on inflation in FRB/US, the optimal policy is primarily driven by the desire to minimize fluctuations in the federal funds rate. This results in a nearly straight federal funds rate path with a slope of about 40 basis  points per year, roughly half the pace through 2019 in either the SEP median or the equal-weights simulation.  While you may see some appeal to the notion that modest undershooting of the unemployment rate is not socially harmful, you may be concerned that the magnitude of the projected undershooting of the unemployment rate, combined with such a shallow federal funds rate path, could run the risk of leading to inflation outcomes that are less benign than those predicted by this simulation. Thank you, Madam Chair.  That completes my prepared remarks.  The February statement and the draft alternatives and implementation notes are on pages 2 to 12 of the handout.  I will be happy to take questions. CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Questions for Thomas.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a report of information and analysis without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 105.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In these simulations in the last two panels—does this take into account possible visits to the zero bound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the simulations and does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 106.
 MR. LAUBACH. No. There is no explicit consideration of the lower bound or any sort of aversion toward hitting the lower bound.  This is just straight-up minimizing this quadratic loss function.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there is no consideration or aversion towards hitting the lower bound. It simply describes the approach of minimizing a quadratic loss function. There is no contention or disagreement indicated.


Passage number 107.
 MR. BULLARD.  So it’s not optimal control in a full sense about possible visits to the effective lower bound.  It’s just optimal control in kind of a local sense—so no big shocks, no recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the concept of optimal control being discussed is not a full sense one, but rather a local sense of controlling certain factors.


Passage number 108.
 MR. LAUBACH.  If you want to define it that way, yes, that’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply agreeing with the statement made by someone else.


Passage number 109.
 MR. BULLARD.  I guess with different objective functions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or assumption without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas mentioned.


Passage number 110.
 MR. LAUBACH. Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It appears to be a simple acknowledgement or agreement with a statement or correction made by Mr. Laubach.


Passage number 111.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.  Okay.  Well, I guess we’re ready to call it a day for today and to resume at 9:00.  I want to turn it over to Brian, who is going to talk a little bit about logistics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and informing the audience about the next steps and logistics.


Passage number 112.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Just a quick announcement about transportation.  There should be shuttles downstairs, out that door on C Street, not down in the Board garage, back to your hotel.  So, again, they should be out there now on C Street, so you just go down the steps and out the door to get the shuttle back to your hotel.  There is a 7:30 and 8:00 a.m. shuttle tomorrow morning from your hotel.  That’s all I have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is simply providing information about transportation arrangements.


Passage number 113.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage is not providing any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 114.
 WILLIAMS.  Wait, wait.  Yes. We have a meeting at 8:00, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks for confirmation about a meeting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 115.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.


Passage number 116.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not clear enough to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 117.
 WILLIAMS.  Is the 7:30 shuttle that—I guess it can fit all of us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 118.
 MR. EVANS.  It will be fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is expressing that something will be fine, suggesting a positive and agreeable sentiment.


Passage number 119.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It beats the 7:30 shuttle flight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 120.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 121.
 WILLIAMS.  It will hold all of us.  It’s big enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not imply any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the "it" being referred to is big enough to contain everyone.


Passage number 122.
 MR. POWELL.  Do we start at 9:00 tomorrow. CHAIR YELLEN.  We’re starting at 9:00.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Powell is asking a question about the schedule, and Chair Yellen confirms that they are starting at 9:00.


Passage number 123.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  And we finish at 9:30.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of a time.


Passage number 124.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  Hardworking presidents are getting started earlier. [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  We’ll serve a boxed lunch. [Meeting recessed]March 15 Session CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  Let’s get started.  I first want to turn to Bill Wascher and ask him to talk about this morning’s data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The laughter suggests a light-hearted atmosphere, and the mention of serving a boxed lunch and starting the meeting suggests a cooperative and collaborative tone.


Passage number 125.
 MR. WASCHER.9  Thank you, Madam Chair.  We received two pieces of hard data this morning:  retail sales and the CPI.  Let me start with retail sales. They were basically flat in February but were revised up in January.  I’m referring to the data for the Census retail sales group, which excludes auto and motor vehicle dealers, building material and supply stores, and gasoline stations.  That’s the category that the BEA uses to estimate PCE. Retail sales were flat—zero, basically.  They were unchanged in February but were revised up to show a 0.9 percent increase in January. Looking at the details for February, it does look like there’s something to this delayed-refund story that President George and First Vice President Gooding mentioned yesterday.  There was weakness in both electronics and clothing—that’s discretionary spending—and it seems consistent with the fact that these delayed tax refunds were holding down spending in February. We get weekly data from the Treasury on the refunds, and it looks like the shortfall in February was mostly made up by the first week of March.  We’d be inclined to put in a bounceback in March reflecting that. And I think adding to our March forecast and the upward revision to January will leave our real PCE forecast for growth roughly unchanged in both Q1 and Q2.  So there’s some timing shift in terms of February and March, but I don’t think there’s any real information here about the underlying pace of spending. 9 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). There’s a handout for the CPI that shows what the BLS published for February.  The data were very close to our expectations.  The total CPI rose 0.1 percent in February.  The core index rose 0.2 percent.  Over on the right-hand side, you can see the latest estimates of the 12-month changes.  They’re down a little bit from what we had in the Tealbook, mainly because the core CPI was just a few basis points lower than we’d expected.  We had a 24 basis point increase, and it came in at 21 basis points—so, really small. I don’t know the implications for the PCE prices at this point.  We have to look at the detail and run it through our programs to calculate how much it would matter for PCE prices. But given how close we were on the CPI, my guess is that it won’t have any major, material effect on our PCE price forecast.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  How big is the differential at this point between CPI increases and PCE or core CPI and core PCE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting data and explaining their interpretation and implications.


Passage number 126.
 MR. WASCHER. Right now, the 12-month change in core PCE prices is about 1¾, so it’s about ½ percentage point at this point. CHAIR YELLEN.  So that’s what you consider to be normal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a conversation providing information and confirming an understanding.


Passage number 127.
 MR. WASCHER.  I think that’s a little bit higher than normal, but it’s been running at that—recently.  David.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides a statement by MR. WASCHER, without any opposing or conflicting viewpoints or statements.


Passage number 128.
 MR. LEBOW. Right.  The historical average is 0.3 to 0.4.  This is a little larger. Housing has a larger weight in the CPI, and housing prices have been rising a little more rapidly.  And medical prices have a larger weight in PCE, and those have been relatively low. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. Are there any other questions for Bill. [No response]  Okay.  Then I think we’re ready to begin our policy round, and President Lacker is going to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing information and agreeing with each other.


Passage number 129.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  President Lacker has just provided a number of suggestions.  I would say, as I was reading the statement and thinking about where we are relative to both elements of our dual mandate, that there probably is a point when we should reexamine the statement—but I don’t know whether this meeting, on the fly, is the point when we should be doing it.  A lot of the verbiage in the statement was designed in a period when we were missing on both elements of our dual mandate by quite a bit.  We are now in a situation where, over the course of this year, in my own forecast, we will be right at both elements of the dual mandate—or possibly a little bit under for the labor markets.  And I think the statement probably needs to change to reflect that.  I am a little concerned about making substantial changes on the fly.  I’d rather do it outside of this room rather than wordsmithing, other than relatively modest changes. But I do think that President Lacker’s comments do—I think we’re going to have enough other changes that we have to make, particularly to the paragraph about reinvestments, that this may not be the meeting to make dramatic changes in the statement.  But I think that we’re coming to a point at which probably a complete “refresh” might be advised. Let me get on with my regular statement.  I support alternative B.  Even after this increase, short-term real rates are quite negative and are not consistent with an economy likely to be approaching both elements of the dual mandate by the end of this year and likely surpassing them next year.  If we want to avoid steeper and potentially more disruptive interest rate increases later, we need to raise rates gradually but much more regularly than last year. While I’m not particularly enamored of following particular monetary policy rules, it is noteworthy that all of the simple policy rules discussed in the Tealbook imply a tighter monetary policy than the baseline assumption.  I do think our approach and communication strategy need to change as we move beyond most of our estimates of full employment.  For example, even with some desire to probe the lower side of estimates of the natural rate of unemployment, we are quickly approaching the point at which having the labor market strengthen further may not be desirable, as it may push us too far beyond full employment. Similarly, while the economy seems roughly balanced now, I am not sure that the risks to the economic outlook are roughly balanced.  In my forecast as well as that of the Tealbook, the unemployment rate goes significantly below most estimates of full employment.  Consistent with this thinking, we need to change how we communicate our overall policy stance.  In essence, our communications have engendered an assumption of unchanged interest rates unless the dataunambiguously confirm that conditions continue to improve.  This is a result of the perception that the decision at every meeting depends on the fine points of the most recent incoming data.  This does not seem consistent with the underlying strength in the economy, our proximity to our dual-mandate goals, and the risks of an undesirable overshoot.  An implication of this strategy is that the bulk of the communication is being done not by the statement at meetings but rather by speeches as the next meeting approaches, after we have received the intermeeting data. This is a risky strategy in an organization designed for presenting alternative views.  I would prefer to move to an approach that makes an interest rate increase at every press conference meeting the policy expectation unless the economy proves significantly weaker or stronger than the forecast.  The data will always be somewhat noisy, but unless the overall signal in the data is sufficiently different and significantly alters our forecast, we should also not alter our path of increases.  And we need to promote that expectation among the public and financial market participants.  We are now close enough to full employment and our inflation target, with interest rates still quite accommodative, that a persistent but gradual increase in rates should be presumed over the year unless the economy shows unexpected weakness or surprising strength. I would also add that I think we should change the paragraph on reinvesting principal payments. As I discussed yesterday, I prefer starting to normalize the balance sheet relatively soon, possibly in the third quarter.  I would employ a slowly tapering strategy that can be adjusted should the economy surprise us on either side.  For that to be possible, we would need to move quickly to determine our balance sheet strategy and how we’ll communicate that strategy, including in the last paragraph of the statement. So my suggestions are all for future meetings, not for this meeting, but are all things that I think we should consider as we continue to evolve the statement.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of Mr. Rosengren providing his thoughts and suggestions regarding potential changes to the statement and policy strategy.


Passage number 130.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Given my outlook, the progress on our dual-mandate goals, and the risks regarding the outlook, I view an upward path to the federal funds rate as appropriate and favor a 25 basis point increase in the target range at this meeting as in alternative B. Regarding today’s statement language, I can support the language in alternative B but agree with Presidents Rosengren and Lacker that some changes be considered in future meetings. In that vein, I would like to make three points about the language for consideration at a later date. First, I’d prefer that we move away from the “gradual” language and simply be clear that, on the basis of our current assessment, we anticipate economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant increasing the funds rate, although not necessarily at each meeting. Second, I understand the intention of introducing the language in paragraph 3 about a sustained return to 2 percent inflation, but this innovation might be interpreted as our expecting inflation to move monotonically to 2 percent rather than to fluctuate around an upward path toward 2 percent.  If the headline inflation numbers soften a bit over the next few months as expected, will the public think we will back away from our forecast and policy rate path. Third, given that total inflation is likely to move down for a few months because of changes in energy prices relative to year-ago levels, I understand why the core inflation concept was introduced in paragraph 1.  But doing so may be interpreted as a signal that we are switching our target to core inflation.  Such shifts in focus have occurred in our history.  For example, former Chairman Greenspan is credited with having shifted the FOMC’s focus from total inflation to core inflation in the 1990s.  But then in October 2007, the FOMC began releasing projections for total PCE inflation along with core PCE inflation.  If the language in paragraph 1  is misinterpreted, we should be prepared to communicate that our goal remains 2 percent for total PCE inflation, consistent with our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which we reaffirmed in January. Let me conclude with a general observation.  I believe current economic conditions and the outlook necessitate a change in our mindset.  Much of the policy discussion over the expansion is rightly focused on the risks of moving rates up too quickly.  We introduced the “gradual” path language to underscore that we didn’t expect to be raising rates at each meeting. The base case was no action, and the burden of proof lay on making a case for action.  That was appropriate then, but now the economic situation has improved significantly: Real GDP growth continues at or above its trend pace; we’ve met our full employment goal from the standpoint of what monetary policy can do, and employment growth is well above trend; inflation is close to goal, and the risks to the forecast are broadly balanced.  In this environment, with policy still quite accommodative, instead of focusing on the risks of moving rates up too quickly, we need to focus on the risks of moving rates up too slowly. We may benefit if our internal discussion from now on starts with a base case of removing accommodation, with the burden of proof lying on the case for delaying such action.  In other words, our internal discussion should be biased toward implementing actions when the accumulated incoming economic data and medium-run outlook are supportive.  This does not imply action at every meeting, but it does mean a discussion focused on the reasons for inaction.  I believe this shift in our discussion will help prevent us from getting “behind the curve.”  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their viewpoint and offering suggestions for future meetings, but there is no direct disagreement with any other individuals mentioned.


Passage number 131.
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B at this meeting. Keeping the rate unchanged in March would all but ensure that, given our “only gradual” language that we’re discussing now, there would be at most three rate increases in 2017.  Hence, if there is some nonnegligible probability that four rate increases were to be deemed appropriate for this year, it makes sense for us to raise the funds rate at this meeting. I do, however, also have concerns with the statement language.  While I understand the reasons for the changes in alternative B, it doesn’t seem to me to make a compelling case for why we are raising rates.  In fact, one could argue that the language in alternative B seems to present a better case for not raising rates than for raising them. The statement language suggests that economic conditions are not significantly different, and inflation hasn’t changed much since our previous meeting.  That’s not the language that justifies a rate change.  It seems to do just the opposite.  Language in paragraph 1 of alternative C is more appropriate. Further, a significant reason for my desire to raise rates at this meeting is that doing so represents a consistent response to what we have communicated about the likely path of the funds rate.  In that regard, I would also suggest amending the first sentence of paragraph 3 to read, “In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, and consistent with the Committee’s intention to remove policy accommodation at a moderate pace, the Committee decided to . . . ” et cetera.  This would give the impression that we are following the guidance we have set out in past statements and in other communications. It also makes clear that we are on a path and not reacting to every data point. Lastly, I am okay with retaining the sentence in paragraph 4 at this meeting but would suggest modifying or removing it in future meetings. And, like other presidents who have spoken before me, I don’t suggest wholesale changes to the language right now but offer these suggestions as we consider significant changes to our language in subsequent statements.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents the opinion and suggestions of Mr. Harker regarding the rate increase and the statement language, but there is no direct disagreement with other participants in the conversation.


Passage number 132.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I agree with alternative B, and I will comment on the statement language at the end of my comments here. I believe we’re making good progress toward achieving our dual-mandate objectives.  We are moving toward full employment.  While it’s not always reflected in the headline unemployment rate, I think other measures of slack, at least to my eye, are showing that we’re making improvement. The Dallas trimmed-mean inflation rate, as President Bullard mentioned, is now running at approximately 1.9 percent.  And, as he said, it was running about 1.6 percent in 2015 and between 1.7 and 1.8 percent in 2016. For me, that movement gives me confidence, actually, that we’re going to reach our 2 percent objective over the next couple of years. Due to this progress, I believe it’s appropriate to remove some amount of accommodation today.  I believe, though, this progress is also consistent with a gradual and patient removal of accommodation during the remainder of 2017.  My SEP estimate has not changed from December—three federal funds increases during 2017. I have just a comment:  While the wealth effect of the post-election stock market rally is certainly a positive and, as has been mentioned, has some positive effect on r*, that by itself has not materially influenced my thinking regarding the path of rates. On that score, it would not surprise me at all if we had some correction in market valuations and a widening of credit spreads. If this was to happen, I might actually view it as a healthy adjustment in the markets. As I mentioned yesterday, I continue to monitor potential fiscal and structural reforms.  While they have the potential to provide upside to my forecast, I’ll also be closely monitoring the potential negative effects of repeal of the ACA on consumers, as well as policies that couldaffect the rate of growth in the workforce and trade policies that might directly or indirectly affect consumer prices and jobs, logistics, and supply chain arrangements and potentially lead to retaliatory responses from foreign governments. Regarding the statement language that has been mentioned, I’ll just make two or three points.  First, I agree with statements that have been made that in the future, we should have a refresh discussion regarding the statement—not today, but in the future. Second, of the comments that President Lacker made, the one I have the most conviction for is the insertion of the word “fluctuate” rather than “stabilize.”  When I look at our inflation objective, we said we don’t want inflation to run persistently above or below the 2 percent inflation objective.  I think that’s consistent with the word “fluctuate.”  So I’m actually okay with that change. On the other hand—this is the third point, and I’ll just comment—regarding the “carefully monitor” language, I actually am glad that that stays in, because while I’m relatively confident about reaching our full employment objective, I must admit that, given globalization as well as the effect of technology-enabled disruption, as I’ve said before, I think these two forces are powerful and limit pricing power and are likely to have some downward effect on prices.  So I am glad that we’re going to continue to monitor inflation carefully.  I think this may continue to be challenging.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker agrees with alternative B and expresses agreement with other statements made by President Bullard and President Lacker.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 133.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I can support alternative B today. As I mentioned yesterday, in my SEP I again assume two rate increases of 25 basis points in 2017.  I see economic activity and inflation evolving pretty much in line with the forecasts I made in December and January, which also were predicated on this policy assumption.  So, not   surprisingly, I don’t see any great urgency for moving today. But since I don’t see today’s rate increase as a commitment to a much different policy rate path from what I currently assume will be appropriate, I can support the decision to raise the funds rate today. I still think we could end up making just two moves this year, but I could imagine three increases as being appropriate if the data come in somewhat stronger than I currently expect. We’ll just have to see, in my opinion.  Even three increases this year would be a gradual funds rate path that gives some deference to risk-management considerations.  We’re still in close proximity to the effective lower bound.  So I can support today’s rate move. Now, the changes in the statement language that occurred between the first and second drafts of the alternatives were big improvements, in my view, and make it much easier for me to go along with alternative B. The first draft came close to declaring victory on our price-stability mandate.  That seemed pretty premature.  Although the recent data have been good, core inflation is still 1.7 percent.  And after some welcome increases in inflation compensation and expectations in the fourth quarter, we’ve not seen much further progress this year.  Most measures remain well below pre-crisis levels. I know some might consider our current performance to be close enough to 2 percent to call it a day.  I do think we should consider the fact that Governor Tarullo is going to finish eight years on the Committee without core inflation getting up to 2 percent, certainly not for more than a few months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is stating that he can support alternative B, but he also expresses hesitation and uncertainty about the possibility of three rate increases and the current performance of inflation. This suggests that there is disagreement within Mr. Evans' own perspective on the appropriate policy action.


Passage number 134.
 MR. TARULLO.  Is there a causal relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any information or statements that suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 135.
 [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  It’s just a happy thing to say to support my argument.  [Laughter] We can’t ignore our history of eight years of running below target and the risks to the credibility of our symmetric 2 percent objective if we end this inflation cycle without actually achieving our target.  I think there is a risk that 2 percent could be viewed as pretty close to a ceiling for the Federal Reserve, and I think that that would have negative consequences. Regarding the kinds of alternatives that Governor Fischer was talking about, with 5.3 percent unemployment and 2.3 percent inflation, I can understand how the symmetry of that might seem problematic.  But for me, the larger issue is the fact that eight years of running below our 2 percent objective leads to a credibility risk that people think that this is a ceiling.  I think that’s the part that we truly need to actively fight against. The following were welcome edits—paragraph 1, recognition that core inflation continues to run below target.  I took note that President Harker and President Bullard made comments about alternative C language and alternative A language as perhaps being better. With regard to inflation, I thought that alternative A was pointing out that, well, inflation has gone up, but that’s largely because energy prices are responsible—that was probably closer to something that I would prefer if you were choosing one or the other.  I think alt-B is a reasonable middle ground to be in this place for me. The paragraph 3 addition that monetary policy is aimed at supporting a “sustained” return of inflation to 2 percent—that’s a welcome addition. The reappearance in paragraph 4 of the Committee’s careful monitoring of “inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal” is also welcome. I hope events will transpire in a way that we will soon be able to move to language closer to that in the original statement draft, but we’re not there yet. President Harker also made a comment that, in paragraph 3, perhaps we could have some language that indicates that there’s an intention to remove accommodation, and others put that as the null for that.  I think that’s too much for my views.  As I mentioned, I’ve got only two rate   increases this year.  So I think it’s much more important to ratify an increase in inflation expectations as the big driver for why inflation is likely to move up on a sustainable basis.  And I would view any change in language that gets in the way of that as quite difficult to accept.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Gooding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and preferences on certain language and discussing their views on inflation and the Federal Reserve's target.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
 MS. GOODING.  Thank you.  The accumulated progress to date on both the employment and inflation objectives supports another step in the direction of removing monetary policy accommodation at this meeting.  Therefore, I support the policy recommendation of a 25 basis point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate that is in alternative B. Outside the employment picture, however, the hard data on real activity that we have in hand has been somewhat weaker than is consistent with our GDP forecast for the year as a whole.  While we do not discount the possibility that first-quarter GDP will begin to look better as more data come in, so far, an increase in business and consumer optimism has not turned into much action.  In addition, the prospects of significant fiscal policy stimulus this year are, if anything, fading.  So before signaling any lean to a more rapid removal of policy accommodation than already embedded in the market expectations, I think it’s prudent to accumulate a bit more information about fiscal policy, about the underlying pace of GDP growth, and about the sustainability of the recent inflation momentum. Regarding the language questions, comments by others about the pivotal nature of this meeting lead me to agree that careful consideration of language change is needed, and I agree with the suggestions made by Presidents Rosengren and Harker to consider changes outside this meeting rather than trying to make such changes here.   As I said in my comments yesterday and as was discussed further by President Rosengren this morning, I would also support adding language affirming the key elements of the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, signaling that the Committee is turning attention toward the reinvestment plan to reduce the balance sheet. I could also support the wording changes that President Lacker suggested in paragraph 1, with the verb tense changes; I also like the change to the word “fluctuate” rather than “stabilize.” That concludes my comments.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN. Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. In the passage, Ms. Gooding expresses support for a 25 basis point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate, while also mentioning concerns about the weak real activity data and fading prospects of fiscal policy stimulus. Additionally, she mentions the need for more information before signaling a more rapid removal of policy accommodation. These conflicting statements indicate a disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 137.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 138.
 MR. TARULLO.  Past participle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only consists of a statement or remark made by Mr. Tarullo. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 139.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It is not discussing any controversial topics or presenting any arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 140.
 WILLIAMS.  The past participle is, I think, what we prefer to use in paragraph 1.  So I would switch the sentences on inflation. I think it does create what I always dislike in our writing—when we repeat phrases over and over.  We’ll say “was little changed” or “has been little changed” twice.  But I do think that sentence should be in the past participle. My last comment is about Governor Fischer’s remarks, which I was following very closely.  I think that the argument you make about inflation overshooting the mark and needing to raise unemployment to 5.9 percent actually doesn’t apply.  And the reason is that—I’m going to speak on behalf of the way I understand the staff forecast, which is, they actually have assumed or built into that forecast that, currently, long-run inflation expectations are below 2 percent. The reason why we need to juice the economy for so long is not only to raise wage and price pressure, but also to move inflation expectations back to 2 percent.  So there are two battles we’re fighting to get inflation back to 2 percent.  If we had inflation expectations back at 2 percent and we got some shock to push inflation up, then we wouldn’t need to be fighting that  battle.  And there the ability for inflation to come back to 2 percent with relatively minor movements in unemployment would be in place. So I think that it’s not right to apply the same symmetry—that we need this huge period of really tight labor markets to get inflation up a few tenths, because it’s really about inflation expectations being anchored at the wrong place.  That’s all I’ve got.  [Laughter]  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Williams disagrees with the argument made about inflation overshooting the mark and needing to raise unemployment to 5.9 percent. He believes that the reason for needing to juice the economy for so long is to move inflation expectations back to 2 percent, not to raise wage and price pressure.


Passage number 141.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B as written for today.  I see today’s decision as well supported by the data.  Since I wrote down three rate increases in the December SEP, the data have come in about as expected or a little better, particularly the January and February labor reports. We’re near full employment, and labor markets are still tightening.  Inflation is approaching 2 percent.  Equity markets are booming, which is adding accommodation as the Committee is seeking a gradual withdrawal of it. Overall, financial conditions are actually looser than they were a year ago.  There’s a high likelihood of tax cuts, both personal and corporate, as well as a possibility of some policies that could be harmful to longer-term growth.  Downside risks from abroad are roughly balanced by upside risks here at home. The Committee has been patient, and that patience, I believe, has served us well.  I see no real economy data that suggest that we are “behind the curve,” but the chances that we will fall behind have clearly risen.  And here I would just point out that I see it as a challenging and highly inconvenient fact that the past two cycles have ended not because of high inflation, but rather because of overheating financial conditions.  While I don’t see that happening today—you don’t see high credit growth or high leverage appearing—it’s not hard to think of financial markets as moving smartly in that direction.  So that’s something to keep in mind. Policy, meanwhile, is still accommodative, with the real rate perhaps 1 full percentage point below the neutral rate.  So, taking all of that on board, for me, as long as the economy moves along this path, it will be appropriate to remove accommodation gradually but steadily.  I would like to see policy getting back to roughly neutral within about a year, which I see as consistent with the median SEP path.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no explicit disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Powell, expresses his support for alternative B and provides his perspective on the current state of the economy and the appropriate course of action for monetary policy. While he acknowledges potential risks and challenges, there is no indication of disagreement with the overall direction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 142.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, given progress toward our objectives.  With the changes we’ve seen in inflation, I think the statement changes are appropriate, but I share some of the concerns raised by President Lacker about those changes and would look forward to future discussions about the statement. I want to make just a brief observation on something a little bit different, and that is the reintroduction of core inflation into paragraph 1 as an alternative measure to looking at the distance we are from the longer-run headline inflation objective.  I do recall that in the past, we’ve had to deal with some public reaction to talking about core inflation in our communications, and I’m always sensitive that we could be potentially sending a message to the public that we are discounting food and energy prices that, in fact, affect people’s cost of living. So my preference had been the construction we had been using when energy prices were pushing down.  We noted that those were temporary.  And I think that in this instance, it would also be appropriate to say there are certain things that are temporarily boosting headline inflation in the same way so that we have a consistent expression.  I think if we hang on to core inflation, that could create some difficulties for us down the road with the public.  Again, I’m not suggesting we have to change that today, but I think that could come up.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and the changes made due to progress towards objectives. However, they also mention concerns raised by President Lacker and their own concerns about the reintroduction of core inflation. They mention potential difficulties with the public if they continue to focus on core inflation.


Passage number 143.
   MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Here, as with the economic go-round, my comments are a little broader than just this decision and, again, reflect my effort to review what I’ve said here for the past eight years, notwithstanding my failure to get inflation up to target during that period. I wanted to explain, first, why I think a funds rate increase is appropriate in the near term; second, why today is actually the right moment to do it; but, third, why I think a continued embrace of the gradualist concept by the Committee is also important for the future.  So, first, why is a move appropriate.  Well, here I’m trying to channel President Mester a little bit.  I think, for all of us, when you approach monetary policy, you’ve got to have a view, or at least an implicit, rudimentary model, of how you think things are working.  I think that when we get into these meetings, sometimes we end up debating about the deltas from the previous meeting and what the significance of that is and lose sight of the fact that this really is a medium-term game that we play. I think we all start with the proposition that monetary policy operates with a lag.  Thus, if you’ve got a situation in which you’re providing a fair amount of accommodation, you can’t wait until you’ve achieved your goals in order to start removing at least some of that accommodation. That’s about as basic as it gets, but it is an important premise—or it’s axiomatic, really. I think the debate or the disagreements over the past several years have been over, how do we know when we are at the point at which that trajectory is steep enough that we’ve got to begin taking that preemptive action.  And that’s where some of my skepticism over the past several years has been expressed—on questions about how much the Phillips curve really tells us and questions about some other efforts to invoke past correlations, which is why I spent so much time torturing Bill Wascher’s staff to try to identify data series or metrics that might actuallysuggest that we are at the point at which some of that trajectory was more assured than it had been before. I won’t repeat what I’ve said in the past several meetings as to why I think we’re at that point or have come to that point, but I think we are there.  Again, I think one can’t just be against rate increases.  One has to be for a model or an approach that would say when a rate increase was appropriate, and that—I think not totally successfully—is what I’ve tried to do.  And I do think we crossed the point, at least by the metrics that I had adopted. Now, second, why today.  There’s nothing in what I just said or what I believe that would suggest you have to move in March.  But I do think this is a good moment to do it for a couple of reasons:  One, there is a widespread view on the Committee that rate increases— plural—are going to be warranted this year, and, two, we’ve seen in the past that things happen that make the Committee reluctant at a particular moment in time to increase rates not because it thinks the trajectory of the economy has changed, but just because it doesn’t want to give a signal when you may be having financial instability in Europe.  So there’s a desire—I think a justifiable desire—to hold back at that particular moment. Well, if that’s the case and you look forward to the rest of 2017 and identify a number of meetings at which things may be going on that might inhibit the Committee from wanting to move at that moment—not, again, because of the economy, but because of a sense of, gee, does it upset markets when they’re fragile.  Then I think you do have to take an opportunity when things are looking relatively decent right now.  And you can do it in the context of saying, “The expectations articulated in December are being realized,” which I, by the way, think is exactly what the statement is trying to do—not to ramp up and say, “Boy, things are even better than we  expected.” The whole point of this is, the expectations articulated earlier have now been realized. But now, why do I think it’s important to maintain a posture of gradualism.  Well, the first reason is the one Charlie already articulated with the continuing validity or importance of risk management.  The second is, I think, John’s very persuasive account of why, given history, you have to make sure that the world believes that 2 percent really is the inflation target.  And after all of my time here, with inflation not having been at 2 percent, if there is a viable theory of inflation expectations, that’s got to be a relevant factor. The third thing I would say, though, is that the uncertainty associated with estimates of r* is, I think, actually pretty important here—and this is another John Williams point, although he didn’t invoke it this morning.  So at any point in which the Committee is on an upward path of the federal funds rate, there’s obviously uncertainty as to whether its expectations regarding the economy’s direction will be realized.  So you can’t say, “Well, there’s uncertainty.  Therefore, we can’t raise rates.”  Or, “We have to embrace a posture of gradualism.” But in an environment in which not only don’t we know necessarily all of the bumps along the way, but also there’s more uncertainty about what the destination is than has been the case in the past, that this is when a mindset of gradualism is really important, because it’s telling us that we’ve got to be continually testing the hypothesis that this is the right path to be on, and we’ve got to be giving ourselves a chance to see whether the effect of our actions is about what one would have expected.  And given that there is a lag to monetary policy—that first premise—it’s going to take a little while to see what the effects of the December and now March rate increases are going to be. Now, let me say, that’s not an argument against all of you necessarily raising rates again in June.  I really do mean this not as a quantitative thing, but as a mindset.  And I think it’s important to continue to project that, which is why I think the language that is in the statement now is important to retain at least for a while, until you feel you’re in the position in which you can revamp the approach, as somebody said earlier. Getting to the language, I think the comments several people have made already about why today is not a good day to do that—it’s both not only not a good idea to do it on the fly, but also not a good idea to do it until the economy has moved and people’s views have moved enough and there’s enough of a consensus that you really are articulating a different approach, given John’s goal, for example, of making sure that people’s belief in the 2 percent target has been achieved. The one thing I’d say, though, Madam Chair, is that if we keep “stabilize around” today, which I’m fine keeping, I don’t think it would be a great idea for the Committee to shift to “fluctuate” in the next couple of meetings, because that’s just going to set off this classic CNBC “What does that shift mean.” and all of the rest. So if we stay with “stabilize around” today, my strong advice would be to keep that until you get to the point at which you’re revamping the statement, and then you may still want to keep it, or you may want to say something else at that time.  But if you want to change to “fluctuate,” I’d do it now rather than doing it incrementally at some future meeting.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 144.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative A today.  It was a close call for me.  I don’t think the 25 basis points is really going to slow down the economy all that much or impair the labor force.  But, on balance, I was more comfortable with alternative Aand not raising the federal funds rate, and I’ll give you my reasons.  Number one, which I talked about yesterday, was a labor force participation story.  None of us really know how much longer this can go on.  We’ve been surprised for the past year.  It may go on for a while longer. I’ve been focused for most of the past year on three different data points to tell me when that story is running to a conclusion:  core PCE inflation moving up on an annual basis, inflation expectations moving up, and/or the headline unemployment rate coming down as some way of signaling that labor force participation has gone as far as it’s going to go. And, basically, they’re all moving sideways, so I’m not seeing a compelling reason to move.  Data dependency means something different, probably, to each of us.  For me, that’s what data dependency means—I want to see those data actually move, and I’m prepared to raise rates when I see the data actually move.  I know 200,000 jobs a month exceeds what is sustainable, so I know we’re using up slack.  I just don’t know how much slack is left yet, and 200,000 a month doesn’t tell us how much slack is left.  It just tells us that we’re using it up. By the way, Pat Harker’s comments actually resonated with me.  When I read the language in the first paragraph of alternative B, I think the language is accurate, but I do think it begs the question, “What’s the impetus for moving today.”  So I feel like the language in alternative B, the first paragraph, resonates with my view, but that begs the question of why we’re moving. Next, some others have made this comment. I would think that, as a Committee, to the extent that we make forecast errors, we would want half of our errors to be too “hawkish” and half to be too “dovish”—randomly distributed over time. But if we look at the past six years, 100 percent of the SEP inflation errors have been too “hawkish.”  One hundred percent of the medians have said inflation is right around the corner, and yet we keep making the same mistake   over and over and over again.  How is that rational.  Why aren’t we reacting to those errors and adjusting our process. Well, I thought about it.  If you’re driving down the highway and you’re driving along a cliff, you’re going to make one-sided errors away from the cliff because if you go over the cliff, you go over the cliff, and you’re dead. In this context, I think the Committee is treating 2 percent as a ceiling, as others have said, and that explains one-sided errors.  John, I was surprised at your comments today.  I agree with your comments today, but I think you and others have talked about nonlinearity reintroducing when we cross 2 percent or the Phillips curve reemerging when we cross 2 percent. Forgive me if it wasn’t you, but it seems like members of the Committee think that really bad things happen if we cross 2 percent.  And, again, if we think 2 percent should be a ceiling, I’m not necessarily opposed to that.  The ECB has it.  But let’s decide it, let’s announce it, and then let’s live by it.  I am opposed to us having an announced target but then behaving as though it is a ceiling, which I think is what we’re doing right now. Relatedly, some people question the dual mandate and say we should have only a single mandate, because they can be in conflict.  If we have high inflation and high unemployment, how do we make decisions.  Well, today we have the opposite situation.  We have consistently low inflation, and we may still have slack in the labor market.  I’m reminded of that old joke of an economist who won’t pick up a $20 bill because it can’t possibly be real, and I feel like there are $20 bills and we are reluctant to pick them up. Finally, for the reasons I articulated yesterday in regard to the balance sheet, I do view an announcement of the balance sheet as somewhat of a substitute for a federal funds rate hike, because I think that an announcement of our plan for the balance sheet will lead to some monetary tightening.  So my personal preference, all things being equal, would be for the next   tightening to be with that kind of an announcement once the data support it.  And once we get that behind us, we can go back to using the federal funds rate as the data warrant.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 145.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  With full employment within reach, signs of progress on inflation, a favorable shift in the balance of risks, and easier financial conditions, some further removal of accommodation is warranted today.  These developments reinforce my sense that the macroeconomy is at a transition, and monetary policy, too, is approaching a transition, when it will be appropriate to begin to allow a gradual runoff of the balance sheet. Even with today’s action, however, the stance of monetary policy will remain accommodative, which seems appropriate given that 12-month core PCE inflation, a good gauge of expected future inflation, remains short of our target and has been persistently below our target for eight years—the “Tarullo era,” as I’ve been reminded throughout this meeting.  [Laughter] Although the amount of accommodation is modest, assuming that expected inflation is close to the 12-month change in core PCE inflation and that the real neutral rate is around zero, as most estimates suggest, following today’s meeting, the federal funds rate will be only a few hikes short of its neutral level. If, as I expect, the economy continues to make progress in the months ahead, we should see further movement to a neutral stance and the start of balance sheet normalization.  However, given the gradual pace of expected improvement, the past persistent shortfall of inflation from our target, the asymmetric risks associated with proximity to the effective lower bound, and the modest amount of remaining accommodation, I expect the appropriate pace to be gradual, similar to the median path in the SEP. At this point, it’s important that we continue to communicate our expectation of gradualism in paragraph 4 in order to assure the public of our commitment to a symmetric 2 percent target. In addition, the gradualism of that rate path is premised in part on assumptions about the timing and pace of balance sheet normalization, which will become clearer to the public in the weeks and months ahead with the release of the minutes and subsequent communications. At this stage, suggesting a shift to a more rapid removal of accommodation would be premature.  It’s fair to ask, given the continued progress we’ve made and the emergence of credible upside risk to demand, what developments might lead to a more rapid removal of accommodation.  One possibility that Governor Powell has mentioned would be rising evidence of an increase in risk appetite and stretched valuations in financial markets, together with strong credit growth.  I would expect that in this case, our first line of defense would be macroprudential policy—both relying on the strong through-the-cycle safeguards we’ve put in place pursuant to Dodd-Frank and using the additional countercyclical tools and guidance that we currently have at our disposal. Another possibility would be one in which inflation was to surprise to the upside. If, contrary to the Tealbook forecast, stronger inflation was to persist, with a 12-month change in core rising to 2 percent, and if stronger inflation was accompanied by signs of stronger momentum and activity, then it would be appropriate to consider adjusting our communication.  But that is not the circumstance that we confront today. For that reason, I disagree with the suggestion of my esteemed colleague from the Richmond bank to delete the sentence in paragraph 4, and I think I would associate myself with comments that have now come from Presidents Evans, Kaplan, and Williams; Governor Tarullo; and President Kashkari.   I have to believe that if inflation was persistently above 2 percent by 0.3 percentage point or more over eight years, the Committee would want to emphasize that it is carefully monitoring actual and expected inflation developments, because there would be concern about inflation expectations having moved above 2 percent.  Indeed, with the modifications in alternative B, the sentence is entirely neutral and would apply as well to inflation being either above or below the target. I like the three added “s” words—“stabilize,” “sustained,” and “symmetric”—and I hope those will be retained.  Any alternative, I think, would signal that we are engaged in the aforementioned “victory dance” on the basis of one month of data, which would suggest that 2 percent is, in fact, a ceiling, not a target. For those reasons, I support alternative B as written.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mainly discusses the current state of the economy and monetary policy, and the speaker shares their views and supports a particular alternative.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 146.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  I’ll have some comments on the language in a bit. As I see it, the grounds for gradually removing monetary policy accommodation are very much in place.  We’re relatively close to our employment and inflation objectives at a time that the federal funds rate is still very low and we judge monetary policy as still being accommodative.  We further expect that the economy will continue to grow at an above-trend pace, and, despite our actions to make monetary policy less accommodative, financial conditions have become easier.  All of this points to a removal of accommodation at today’s meeting.  I would expect that the decision today will be of little surprise to anyone, given our recent efforts to align market expectations more closely with our views.  I want to talk just briefly about yesterday’s discussion.  I was very pleased by the discussion we had on reinvestment and the balance sheet.  I think there’s more to do there to develop a coherent strategy among the Committee, and I just would strongly encourage us to do that at the next couple of FOMC meetings, because I think we really want to get that wrapped up so we’re ready to go as soon as, potentially, the third quarter.  So I think we’re making good progress, but we need to continue to move on that path. In terms of language, on paragraph 4 and President Lacker’s suggestion to remove that sentence, I think that’s too far.  I think that declares victory on inflation, and I don’t think that’s appropriate with us still being below our 2 percent objective.  I really do think we need to spend some time at or above 2 percent before we can actually declare victory. On paragraph 2, President Lacker suggested the word “fluctuate” rather than “stabilize.”  I think “fluctuate” is actually probably more accurate than “stabilize,” so I’m certainly open to that suggestion, but I don’t feel strongly about it.  I don’t think it’s a big deal.  The key word in that sentence is “around.”  That’s really the key word rather than the word “stabilize” or “fluctuate.” In paragraph 1, I certainly agree that the tenses should be the same.  I guess I would say that if you want to be parallel to the sentence on job gains, you should say “inflation was little changed and continued to run somewhat below 2 percent,” as opposed to “was” and “has continued.” I think we want to have the tenses consistent across the paragraph, not just in that single sentence.  It’s a very small point. As far as President Harker’s suggestion to put in language in paragraph 3—“and consistent with”—I don’t think that’s necessary.  I think what we’re really trying to signal at this   meeting is that we’re removing monetary policy accommodation because the economy is evolving in the way we expected—no drama—so I don’t think we need that emphasis. Finally, as this is Dan’s last meeting, I think it’s proper for me, as the Vice Chairman of this Committee, to say a few words.  I want to recognize all that he’s done for the Federal Reserve and the FOMC.  Although I didn’t coordinate my comments with the Chair, unlike in the case of some other recent matters, my remarks are very much in a similar vein. Dan, you’ve always come very well prepared to the FOMC meetings.  You made many meaningful contributions on monetary policy and its execution in your eight years on the Committee. I agree with Eric—I much preferred when you were on my side rather than in opposition.  When you were in opposition, you were a very worthy advocate, and we had some pretty good debates. You more than held your own in debating and discussing the outlook with all of these Ph.D. economists, myself included, and that’s quite an achievement at the Federal Reserve. While this will be a mere coda in your Federal Reserve career compared with your role in changing how we supervise large systemically important firms, how we’ve implemented the CCAR process, and how we pushed through the regulatory overhaul that was surely necessary following the financial crisis, you also deserve considerable credit on the monetary policy side for taking your role here seriously and making many important contributions.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. Let me just start by saying that I’ve heard many of you around the table suggest that, as we come close to achieving our goals, perhaps we rethink the structure of the statement.  I’m more than open to doing that, and we will work on that and try to get back to you.  I do want to go through one by one now the various suggestions that have been made for changes.  Starting in paragraph 1, on the tense issue, I’ve heard the suggestion and take the Vice Chairman’s modification that we might change the tenses in the clause beginning “excluding energy and food prices . . .” to say “inflation was little changed and continued to run somewhat below 2 percent.” President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In paragraph 2, there is a suggested change in language suggested by President Lacker and President Lacker suggests the word "fluctuate" rather than "stabilize." However, the speaker does not feel strongly about the change and states that it is not a big deal.


Passage number 147.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I’d point out that “has continued” appears three times in the first three sentences, rather than “continued.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 148.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We go back and forth throughout that paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without additional context or information about the content of the paragraph. The phrase "We go back and forth" suggests a discussion or exchange of ideas, but the passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 149.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, we use it three times.  And in past statement-drafting rounds, we’ve changed initial drafts that weren’t in agreement with the tense that’s established at the beginning of “has continued.”  It would be more consistent to say “has continued” rather than “continued,” don’t you think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that using "has continued" would be more consistent in contrast to using "continued".


Passage number 150.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, I guess what I was coming back to is the sentence “Job gains remained solid and the unemployment rate was little changed in recent months.”  I feel like this is a parallel sentence to that sentence, and that earlier sentence is all in the past tense.  That’s all.  I don’t think it’s a big deal.  I could go either way. CHAIR YELLEN.  Does anybody else have a strong view about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about the interpretation of a sentence and the speaker expresses their opinion without any conflicting views.


Passage number 151.
 MR. TARULLO.  It’s definitely not a big deal. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let’s go with “continued.”  Is that acceptable to everybody. Okay. Then, in paragraph 2, we have the issue of “stabilize around” or “fluctuate around.” I heard opinions on both sides.  I’d say my personal preference is for “stabilize around” for the reasons that President Williams expressed, but “fluctuate around” is an alternative.  So let me  see.  How many people would prefer to stick with “stabilize around”. [Show of hands]  Okay.  And “fluctuate around”.  [Show of hands]  Okay.  I think I see more support to stick with “stabilize around,” so I will propose we just stick with “stabilize around.” The next thing I noted was President Harker’s suggestion that we add language in paragraph 3 saying “consistent with the Committee’s intention to remove accommodation at a gradual pace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. There is a discussion and consideration of different options, but ultimately a decision is reached by consensus.


Passage number 152.
” MR. HARKER.  Madam Chair, I withdraw that for now because I do think it should be part of an overall package of changes that we consider in the future. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Good.  So we’ll pass on that.  Let’s see.  Then President Lacker suggested omitting the sentence about carefully monitoring.  I did hear many strong expressions of support to keep that in and, I think, enough strong suggestion of support that I would not propose removing that. The one last thing I will mention is the wording change in paragraph 4 concerning “in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases.” We have crossed out “only.”  President Bullard suggested that that’s an important change and we keep “only,” and I think that’s worth a moment of discussion. I will say that it was intentional to cross out “only,” and I think it is a way of emphasizing—and this maybe captures a part of what President Harker was driving at in his proposal—that we do see ourselves, if things continue in the manner they’ve been going and in line with our expectations, as making some further gradual upward movements in the funds rate.  These would obviously be data dependent.  Obviously, if the economic outlook changes, that might not happen.  Something different might happen.  But it is switching the emphasis to saying that the Committee expects gradual increases. So let me make sure that people are comfortable with that. Is there anybody who wishes to keep “only”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The chair, Janet Yellen, indicates that she has heard support for keeping certain wording in the document and does not propose removing it. She also discusses a suggested change and explains her reasoning for crossing out the word "only." There is no indication of disagreement or contention among the participants.


Passage number 153.
 MR. EVANS.  I don’t really have a strong opinion.  It’s a subtlety that, frankly, is completely lost on me.  If I had seen only the construction the way it is this way, “in a manner that will warrant gradual increases”—what do we think “only gradual” is really doing.  I guess “only gradual” means we absolutely won’t do a 50 basis point increase. CHAIR YELLEN. “At most” is what it means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Evans admits to not having a strong opinion, and Chair Yellen simply clarifies the meaning of "only gradual" as "at most."


Passage number 154.
 MR. EVANS. Whereas with “gradual increases”—well, we might do more than “gradual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, MR. EVANS is stating a hypothetical scenario (gradual increases) and discussing the potential outcome of that scenario. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 155.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s a slight difference of emphasis. CHAIR YELLEN.  It’s very slight, but I think it is maybe emphasizing an expectation that we think we’re on a mild, gradual path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers seem to be in agreement that there is a slight difference in emphasis, but they both view it as a minor distinction.


Passage number 156.
 MR. EVANS.  But it’s opening up a 50, isn’t it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This statement is a simple observation, not expressing any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 157.
 I mean, “only gradual”—that’s why it’s a subtlety that’s lost— MR. FISCHER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or observation made by Mr. Fischer about the subtlety being discussed.


Passage number 158.
 It depends on whether you’re measuring it in units of— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s still based on expectations.  The expectations could change, so I don’t think it’s really binding us very much. CHAIR YELLEN. President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 159.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 160.
 WILLIAMS.  I think my view was, we got into that one-rate-hike-a-year thing, and people started maybe interpreting “gradual” as really gradual.  And most of us don’t think one rate hike is the right thing. That’s how I interpreted it—but not about 50 basis points. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Williams and Chair Yellen seem to be discussing their interpretations of the one-rate-hike-a-year approach, but they do not express any disagreement with each other's views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 161.
 MR. BULLARD. Yes.  I think it is a subtle matter, but we are playing a hairsplitting game, and I think that the trajectory is much more important than the move today. So I think there would be—potentially, anyway—a lot of focus on this. In previous tightening cycles, we’ve gone as much as 300 basis points in a year.  Even in the 2004–06 tightening cycle, we moved at every meeting.  So what you’re doing here is at least putting some probability that you might do something more akin to what we’ve done in the past, whereas I think the “only gradual” has shut that down.  It is saying something about, well, potentially we’d go faster. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, believes that the trajectory of interest rate hikes is more important than the current move, and expresses disagreement with the phrase "only gradual" which suggests a slower pace of rate hikes. This creates a disagreement or contention between Mr. Bullard and the prevailing view expressed by Chair Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 162.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Yes.  I would just say, all things being equal, I would rather keep it.  I agree that the distinction, just purely looking at the language, is very subtle.  But the striking of it will be absolutely noticed, and I think it will be interpreted as a very “hawkish” development— maybe overinterpreted.  So maybe this kind of a change could be wrapped into the broader changes that we consider at a later date. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kashkari expresses his preference for keeping something, while Chair Yellen does not express a clear position on the matter.


Passage number 163.
 MR. FISCHER.  There will come a day when we have to reduce the rate by 50 basis points.  We don’t want to rule that out, do we. CHAIR YELLEN.  We’re not ruling anything out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen are in agreement that reducing the rate by 50 basis points is a possibility they don't want to rule out.


Passage number 164.
 MR. FISCHER.  No, but—I mean, I’m in favor of “gradual.” CHAIR YELLEN.  “Gradual” or “only gradual”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer agrees with the concept of "gradual" and Chair Yellen simply repeats the term.


Passage number 165.
 MR. FISCHER.  No, “gradual”—because otherwise, we could only go down 25 basis points per meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 166.
 MR. EVANS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 167.
  It says “expect,” so— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, it’s already qualified. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let me just ask for a show of hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response of "Okay" suggests agreement or understanding.


Passage number 168.
 MR. EVANS.  Can I ask a flippant question, though. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 169.
 MR. TARULLO.  Now that I’m leaving.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only states a fact about someone leaving.


Passage number 170.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not explicitly expressing any contention or disagreement. It could be a neutral statement of fact or a description of a situation without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 171.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  If I found myself in public and somebody asked me the question “Hmm, what does taking ‘only’ out do.” would it be wrong for me to say, “Well, if you look at other places, the grammar police came in and made some adjustments, so it was—”.  That would be wrong.  I’m getting that that’s wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and expressing their own belief about the potential answer.


Passage number 172.
 MR. TARULLO. No, I think you can’t say that.  You could say what John just said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and agreeing with John's statement.


Passage number 173.
 MR. EVANS.  What did John say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 174.
 MR. TARULLO.  That “gradual” may mean more than one increase a year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply pointing out that the word "gradual" may imply more than one increase per year.


Passage number 175.
 MR. EVANS.  Gee, we’ve already got SEPs that have way more than one increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about SEPs having more than one increase.


Passage number 176.
 MR. TARULLO.  And have for some time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Tarullo has had something for some time, without any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 177.
 MR. EVANS.  It just opens up discussions that kind of take you far afield, it seems to me, but—okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans is expressing his opinion about a topic but is not opposing or arguing against any other viewpoint.


Passage number 178.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is not provided.


Passage number 179.
 WILLIAMS.  That’s the beauty of the dot plot. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a comment made by Williams about the dot plot and a response by Chair Yellen.


Passage number 180.
 MS. BRAINARD. First of all, I think some of the commentary is well anticipated.  But, second, they’re going to view it in light of the lack of changes to the SEP median forecast.  So in that sense, I think it will be easy to explain that, in fact, the Committee just feels more confident about achieving that SEP.  That’s how I would say it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their perspective on how the Committee's decision will be interpreted.


Passage number 181.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay—“confident.” Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  So I guess, on balance, I’m hearing sentiment to leave it as proposed—get rid of the “only.”   Okay.  Before we vote on the statement, I’d just like to say a few words about communications.  Assuming that we are going to vote to raise the target range today, I intend to emphasize in my press conference remarks that this action reflects ongoing progress toward our employment and inflation goals.  In doing so, I will note that conditions have been evolving in line with our expectations.  I’ll reference the median SEP numbers to help make the point that the outlook is not materially changed.  I will also stress that today’s action is consistent with our long-standing expectation that gradual increases in the federal funds rate would be warranted to achieve and sustain our objectives, and that our basic strategy remains unchanged. Okay.  Brian, would you tell us what we’re voting on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing the wording for a statement and planning for a press conference.


Passage number 182.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Certainly, Madam Chair.  This vote will be on the policy statement for alternative B as shown on pages 5 and 6 of Thomas Laubach’s briefing materials distributed yesterday, except for changes in tense to the penultimate sentence in paragraph 1.  The final clause would read “excluding energy and food prices, inflation was little changed and continued to run somewhat below 2 percent.” The vote will also be to approve the directive to the Desk as included in the implementation note on pages 11 and 12 of Thomas’s briefing materials.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating what the vote will be focused on and providing some details about the changes that were made.


Passage number 183.
 Chair Yellen Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Brainard Yes President Evans Yes Governor Fischer Yes President Harker Yes President Kaplan Yes President Kashkari No Governor Powell Yes Governor Tarullo Yes MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  We now have two sets of related matters that are under the Board’s jurisdiction:  corresponding changes to the interest rates on reserves and discount   rates. I first need a motion from a Board member to increase the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances to 1 percent, effective March 16, 2017.  Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply lists the individuals present and their positions on a certain matter.


Passage number 184.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  And a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response "So moved" and "And a second" indicate agreement and support for the motion.


Passage number 185.
 MR. TARULLO.  Second. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  Finally, I need a motion from a Board member to approve establishment of the primary credit rate by the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco at 1½ percent, effective March 16, 2017.  It will also encompass approval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 1½ percent primary credit rate by each of the remaining Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of March 16, 2017, and the date such Reserve Bank informs the secretary of the Board of such a request.  The secretary of the Board would be authorized to inform such Reserve Banks of the approval of the Board of Governors on such notification by the Reserve Bank.  Lastly, this vote will also encompass establishment of the rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas specified in the staff’s March 10 memo to the Board.  Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements. It is simply stating the need for a motion to approve certain establishment and rates.


Passage number 186.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The phrase "So moved" is a response to a motion, indicating agreement or approval. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


