Passage number 1.
  Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on December 11–12, 2012 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 11, 2012, at 11:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, December 12, 2012, at 8:30 a.m.  Those present were the following: Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Elizabeth Duke Jeffrey M. Lacker Dennis P. Lockhart Sandra Pianalto Jerome H. Powell Sarah Bloom Raskin Jeremy C. Stein Daniel K. Tarullo John C. Williams Janet L. Yellen James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively William B. English, Secretary and Economist Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, William Nelson, David Reifschneider, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors   James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Eric M. Engen, Thomas Laubach, and David E. Lebow, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley,¹ Associate Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Jane E. Ihrig, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Beth Anne Wilson, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Jennifer E. Roush, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Marie Gooding, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Loretta J. Mester and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Chicago, respectively Troy Davig, Mark E. Schweitzer, Geoffrey Tootell, Christopher J. Waller, and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Cleveland, Boston, St. Louis, and Minneapolis, respectively Mary Daly, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Evan F. Koenig, Lorie K. Logan, Julie Ann Remache, Alexander L. Wolman, and Nathaniel Wuerffel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, New York, New York, Richmond, and New York, respectively Argia M.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a list of people who were present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Sbordone, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York December 11 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everyone.  As I reported last time, following our rules, Bill English and Scott Alvarez are continuing a review of the leaks that we saw earlier this year in order to recommend further steps.  This process is ongoing.  I understand they have some interviews this week while people are here.  I thank everyone for what I understand is very good cooperation; I appreciate that.  The first item on our agenda today is “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations.” Let me turn the floor over to Simon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Questions for Simon.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of a statement asking for questions for Simon and mentioning President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 4.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Simon, in terms of chart 19, I’m a little puzzled by what we’re trying to get at through that question.  If the respondents have a lot of heterogeneity in beliefs about what the course of the economy is going to be, that should translate into their having differences of opinion about how big our balance sheet is going to grow as well, given the way that we stated our policy.  So how are you thinking about taking account of those differences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 5.
 MR. POTTER. We have the measure for disagreement in their point forecasts, the darker blue line, and that captures different views about the FOMC’s reaction function and how the economy might evolve.  And then the lighter blue, which you only have two recent observations on because we only just started to ask this question, captures each responding dealer’s uncertainty around that point estimate and gives the average of that uncertainty. It’s trying to separate out disagreement about how things might evolve in point expectations from uncertainty in terms of the average level of uncertainty that dealers have.  If we had a longer history of the balance sheet question, we could see whether this was relatively high or low for the balance sheet. What I wanted to make clear is that this number for what the federal funds rate would be 12 months ahead is relatively high compared with the earlier history, particularly if you look at 2007, 2008—quite turbulent times.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The passage mentions different views about the FOMC's reaction function and how the economy might evolve, suggesting that there is contention or disagreement among the participants. Additionally, the passage compares the current number for the federal funds rate to earlier history, indicating a difference of opinion or viewpoint.


Passage number 6.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay, I think I understood you.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Kocherlakota expresses his understanding and gratitude, indicating agreement with the statement or information provided by the other person.


Passage number 7.
 MR. POTTER.  There’s a MarketSOURCE piece that was posted yesterday that goes into more detail. It was the only way we were able to try to capture some of the uncertainty about what the open-ended purchases actually mean rather than just focusing on the point forecast, which I think is somewhat misleading as the size of the program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage is simply stating that there is a MarketSOURCE piece that provides more detail about open-ended purchases and the speaker believes that focusing only on the point forecast is somewhat misleading.


Passage number 8.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 9.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you.  Simon, I heard this morning in Steve Liesman’s CNBC report on the Fed Survey that close to 70 percent of those surveyed are concerned that with our continued asset purchase program, there are going to be both market disruptions and pricing issues.  And what was interesting about the survey is that it is a very sharp reversal from the September survey.  I know that in our primary dealer survey, we don’t ask questions about market disruptions, and in your comments you said that the staff does not believe that our continued asset purchase program would cause market disruptions.  But are you hearing any comments from the dealers about concerns about market disruptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes


Passage number 10.
 MR. POTTER.  We always get comments and very wide-ranging views about what we should be doing, and what the effects are. I haven’t noticed a big switch in the same way that the CNBC survey has.  It would be useful to see how precise that question is and whether there’s some follow-up.  The metrics that we have do not show, really, any strains in the markets right now.  We’re actually surprised that there haven’t been more strains, given the size of our MBS purchases, because we’ve been running somewhere between $70 billion and $80 billion per month.  After Hurricane Sandy, we had to make up for one day; we switched very quickly from in the low $3 billions per day to the high $3 billions, and we accomplished that with really great ease.  So on the MBS side, we’ve seen very little.  What we will follow is the settlements and whether we have to roll.  Part of that is the 3½ percent coupon:  Because the primary rate isbeing pushed down so much, that is becoming a coupon that you’re unlikely to produce.  That tends to result in some market-functioning issues, but that’s really a desirable side effect of the policy if we want to push down the primary rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their observations and metrics related to market strains and MBS purchases. They mention surprise at the lack of strains and mention potential market-functioning issues as a side effect of a policy.


Passage number 11.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 12.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to talk about exhibit 3, chart 17, “Expected Pace of Asset Purchases.” I thought your characterization of this was that—and I may be reading the graph wrong, so let me know—all or most of the probability was on $45 billion.  But it looks to me that more than half of the probability is actually on something less than $45 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Mr. Bullard is expressing disagreement with the chairman's characterization of the exhibit and providing his own interpretation. He believes that more than half of the probability is on something less than $45 billion, contrary to what the chairman suggested.


Passage number 13.
 MR. POTTER. The question that we ask is about the upcoming meeting, the January meeting, the March meeting, and the one-year-ahead.  This chart is the one-year-ahead chart.  If I had shown you a chart for this meeting, I think that what you’d see is that 18 of the dealers are at $45 billion.  There are three dealers who are a little bit below $45 billion, and that might be because they have a different view of the purchase allocation.  So in 10-year equivalent space, it’s probably the same as the $45 billion.  However, this chart is the one-year-ahead, and it captures the fact that some of the dealers think the open-ended purchases will end sometime in 2013. Also, we’re seeing a tapering in here from some of the dealers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting information about different views and opinions among the dealers.


Passage number 14.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a simple expression of gratitude and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 15.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Governor Powell" is a neutral and factual piece of information, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 16.
 MR. POWELL.  Simon, in reference to chart 20, do you have a story on what caused the dealers to herd into six quarters between the October survey and the December survey. It seems like there’s a real coming together around that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 17.
MR. POTTER. There are three ways this herding could happen:  They could fix the date at which the federal funds rate will increase and move the end of the purchases, vice versa, or move both.  If you look at those light blue lines, some of the dealers had an expectation that the funds rate would be held close to zero for a very long time.  They’ve tended to move that in closer to 2015 or 2016.  And there’s still one dealer who believes very strongly that we will be purchasing when rates go up.  It’s interesting.  I’m not sure what to think of that dealer, but that dealer has been quizzed on this topic, and that’s what that dealer strongly believes.  That’s the one at minus 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing different scenarios and observations without expressing any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 18.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions for Simon.  [No response] If not, may I ask for a vote on open market operations since the October meeting. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for any other questions before proceeding to a vote on open market operations.


Passage number 19.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As you know, I voted against extending the swap lines in November, and I remain opposed.  They amount to fiscal policy, and we can provide perfectly adequate dollar liquidity through open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is expressing his personal opinion and stance on the matter of extending swap lines, but there is no direct disagreement or contention with any other parties mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 20.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. This vote is on open market operations, and I will give a moment for questions on your issue, but I take note of your comment.  So let’s do a vote on open market operations.  Any opposed.  [No response]  All right.  Let’s take that as approved. The second request is for an extension of liquidity swap lines.  You received an earlier memorandum on that.  We have both Simon and Steve Kamin here if there are any further questions.  Are there any further questions or comments on the swap lines. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward discussion about voting on open market operations and discussing a request for an extension of liquidity swap lines.


Passage number 21.
 MR. FISHER.  May I just ask what the status of our swap line with Mexico is.  Is it still open.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking about the status of the swap line with Mexico.


Passage number 22.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the extraordinary swap lines that we had during the crisis are no longer extant.  What is there is longstanding, NAFTA-based, $3 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about the swap lines during the crisis and mentions the $3 billion that exists based on NAFTA. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 23.
 MR. FISHER.  Okay.  Well, this extension doesn’t affect the existing swap lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the extension does not affect the existing swap lines.


Passage number 24.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, it doesn’t affect them in any way.  We do those separately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply acknowledges that something does not affect someone or something in any way, and that a specific task is done separately.


Passage number 25.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude or appreciation.


Passage number 26.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions. [No response] All right.  All in favor of extending the swap lines, please say aye.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 27.
 MR. LACKER.  Opposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "opposed" indicates that Mr. Lacker disagrees with something or someone.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.  Any other. [No response]  Okay.  Thank you very much.  Again, the coordinated public announcement is not going to be released until Thursday morning.  Okay.  Our second item is on aspects and options for continuing asset purchases.  You received a number of memorandums from the staff in the intermeeting period, including a very substantive one that looked at a number of different scenarios, of which Jane Ihrig was the lead author here at the Board.  So I’m going to turn it over now to Jane Ihrig of the Board and Julie Remache from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to give a brief overview of some of the staff findings on this issue, and then we’ll have an opportunity for questions.  Jane.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 29.
 MS. IHRIG.2  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the handout labeled “Options for Continuation of Open-Ended Asset Purchases in 2013.” The Committee received a memo from the staff providing projections of the effects of additional asset purchases on the economic outlook as well as the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and income.  I will discuss the various options we considered, how we modeled these programs, and their effects on the macroeconomy; Julie Remache, from the Desk, will continue the presentation by discussing the effect of these programs on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and income. For this presentation, we will focus on three purchase program options, as outlined in the top-left panel of your first exhibit.  We consider a $750 billion program that includes $250 billion in asset purchases from October 2012 through the end of this year and $500 billion in purchases in 2013 (option 1 in the memo).  We 2 The materials used by Mses. Ihrig and Remache are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).   also evaluate a program that includes $1 trillion in purchases next year (option 3) and a program that has no purchases after the end of this year (option 6).  We report the results for the programs that assume monthly purchases of $45 billion in Treasury securities and $40 billion in MBS.  The memo also considered purchase options with different compositions and paces; in general, under our modeling framework, the results are similar for programs of similar overall size. There are many assumptions that the staff must make in developing these projections, and the open-ended nature of these programs makes the analysis particularly challenging. We start with the projection for the SOMA portfolio, and then we estimate the term premium effect on the 10-year yield from the staff’s term structure model.  Here we assume that investors correctly anticipate the pace and ultimate size of the programs.  With the estimates of the term premium, we then simulate the macroeconomy using the FRB/US model, where the $750 billion purchase program is consistent with the staff forecast in the October Tealbook.  Other models and assumptions, of course, could yield somewhat different results.  Our analysis embeds assumptions that are consistent with the exit strategy principles reported in the June 2011 minutes.  However, should purchases continue for sufficiently long, the Committee may need to modify this strategy.  Julie will discuss one alternative, while the box we included in the December Tealbook B mentioned some additional considerations. The top-right panel highlights the effects of the purchase programs on the size of the SOMA portfolio.  Under the program with $500 billion in additional purchases (the blue dotted line), the portfolio expands through the middle of next year, peaking at $3.3 trillion.  The program with $1 trillion of additional purchases (the red dashed line) has the size of the portfolio peak somewhat later and higher.  Alternatively, if no additional purchases are made (the black line), the SOMA portfolio peaks near its current level.  The portfolios begin to contract around the time assumed for the first increase in the federal funds rate, projected as August 2015 in the memo. Reflecting the staff’s exit strategy assumptions, redemptions of securities begin six months before liftoff, and sales of agency securities begin six months after liftoff and proceed at a pace that eliminates agency holdings over five years.  Under this strategy, the portfolio size is normalized between late 2018 and late 2019.  After this point, the balance sheet begins to expand, matching the assumed growth of Federal Reserve capital and currency in circulation. The bottom panels present the estimated effects of the purchase programs on the macroeconomy.  Estimates by the staff imply that additional purchases will lead to lower longer-term interest rates, higher stock prices, and a weaker dollar.  These more-accommodative financial conditions boost aggregate demand, causing the unemployment rate to fall and the inflation rate to rise somewhat.  For the $750 billion open-ended purchase program, the unemployment rate in late 2015 would be 30 basis points below the level projected if purchases were suspended at the end of this year, while core PCE inflation would be boosted about 20 basis points.  For the larger program, the simulated effects on the unemployment rate and inflation relative to the same baseline are about twice as large, implying more rapid progress toward both of the Committee’s goals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward presentation of information and analysis.


Passage number 30.
 MS. REMACHE. Thank you, Jane.  Turning now to the income effects of these programs, the top-left panel of exhibit 2 shows the projected path of Federal Reserve remittances to the U.S. Treasury under the three purchase programs discussed by Jane.  The contours here are similar to analyses shown to the Committee in the past: Income would be boosted in the near term by the additional interest income from the asset purchases but then damped in the medium term as a result of higher interest expense on larger reserve balances and higher realized capital losses on larger asset sales. Overall, under the assumptions in the memo, additional asset purchases would result in a lower level of cumulative remittances to the Treasury, and a deferred asset would be recorded during the exit period.  As a reminder, a deferred asset is recorded when income is not sufficient to cover expenses, including dividends and transfers to maintain surplus at a level equal to capital paid in.  Under the $750 billion program, as shown in the inset box, the peak level of the deferred asset is small, at $4 billion, and lasts about two years.  Under the larger program, the deferred asset peaks at $45 billion in 2020 and lasts for five years. As a purely economic matter, the implications of balance sheet losses, low remittances, and a deferred asset are not obvious.  On the one hand, losses would not directly affect the Committee’s ability to implement monetary policy except in extreme circumstances.  On the other hand, losses would, of course, have fiscal implications for the Treasury.  Those implications, however, should be viewed in a broader context that includes the higher tax revenues generated by improved economic performance. Given the macroeconomic effects projected in the memo, we estimate that the overall effect of additional purchases on the federal debt-to-GDP ratio would be a decline of 1½ to 2¾ percentage points by 2025, as shown in the top-right panel. Nevertheless, participants may be concerned about the possible communication challenges and political repercussions of Federal Reserve losses and so be worried about the risks to the paths of Federal Reserve income and remittances caused by a large and growing portfolio of long-duration assets.  To aid in judging these risks, the middle panels show the likely paths of remittances and the deferred asset for the $1.25 trillion program under alternative interest rate scenarios. In the memo, we considered simple interest rate shocks of plus and minus 100 basis points and a more adverse alternative simulation in which long-term interest rates run approximately 200 basis points above the no-shock interest rate path for a number of years. Overall, lower interest rates lead to modestly higher cumulative remittances, though remittances will nevertheless fall to near zero for a few years (shown by the blue dotted lines).  Similarly, the interest rate paths assumed in the December Tealbook, which were lower than those assumed in the October Tealbook and the staff memo, substantially reduced the deferred asset with the $1.25 trillion program   relative to the memo scenarios shown here.  Higher interest rates have the opposite effect—lower cumulative remittances and a larger and more-prolonged occurrence of a deferred asset. In the most adverse scenario for Federal Reserve income (the solid purple lines), the pace of recovery picks up substantially, inflation rises markedly, and term premiums increase.  The resulting higher path for interest rates leads to a deferred asset that peaks at $180 billion in 2019.  However, as noted in the memo, even in this case, the federal debt-to-GDP ratio in 2025 falls because stronger real activity causes the increase in nominal tax revenues to outpace the growth in nominal outlays. In the memo, we also highlight some additional risks that could be associated with exit.  For example, if the interest rate paid on Federal Reserve liabilities was to exceed the interest rate on excess reserves, interest expense could be larger than what is assumed in the projections covered thus far. Likewise, if asset sales were to prompt a distinct widening of the MBS–Treasury basis, capital losses could be larger. A partial-equilibrium analysis of these two effects suggested that each could reduce cumulative remittances by about $40 billion. Finally, in addition to the uncertainty regarding rates, income projections are highly dependent on assumptions made regarding exit.  As noted by Jane, the results presented here reflect the exit strategy principles laid out in June 2011.  Using our assumed five-year sale pace for MBS, the larger purchase program will not normalize the size of the portfolio by the end of the three-year window noted in that strategy.  The portfolio has evolved considerably since June 2011, and the Committee may at some point wish to revisit this exit strategy.  While the memo does not undertake a full assessment of alternative strategies to normalize the portfolio and the balance sheet, we do provide an illustrative example in which the portfolio is reduced only through redemptions, without the use of sales. The bottom-left panel shows the path of SOMA holdings in a “No Sales” scenario under a $1.25 trillion program, compared with the staff’s standard exit assumptions.  With no sales (the solid green line), it takes just a little more than a year longer to reach the steady-state size of the portfolio, and, as shown in the bottom-right panel, annual remittances to the Treasury are higher in the medium term. In total, cumulative remittances are boosted by $50 billion as the elimination of realized capital losses and the added coupon income from retaining the MBS more than offset the added interest expense of higher reserves before the portfolio is normalized.  Indeed, the peak deferred asset in this case is just $6 billion.  Again, this example is just one of the ways in which the exit strategy could be altered. To summarize, the staff models indicate that additional asset purchases will boost aggregate real activity and inflation moderately. The programs will also significantly increase the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, which affects income.  All the projections, of course, rely on many assumptions and are subject to uncertainty, but our hope is that these projections provide some sense of the effects of additional purchases on the economy and on our balance sheet.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Jane and I are happy to take questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and analysis on the income effects of the asset purchase programs, discussing the projected path of Federal Reserve remittances to the U.S. Treasury and the implications of balance sheet losses and deferred assets. There is no clear contention or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 31.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and let me thank Jane and Julie and the staff for the work on this memo.  This effort was very labor-intensive because it involved analyzing the effects on the balance sheet.  They went CUSIP by CUSIP; they looked in great detail at what we hold.  It was a lot of effort, and we appreciate the work.  Obviously we’ll have plenty of time to discuss these issues more broadly, but at this point, does anyone have any questions for our presenters.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of gratitude and acknowledgment of the effort put into the memo and an invitation for questions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 32.
 MS. DUKE.  I just have one question, and you may not have the answer with you in your notes, but you mentioned that the deferred asset would still be larger than the capital.  What about the unrealized losses in the portfolio. Where would they be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement present in the passage. The individual is questioning the speaker about the unrealized losses in the portfolio and where they would be, suggesting a differing understanding or viewpoint.


Passage number 33.
 MS. IHRIG.  It depends on the scenario you look at.  For example, in the very extreme case, we have unrealized losses of more than $300 billion.  That’s going to be greater than our capital stock, but for option 1 and option 3—go ahead, Julie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting different scenarios and acknowledging that the unrealized losses are greater than the capital stock in one extreme case.


Passage number 34.
 MS. REMACHE.  They would be approximately $200 billion under a $500 billion program and $240 billion under a $1 trillion program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply provides two different estimates for the costs of two different programs.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Assuming what interest rate scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that something is being assumed about an interest rate scenario.


Passage number 36.
 MS. REMACHE.  These are revised under the Tealbook scenario, which is a little bit more favorable than what we looked at in the memo, and those peaks occur sometime in about mid-2016.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact without any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about revised numbers under a scenario called Tealbook.


Passage number 37.
 MR. POTTER.  That would be above capital.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a statement made by Mr. Potter.


Passage number 38.
 MS. REMACHE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 39.
 MS. IHRIG. Total capital stock around that time is $100 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the total capital stock being around $100 billion.


Passage number 40.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Can I have a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any form of contention or disagreement. It is a simple request or question.


Passage number 41.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The question asks if there is contention or disagreement in the passage, but does not provide any passage for analysis. Therefore, the answer is "Yes" because there is a lack of clarity or agreement.


Passage number 42.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But in the past I would imagine that we’ve had many periods of time where the capital losses on the portfolio were far bigger than our capital—for example, back in the early 1980s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a possibility from the past. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 43.
 MS. REMACHE.  That’s right.  We did some preliminary looking at some of those figures and found that in the early 1980s, the unrealized loss position on the portfolio was approximately 7 percent of the size of the portfolio at that time. Our projections are similar to that but just a bit larger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating some preliminary findings and making projections based on those findings.


Passage number 44.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So they’re comparable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that two things are comparable without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 45.
 MS. REMACHE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The word "Yes" implies that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without any additional context or information provided, it is not possible to determine the exact cause or nature of the disagreement.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry to interject one other thing.  I guess these capital losses, of course, are offsetting the remittances that we are now sending to the Treasury.  In the last four years, we have sent $280 billion to the Treasury, and obviously they would be larger over the lifetime of the security.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It presents factual information without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 47.
 MR. POTTER.  These are the unrealized ones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Potter.


Passage number 48.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Unrealized, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states a fact without expressing any conflicting views or ideas.


Passage number 49.
 MS. IHRIG.  Also, one important point to make is that we would never sell the entire portfolio.  You would want the size of your SOMA portfolio to be at least as large as your currency in circulation, which is your big liability and which is more than $1 trillion right now.  You would never actually recognize all of those unrealized losses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a point and providing an explanation.


Passage number 50.
 MS. REMACHE. Let me add that if we considered the amount of the portfolio that is in excess of the level of currency at the time of these losses, under the $500 billion scenario we project unrealized losses to peak at about $240 billion, but $130 billion of that is associated with the portfolio that is larger than currency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents information and projections regarding the amount of unrealized losses associated with the portfolio.


Passage number 51.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 52.
 MS. RASKIN.  When you look at tax revenues, do you look at actual collectability, or do you take what would be optimal and assume that everything is collectible that could be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is asking a question and seeking clarification, not expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 53.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. The model includes equations for tax revenues, tax rates, and the income bases for various major federal taxes. Those factors are all endogenous with the state of the economy.  The model starts off with our baseline assumption for the average tax rate that’s going to be applied to the personal income tax received by households going forward.  The scenarios then assume that if the economy was growing stronger, you would have the tax base increasing more rapidly causing tax revenues to rise relative to the baseline. In addition, there’s a certain sensitivity of average tax rates to the state of the economy.  For instance, if the economy is doing better, you’re getting higher personal capital gains and things like that that boost the average tax rate.  So the model tries to model the endogeneity of tax revenues and the state of the business cycle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is describing a model and explaining how it factors in the endogeneity of tax revenues and the state of the business cycle.


Passage number 54.
 MR. WILCOX. It’s fit to actual data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a statement by Mr. Wilcox without indicating any disagreement or contention. It simply states that what he said is suitable for actual data.


Passage number 55.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It’s the actual tax revenue; it’s not any optimized estimate of what tax revenues could be in theory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Reifschneider is a straightforward explanation of what "actual tax revenue" means, without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 56.
 MS. RASKIN.  So it takes a haircut for the lack of ability to collect fully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there is a consequence of having difficulty in collecting fully, which is taking a "haircut."


Passage number 57.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Yes.  It’s based on the Treasury’s actual success in collecting revenues, and not based on some hypothetical collection experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and providing an explanation for their statement that it is based on the Treasury's actual success in collecting revenues.


Passage number 58.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no mentioned contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states "President Plosser" without providing any other information or context.


Passage number 59.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I have two questions I’d like to seek clarification on, following up on the remittances and on charts 5 and 6, about the difference in the pace of sales and how that affects remittances.  I want to go back to the first page on the pace of shrinking the balance sheet   on the SOMA sales and how the “No Sales” options of the green lines on charts 5 and 6 translate into behaviors of both unemployment and inflation in those charts, if at all.  How would it change those charts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 
The passage is simply stating that the speaker has two questions and is seeking clarification on certain charts and their potential impact on unemployment and inflation. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 60.
 MS. IHRIG. If we don’t do sales, then we would think that the SOMA portfolio is larger for a longer period of time.  This scenario means we’re not putting duration back into the public’s hands, which would imply we would keep holding interest rates down for a longer period of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Ihrig is simply stating a hypothetical scenario and its implications without expressing disagreement or contention with anyone or any idea.


Passage number 61.
 MR. PLOSSER.  And how will that show up in the unemployment and the inflation charts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a straightforward question and does not show any sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 62.
 MS. IHRIG. That’s a little harder because I would think if you’re not doing sales, then you might want to consider when the fed funds rate will lift off as well because that would also feed into the macroeconomy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing an opinion about what someone might want to consider, but it does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 63.
  MR. PLOSSER.  It’s hard to make a translation between these charts 5 and 6, which look like small changes, into what they might look like in the previous charts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is simply expressing difficulty in making a translation between two charts.


Passage number 64.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think it’s fair to say that the effects on inflation and unemployment would be relatively small.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion on the effects of a certain scenario.


Passage number 65.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage. The passage does not include any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 66.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Because the effect on our usual calculations of term premium effects would be relatively small.  This balance sheet is larger by a relatively modest amount out in 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020.  And those effects, just the way the modeling works on term premiums today, would be relatively small, and therefore the effect on the macroeconomy would be expected to be relatively small.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that the effect on term premiums and the macroeconomy would be relatively small.


Passage number 67.
  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Two other things.  First, Bill’s point is exactly right. Second— getting back to the point that Jane raised—out there later in the decade the funds rate is moving in response to changes in economic conditions.  To the extent that the balance sheet was providing any additional stimulus out toward the second half of the decade, the funds rate would be somewhat higher, which would tend to offset the stimulus from the balance sheet.  This outcome is conditional, the way we run it, on people having full confidence in the Fed doing what needs to be done for stabilizing inflation, and so on.  I don’t know whether you were thinking about it this way or not, but in terms of looking at figure 5 in the second exhibit, if you thought that pushing renormalization out further was going to worry a lot of people, then you could have expectational effects on inflation that aren’t taken account of in this scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 68.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you.  I have one other question that is kind of related to that.  We had a memo from the staff about forecasts of unemployment rates, and if I remember correctly, using FRB/US the root mean squared error on the one-quarter-ahead unemployment rate was about 50 basis points; two-quarters-ahead it was about 80 basis points.  So how do I think about that reality versus the notion that we are now, through simulations of the model that is making those forecasts, saying that we are going to accurately predict changes of somewhere around 30 or 40 basis points three years out.  How do I think about putting these two memos together and how meaningful it might or might not be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about contrasting information and asks how to interpret it.


Passage number 69.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think you are getting at two different types of uncertainty. One is that in terms of the actual effect of some policy action, like the policy actions that we are talking about here, there is uncertainty about what its marginal effects would be on the economy.  We are just giving you point estimates, but as we pointed out, there is a huge degree of uncertainty about what their marginal impact would be on the economy.  But the other memoabout the labor market provides a different take on uncertainty, which goes beyond what the marginal effect of policy would be: It is a highly uncertain world; all sorts of unexpected things can hit the economy.  Therefore, our ability to forecast where the unemployment rate will be in a year or two, or even a few months, is quite uncertain.  But that uncertainty is distinct from uncertainty about the effects of policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining two different types of uncertainty and their distinctions, but there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 70.
 MR. PLOSSER.  These forecasts are in the absence of shocks, so this uncertainty here is about what you believe to be the structure of the marginal effect—this outcome is a model outcome, I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the nature of the forecasts and the uncertainty associated with them.


Passage number 71.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It is a model outcome, and there is a lot of uncertainty around its estimate of the marginal effect.  And then, in addition, there is a much wider uncertainty in the world around what will happen to unemployment and other factors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there is uncertainty surrounding the estimate of the marginal effect and a wider uncertainty in the world regarding unemployment and other factors.


Passage number 72.
 MR. PLOSSER.  So these answers are built into the model—I mean, this answer is about what the model says as opposed to what some other model might say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is simply stating that the answer is based on the model's prediction rather than any other potential models.


Passage number 73.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes. So you could put confidence intervals on that, just on the basis of your uncertainty about the channel—how the policy would affect the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the possibility of putting confidence intervals on the uncertainty surrounding the effect of a policy on the economy.


Passage number 74.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions "President Fisher" without providing any context or statement that could suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 75.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, we are just asking questions here, not giving our opinions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker clearly states that they are only asking questions, implying that they are not expressing their personal opinion or engaging in debate.


Passage number 76.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not clear what the passage is, so it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in it.


Passage number 77.
 MR. FISHER.  I do have a question.  This time is the first that I remember—and maybe I haven’t read everything as carefully as the others at the table—an explicit discussion about the likely tax revenue consequences of our actions.  I’m assuming—and this is my question—that this is sort of a way to justify what may be nonremittances or deferred assets. Is that a correct assumption.  In other words, we can say, “Look, this change was a consequence of our policy, but look at what we got for it.” Is that fair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 78.
 MS. IHRIG.  Well, I think that part of it was to put it in the framework of the entire economy.  That is, if we have low remittances, why are we having low remittances, or why are we having a deferred asset.  And we wanted to remind everybody that it might be because the macroeconomy is improving.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a viewpoint about the cause of low remittances and deferred assets.


Passage number 79.
 MR. FISHER.  So we got a benefit at this cost.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher simply states that there was a benefit obtained, but it came at a cost.


Passage number 80.
 MS. IHRIG. There is, in the overall macroeconomy, a benefit.  I think that was the main point of putting that in the memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 81.
 MR. FISHER.  My second question is on the assumption of a one-for-one pass-through of the decline in the 10-year Treasury—not so much to the primary mortgages, but to corporate bond rates, which would have the usual impact on investment spending.  These assumptions are imposed.  You gave a good speech, Governor Stein, in which you said that declines in longer-term rates from lower-term premiums may not change the hurdle rate for new investments.  We have other models—I mean, there are a lot of disclaimers here.  Page 7 is like when you buy a prescription drug and you get this long printout:  Don’t do this; don’t do that.  And it even says that the economic theory underlying asset purchases is only partially developed.  So I want to explore that one-for-one pass-through.  We are at a point, as Simon pointed out—and by the way, excellent presentation—where we have had this enormous rally, a lot of issuance.  Interestingly, yesterday with Brown-Forman’s issue of that one bond—they are the purveyors of Jack Daniel’s whiskey, which is why I paid attention to it—we did break through the record at $1.025 trillion in investment-grade credits.  We passed through the junk mark that you pointed out in your October presentation, I forget in which chart. The net debt-to-EBITDA ratio is now   .5, which is above pre-crisis levels.  So I am just wondering how confident you are in the one-to-one pass-through, and, very importantly, how dependent on that one-to-one pass-through are the conclusions that you drew.  Granted, you are very careful to state that there is a lot of uncertainty around the one-to-one pass-through, but how dependent on it is your analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a series of questions and seeking clarification on certain assumptions and conclusions. There is no opposing viewpoint presented or argument being made.


Passage number 82.
 MS. REMACHE.  I think, as you correctly point out, we are using just one modeling framework for estimating these effects, and under that framework shifts in the risk of public-sector holdings have an effect on the term premium embedded in interest rates, and then that feeds through to other interest rates.  Whether or how the one-for-one pass-through to things like corporates and such affects the results is a modeling question that perhaps Dave could elaborate on. But there are other models in which these purchases may impact markets.  If there is segmentation, it may depend more on which assets you are buying and how that works.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about different modeling frameworks and how the purchases may impact markets. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 83.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  So my overall response is:  How uncertain am I. I am not very certain at all.  In terms of the first thing you focused on, the pass-through into corporate rates, I am less worried about that.  There is a lot of evidence that it may not be one for one, but nonetheless the evidence supports a pretty high pass-through into corporate bond rates.  However, the evidence on what it does to the exchange rate and the stock market, and going from there to what these various changes in long-term interest rates and other asset financial conditions do to the real economy—there is a tremendous amount of uncertainty about that.  These effects could be smaller.  It could be that the effects have changed over time because the conditions that existed back in 2009, when we first got into these purchases, are different now.  So expectational effects, confidence effects, market functioning effects—these effects may be different now from what they were. So, without belaboring the point, I’d say there is a lot of   uncertainty.  There are reasons to think the effects could be smaller than what we are generating with FRB/US. I should say, though, that one also has to worry that maybe FRB/US doesn’t capture all of the relevant channels and that there could be offsets in other directions.  For example, we are not taking account of any positive feedback on house prices.  In reality, the low-mortgage-rate environment that you have put in place is bumping up house prices.  Moreover, maybe that bumping up of house prices is having favorable effects on certain households—increasing their access to credit or the willingness of banks to provide credit, and so on.  Anyway, my point is simply that there is a tremendous amount of uncertainty.  There are good arguments for why FRB/US’s effects may be too large.  I think there are also arguments for why FRB/US may be neglecting some things that could be important. It is extremely difficult to tie these forecasts down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and acknowledging that there are arguments for both the effects being smaller than predicted and for other factors not being accounted for. This indicates a disagreement or differing opinions on the topic.


Passage number 84.
 MR. FISHER.  But a few certainties come out of these forecasts: The first is the high likelihood of a deferred asset.  Second, a possible likelihood of balance sheet impairment— possible, low probability.  Third, a possible need for us to change our exit strategy.  At least the first and the third I just stated seem like highly likely outcomes under either strategy.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating some certainties and possibilities without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 85.
 MS. IHRIG.  I think in terms of the deferred asset, there are a lot of assumptions that go into the balance sheet and income projections.  One of the inputs is the financial market conditions, or the interest rate paths.  You can see just by comparing the memo—which used the October Tealbook rates—with those using the December Tealbook—which actually has lower rates because the staff projection is that the economy is a little weaker and the fed funds rate lifts off a little later, and the path is a little lower.  The deferred asset for the $500 billion program is not there in the December Tealbook, and in the $1 trillion of purchases next year, the deferred asset went from $45 billion down to $4 billion.  I don’t know if you want to say those are large or modest changes in interest rate assumptions, but with such changes we can have relatively large changes in the size of the deferred asset in the projections.  I don’t know how you want to think of that in terms of how certain or uncertain we are about our projections.  However, they do rely on the financial market conditions we are expecting going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the assumptions and projections related to the deferred asset and financial market conditions.


Passage number 86.
 MS. REMACHE.  I would just add that the third point about exit strategy does factor importantly into the pattern of income and remittances to the Treasury.  Of course, the exit strategy could be changed.  We looked at a “No Sale” scenario as sort of an illustrative example of that.  There are other variations that I think could be explored.  But it was quite notable in the memo that using those higher interest rates had such a substantial effect on the pattern of income and the deferred asset that was recorded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and suggesting alternative scenarios that could be explored.


Passage number 87.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, I want to thank you for a very thoughtful, however scary, memo.  Thank you very much for your good work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses gratitude and appreciation for a memo, acknowledging its thoughtfulness but also stating that it is scary. This does not indicate any disagreement or contention between the speaker and the writer of the memo.


Passage number 88.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage only states the name "President Rosengren" and does not provide any further information or context to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 89.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  My question is, how sensitive are your results to your assumption of what a normalized balance sheet looks like.  Think of three different options:  one where you return to a T-bill–only balance sheet, one where you hold all of the longest-duration Treasuries, and one where you hold an entirely mortgage-backed securities portfolio.  Those are the three extremes.  Would there be much difference in what these patterns would look like, or would that not make a big difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is asking a technical question and does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 90.
 MS. IHRIG. In terms of the contour, I don’t think it makes much difference.  What the contour is really reflecting is the exit strategy assumption we have in terms of MBS rolling off,  or if you are only holding MBS, then it would just be the Treasuries rolling off.  You would have slightly different contour, but you would first have it declining from whatever peak we have.  And then, the normalization to the point where the size of the balance sheet is the normal size, again, that is going to reflect the liabilities we have. The currency in circulation is your biggest liability.  So in terms of the contour, not necessarily. In terms of income, it would matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the contour of the balance sheet does not necessarily matter, while acknowledging that the income would be affected.


Passage number 91.
 MS. REMACHE.  I think on that point, ultimately, in the long run, the composition of the portfolio would then affect the overall yield.  If the portfolio were fully bills, then the yield would presumably be lower than a portfolio of all longer-duration assets, whether they were Treasuries or MBS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is stating a hypothetical situation about the yield of different portfolio compositions. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 92.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It only states a title or position without any context or conflicting statements.


Passage number 93.
 MR. PLOSSER. Presumably you’ve got a starting date for what would be a normal-sized SOMA portfolio—what is the date, and what is your underlying assumption about how fast that is going to grow until you get to 2021 that gives you this trend line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question about the starting date and growth assumptions related to a portfolio.


Passage number 94.
 MS. IHRIG. The date actually isn’t a fixed date. We look at the fact that as, say, you do sales of MBS or Treasuries roll off the portfolio, that is going to drain reserves, and we have to hit some normal level of reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the fluctuating nature of the date.


Passage number 95.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’m trying to figure out where you come up with the normal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply trying to understand the basis or reasoning behind the speaker's "normal."


Passage number 96.
 MS. IHRIG.  Yes.  In the analysis we do, we assume pre-crisis reserve balances of $25 billion.  That is when we decide normalization is, but at the same time, you have to look at what the currency is in the portfolio at that point in time.  So normalization is when reserve balances hit $25 billion and whatever currency happens to be at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their analysis and the specific criteria they use to determine normalization. There is no contradiction or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 97.
 MR. PLOSSER.  But you are making some assumption about the growth rate of currency, and that’s the question I’m asking.  What are you assuming the growth rate of currency is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser is simply asking a question to clarify an assumption.


Passage number 98.
 MS. IHRIG.  Yes.  The growth rate of currency is whatever the growth rate of nominal GDP is.  If you look at the annual growth rate of currency over, say, the last 20 years, the last 10 years, the last 5 years, it is around 6 percent.  So implicitly that is what we have for the long-term trend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing a factual statement about the growth rate of currency based on the growth rate of nominal GDP. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 99.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. However, without further context, it is difficult to provide a more specific explanation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 100.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to thank the staff for this detailed memo on balance sheet options, which I thought was very good.  I have two comments on the memo.  One comment is that I would like to see more emphasis on the adjustability of the balance sheet policy and the associated automatic stabilizer effects.  The second comment is that I thought that some scenarios seem politically untenable to me, as I think the Congress would reconsider allowing the payment of interest on reserves. Let me just talk about balance sheet adjustability first.  The memo emphasizes the total expected amount of the increase in the size of the balance sheet when discussing the impact of the balance sheet policy in the near term.  I see this approach as a practical way of laying down some alternatives for the Committee.  However, I think it also tends to deemphasize one of the great strengths of the September 2012 decision, namely, that the program can and should be adjusted as the data on the economy arrive.  Committee adjustments would send an important signal to the private sector concerning how the Committee thinks the economy is performing relative to expectations.  Private sector expectations about the total size and duration of the program will also adjust according to the relative strength or weakness in incoming data.  This is  the automatic stabilizer feature of the current policy.  The great advantage of this approach is that we do not have to lay down today exactly what the total size and duration of the program will be—a guess that will likely turn out to be inaccurate as events unfold during the coming quarters.  Instead, we can lay down a baseline path in the expectation that the path will likely be adjusted as the data arrive. One implication of this approach to policy is that there is less need to commit to an extensive program today, before we know how the 2013 U.S. economy is actually going to perform.  So I thought that, maybe by necessity about the way the analysis had to be done, that part just couldn’t be captured; I think it would be too difficult to capture that.  But I think it’s an important consideration for the Committee. My second point is about the political feasibility of some of the balance sheet scenarios.  The Federal Reserve was granted authority to pay interest on reserves in 2008.  The Congress had previously opposed use of this tool for monetary policy for many decades.  Some scenarios in the memo have the Fed claiming a deferred asset for purposes of remittances to the Treasury but simultaneously making rather large interest payments to mostly very large banks.  My view is that such a scenario is politically treacherous and may result in the Congress reverting to the previous policy of not allowing the payment of interest on reserves to large banks.  Losing the ability to pay interest on reserves would, of course, have devastating consequences for the Committee’s exit strategy.  So I caution the Committee that we probably do not want to be in the situation where the perception is that payments to the Treasury are on hold but payments to banks are substantial.  I think that the staff also recognizes political difficulties, but that is up to the judgment of the Committee here.  So I just wanted to point that one out because I think it is a glaring one in this particular analysis.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The author expresses disagreement or concern with certain aspects of the memo, specifically the emphasis on the total expected increase in the size of the balance sheet and the perceived political difficulties of paying interest on reserves to large banks.


Passage number 101.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Any other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is neutral and does not suggest any argument or conflict.


Passage number 102.
MR. ENGLISH.  One thought for President Bullard.  On your first point, we did have a memo back in August that tried to talk about some of these benefits of open-ended, flexible programs that could be adjusted.  I think the question we discussed there, but I don’t think really resolved, is the potential for a benefit in terms of business and consumer confidence that the Federal Reserve will adjust if there are shocks and keep the economy on track.  But we were never, I think, able to figure out how big that effect would be.  But it seemed like a potential benefit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their thoughts and acknowledging that they did not fully resolve a certain question.


Passage number 103.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  And I appreciate that previous analysis; I just didn’t want to forget it in the discussion here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply acknowledging and expressing appreciation for the previous analysis. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 104.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Question. President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 105.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I can phrase it as a question.  [Laughter] I will be brief, Mr. Chairman.  My brief comment is that when I read this memo—this memo, as you said yourself, is just excellent—I thought the discussion of the negative or zero remittance issue was quite complete, and I appreciated that.  This memo really brought home to me more than the previous memos we got from the staff that I think there is a relatively high probability that we may have a period of zero remittances, whatever we choose to be our exit strategy.  And I would urge us to think about communicating proactively about this possibility with a number of constituencies: the Congress; our external auditors; and, ultimately, the public.  I don’t think we should just wait until the time when we have zero remittances to begin that communication.  I think we should start planning for that communication now. I think it integrates with restructuring our exit strategy principles, which probably will not be tenable given the size of the balance sheet that we are likely to embark on.  I’m not sure the best way to structure that conversation.  One idea that struck me as potentially fruitful is to have the hardest working people in central banking, our  communications subcommittee, formulate a plan of attack.  But however we choose to proceed, I do think we should be communicating proactively about this possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is expressing agreement with the memo and suggesting that proactive communication about the possibility of zero remittances should begin now. There is no indication of disagreement or contrary viewpoints.


Passage number 106.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the sentence. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a comment and related question, and the comment was inspired by the line of questioning from Governor Raskin and the staff’s response.  First, a compliment:  This memo is exceptionally helpful on a very important issue.  Set aside two things:  one, that we would run out of assets that we would want to sell to draw down our liabilities; and, two, the political risks of no remittances and a big deferred asset, which are highly consequential. Set those aside. I always thought that the economic argument for the irrelevance of unrealized capital losses and the zero remittances was the fact that on the Treasury’s balance sheet there is an equal and opposite sort of capital gain due to the fall in the real market value of their liabilities. Now, viewed through this lens, this analysis sort of shines a spotlight on a can of worms here that we haven’t really talked about. This whole analysis is based on the implications of taking duration risk, and it points out that it doesn’t disappear:  It flows through our income statement eventually.  So the traditional approach to these kinds of things—you know, in some settings you can sort of consolidate the Fed’s and the Treasury’s balance sheets, and in others it makes sense to keep them separate.  But looking at the balance sheet naturally draws you to looking at the government’s intertemporal budget constraint, and through that lens, there are going to be ramifications down the road for tax or spending policy.  If you truncate your horizon and just look a certain number of years ahead, you have this sort of free variable—debt at the end of the horizon.  And I’m assuming that in all your analysis of taking duration out, you haven’t really gone through the implications of the government’s intertemporal budget constraint; you   just let debt at the end of the period be the free variable.  And that is consistent with figure 2 in exhibit 2 up here.  I don’t know if it is empirically consequential or not, but it suggests that it would be useful to at least check to see that there aren’t any implications—especially at a time where many perceive us as getting close to the limits of a debt-to-GDP ratio that we find sustainable.  I don’t know if you have thought about that or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a different perspective on the analysis being discussed and suggesting that there may be implications for the government's intertemporal budget constraint that have not been thoroughly examined.


Passage number 108.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. The way we run it in the long, long run, the debt-to-GDP ratio is stable. So tax rates are responding endogenously in the simulations to get back to the same baseline debt-to-GDP ratio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply describing how the debt-to-GDP ratio remains stable in their simulations and how tax rates respond accordingly.


Passage number 109.
 MR. LACKER.  Oh, okay.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage consists of a simple response and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 110.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Now, that’s occurring after 2025, and that is a gradual process.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple statement of fact without any conflicting ideas or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 111.
 MR. LACKER.  Does that come into play across scenarios here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the phrase "come into play across scenarios" suggests that there may be different scenarios or situations where the mentioned subject is in dispute or being debated.


Passage number 112.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, agents understand that in the long run, none of these policies will affect the long-run debt-to-GDP ratio. They understand it will affect it out for 10 years, and then tax rates will adjust, and so on, to bring that debt-to-GDP ratio back to where it is in the baseline case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Reifschneider about agents' understanding of the long-run debt-to-GDP ratio.


Passage number 113.
 MR. LACKER.  But it is way out past 2025.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement or assertion made by Mr. Lacker without challenging or opposing any other viewpoint.


Passage number 114.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It is beyond 2025, yes.  Well, it is already starting to occur a little bit.  You can’t quite see it from the graph, but if you were looking at the simulation results for 2025, you could see tax rates starting to evolve endogenously.  A lot of this effect is primarily a residual of that fact that there is a “free lunch” aspect to the current economy, in that the economy is underutilized at the moment.  Additional asset purchases bring the economy back closer to potential output.  That’s a revenue gain that lasts for a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential effects of additional asset purchases on tax rates and revenue.


Passage number 115.
   MR. LACKER.  All right.  Well, it sounds like the staff has a clean way of handling it. I didn’t know that.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses surprise and appreciation for the information provided by the staff.


Passage number 116.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Seeing no other questions, why don’t we go on to item 3, again, with our thanks to the presenters and the authors for some very helpful work.  Item 3 is “Economic and Financial Situation.” We will also have commentary on financial stability and on the Summary of Economic Projections.  Let me ask David Wilcox to lead off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply introducing item 3 and expressing gratitude to the presenters and authors for their work.


Passage number 117.
 MR. KILEY.4 Thanks, Steve. I’ll refer to the material titled “Material for Briefing on Financial Stability.” This summary is based on our recent Quantitative Surveillance, or QS, report.  The most proximate potential shocks we highlighted remain a disorderly resolution of the fiscal cliff and the process of raising the federal debt ceiling, or an intensification of the European sovereign debt crisis.  Such adverse developments could be amplified by the perception that some large banks remain weak despite substantial increases in capital and liquidity, by the unstable funding model of global dealer firms, and by the persistent risk of runs on money market mutual funds. We also continue to monitor the degree to which low interest rates may be encouraging a buildup in duration and credit risk or leverage within the financial system that could raise concerns.  While there has been some increased willingness to take on risk since the summer, it is difficult to ascribe these changes to low interest rates rather than to an improvement in investor sentiment, most especially with respect to Europe.  Taking a somewhat longer view, indicators of risk-taking or leverage have, on balance, shown only a moderate recovery over the past couple of years.  As a result, we see the potential for a move toward excessive risk-taking primarily as a concern to monitor going forward. Turning to your first exhibit, the private nonfinancial sector has continued to delever, as shown in the top-left panel. In the past, excessive credit growth has been an indicator of potential systemic risk, and recent developments on this front suggest we remain in the hangover, rather than the buildup, phase of the credit cycle.  Moreover, nonfinancial corporations have strong balance sheets, in part reflecting efforts on their part to take advantage of low interest rates to refinance their debt and increase the maturity profile of their liabilities.  For example (and as illustrated in the top-right panel), firms more reliant on short-term debt have been able to lower this dependence, on average, over the last couple of years. The remaining panels cover valuations in the equity, residential real estate, and bond markets.  Equity valuations suggest essentially no froth in stock prices—indeed the staff estimate of the required return to equity (the middle-left panel) has fallen little, on net, since the initial decline after the end of the financial crisis.  As a result, the implied equity risk premium (the difference between the black and red lines) has widened to a value outside that seen in recent decades.  Residential real estate valuations (shown in the middle-right panel) also appear, as best we can judge, on the low side of fair value, despite recent signs of improvement in housing markets.  In contrast, Treasury yields have reached historical lows, with estimates of term premiums, such as that produced by Board staff and reported at the bottom left, falling to levels not seen over the past several decades. Low Treasury yields reflect 4 The materials used by Mr. Kiley are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). policy actions by the Committee as well as heightened risk aversion and investor demand for the safety and liquidity of Treasury securities.  With low prospective returns on safe assets, investors have moved out the credit curve, and yields on corporate bonds have hovered at historic lows (as reported in the bottom-right panel). To date, the yields on corporate bonds continue to reflect above-average spreads relative to Treasuries, and staff models for high-yield bond spreads suggest that investors should be adequately compensated for bearing credit risk. Nonetheless, there may be indications that some investors may be reaching for yield in a way that could lead to some buildup in excessive risk going forward.  Your next exhibit summarizes some of these developments. In response to unusually low yields, the pace of speculative-grade bond issuance has been rapid over the past few months, as shown by the green part of the bars in the top-left panel.  As shown in the top-right panel, most of the speculative-grade issuance has been to refinance debt; refinancing has also been important in syndicated lending, as can be seen in the middle-left panel.  Nonetheless, there has been an uptick in some potentially riskier practices in debt markets.  For example, the top-right panel shows an increase in use of proceeds for mergers and acquisitions and dividend payments, although the latter may reflect tax planning.  Moreover, there is evidence that bond covenants are becoming less restrictive.  There have been some similar developments in the leveraged loan market, with strong demand from investors contributing to some erosion in credit terms and deal structures, as suggested, for example, by the pickup in covenant-lite issuance shown in the middle-right panel. The bottom panel highlights some summary points.  Several factors suggest that developments to date may not signal a notable increase in systemic risk. First, market participants report that increased demand for corporate credits reflects, in part, interest on the part of long-term investors such as insurers and pension funds; these investors may be less likely to contribute to a disorderly reversal.  In addition, leveraged loan dealers appear to be better managing the pipeline of deals than in 2007, for example, through tight position limits, making a repeat of the 2007 experience, in which commitments pressured underwriters’ balance sheets, less likely at this point.  More generally, despite the gradual easing witnessed over the past couple of years, market participants continue to characterize market conditions as significantly tighter than those that prevailed at the height of the credit boom in 2006 and 2007, despite the stronger financial condition of businesses. Even so, some situations bear watching.  The potential for a disorderly deleveraging could rise if available borrowing capacity were taken up quickly, particularly if such a shift involved short-term financing or mark-to-market triggers to fund investments.  More generally, a sudden and large reversal of inflows into corporate bond and loan funds could strain these markets, with the potential for a sizable decline in prices, given the relative illiquidity of the underlying instruments. We also are on the lookout for the possibility that the low nominal return environment expected to prevail for at least several years may lead some institutions to reach for  yield in new and difficult-to-detect ways; in this regard, it is important to emphasize that the signs of increased risk-taking in the top panels are perhaps best thought of as barometers of appetite for risk, rather than factors that, in and of themselves, would contribute to an increase in systemic risk. Our overall assessment is that the currently low level of interest rates may be contributing to some increase in willingness to bear risk in a manner that supports the recovery and financial stability.  In this sense, we should perhaps be happy to see that at least some investors have begun to join the party and drink from the punch bowl.  We’ll closely monitor developments to see whether the punch in the bowl needs to be watered down a bit or even, at some point, taken away.  Jen will follow up with her remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 118.
 MS. ROUSH.5 I will be talking about the packet “Material for Briefing on the Summary of Economic Projections.” As shown in the top panel of exhibit 1, under your individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, you project that real GDP will have expanded only moderately this year but that economic growth will pick up somewhat over the next three years, rising a little above its longer-run value in 2014 and 2015.  Accordingly, you project that the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, will end the year near its average level in October and November and then decline gradually. Nonetheless, most of you see the unemployment rate at the end of 2015 as still noticeably above your individual judgments of its longer-run normal level.  Turning to the bottom two panels, your projections for inflation are generally at or somewhat below your 2 percent longer-term objective over the projection period. Exhibit 2 tabulates the ranges and the central tendencies of your projections, along with those from your September SEP and the September Tealbook.  Your projections for economic growth and inflation are unchanged to slightly lower relative to those you made in September.  Your near-term unemployment rate forecasts are a couple of tenths lower, with a number of you remarking that the recent labor market data had come in better than you had been expecting.  The Tealbook forecast puts economic growth near the middle of your central tendencies for the next two years, and then near the upper end in 2015.  Meanwhile, the Tealbook projections for unemployment are near or slightly above the upper ends, and for inflation near or slightly below the lower ends, of your central tendencies throughout the projection period. Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, about three-fourths of you think that it will not be appropriate to begin raising the funds rate until 2015 or later.  In contrast, five of you—one fewer than in September—now believe that economic conditions will warrant increasing the federal funds rate before 2015.  Among the group who saw a later tightening of policy, a majority indicated that they believed it 5 The materials used by Ms. Roush are appended to this transcript (appendix 5).  was appropriate to maintain the current level of the federal funds rate until unemployment is less than or equal to 6½ percent. In contrast, a majority of those who favored an earlier tightening of policy pointed to concerns about inflation as a primary reason for expecting that it will be appropriate to raise rates before 2015. The bottom two panels of the exhibit provide your assessments of the appropriate target for the federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over the longer run.  For the five participants who see the funds rate leaving the effective lower bound in 2014 or earlier, the median value for the funds rate at the end of 2014 is 1.5 percent.  The 13 participants who judge that liftoff in 2015 will be appropriate expect the funds rate at the end of that year to be 1.25 percent or less, while the one participant who favors liftoff in 2016 sees the funds rate at 50 basis points at the end of that year (not shown).  Committee participants were about evenly split between those who saw the appropriate path for the funds rate as unchanged from September and those who saw it as a bit more accommodative.  Only one of you indicated that the appropriate path for the funds rate had moved higher. With regard to securities purchases, nine of you indicated that appropriate policy calls for additional purchases of longer-term securities at a pace of $85 billion per month through mid-2013, as in the staff forecast.  Seven of you thought that a higher level of purchases, perhaps continuing through the end of 2013, would be appropriate, while three of you thought a lower level of additional purchases, or none at all, would better foster the Committee’s dual objectives. Exhibit 4 depicts the economic conditions that you anticipate for the year in which you judge that the first increase in the funds rate will be appropriate.  Your projected unemployment rates range from 5½ percent to about 7½ percent, with a median of a bit less than 6½ percent, while your inflation projections are in a narrow range of roughly 1½ to 2¼ percent, with a median rate of 2 percent.  Most participants who judge that the first increase in the funds rate should occur in 2013 or 2014 (shown by the white diamonds and gray circles) see a higher level of unemployment at the time of the first funds rate increase than do those reporting later firming dates (shown by the dark blue squares and the gray triangle).  Altogether, 13 of you project unemployment at or below 6½ percent at the end of the year in which you see the first increase in the funds rate, when most of you in this group also see inflation at 2 percent or below. The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the uncertainty and risks surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the top two panels in the column on the left, nearly all of you continue to indicate that you judge the current level of uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment to be higher than the average level over the past 20 years.  The corresponding panels to the right indicate that most of you continue to view the risks to GDP growth as weighted to the downside and, accordingly, the risks to unemployment as weighted to the upside.  Many of you noted that the downside risks to economic growth from U.S. fiscal policy are considerable and continued to see developments in Europe as a key risk, even as some of you acknowledged that tensions there had eased since September.  Turning to the bottom panels, 10 of you see the uncertainty associated with your projections for total PCE inflation as broadly similar to the average level of uncertainty over the past two decades, while 7 of you see it as higher.  Most of you continue to see the risks to inflation, shown to the right, as broadly balanced. Lastly, I have been asked to remind you that in addition to the regular SEP packet you received last night from the FOMC Secretariat, you received a set of experimental charts from the subcommittee on communications that included possible enhancements to the documents provided to the public.  A discussion of the experimental charts is not on the agenda for this meeting, but it is currently planned for the January meeting. Thank you.  That concludes the staff presentations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and summarizing the projections made by participants. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 119.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Just to reiterate, we’ve got these experimental charts for consideration.  Governor Yellen, we are going to be talking about them in January, correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement acknowledging the presence of experimental charts and confirming the plan to discuss them in January with Governor Yellen.


Passage number 120.
 MS. YELLEN. Yes, that is the plan.  Our subcommittee developed a few new possible tables and charts for your consideration based on the December SEP.  We have distributed them, but we are not planning to discuss them at all today.  We do plan a full-blown discussion in January, and, before that, our subcommittee will circulate questions as well as a few additional charts that would be based on the responses of voters today who express support for the policy decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating the plan and explaining the future steps without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 121.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Okay.  The floor is open for questions for the staff.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 122.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a factual one for Jennifer and then more of an open-ended, analytic one for Michael.  Jennifer, I don’t think it is in the package, but you recounted the varying views on total asset purchases.  Would you mind repeating that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply requesting information from Jennifer and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 123.
 MS. ROUSH. There were nine that agreed with Tealbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides information about the number of people who agreed with Tealbook, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 124.
 MR. TARULLO.  When you say “agreed with Tealbook,” do you mean the presumption of half a trillion extra.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and confirmation about the meaning of a previous statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 125.
MS. ROUSH. Through mid-2013.  That’s right.  And then, seven thought there should potentially be higher purchases.  And there was a range, but some of those continued through the end of 2013.  And then, there were three additional participants who saw a lower level of purchases.  One of those saw a beginning of tapering, and two of those saw an end of purchases now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The participants had different views on whether there should be higher or lower purchases, with some suggesting tapering off and others suggesting an end to purchases.


Passage number 126.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.  Thank you.  Michael, you were careful in your presentation to talk about risk associated with an observed search for yield and the appropriateness or inappropriateness of risk because at some level it seems a bit odd to worry about people trying to find things that actually yield them money, and you are worried about that only when the risk seems somehow inappropriate.  As you do financial stability assessment, how do you distinguish between healthy and unhealthy search for yield, which is to say the risk component: Is it largely based on variance from historical observation, or is there some other metric that you are using.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Tarullo to Michael regarding his presentation and methodology for assessing the risk associated with a search for yield.


Passage number 127.
 MR. KILEY.  I think we try to look at a broad range of things.  You know, that is probably our greatest challenge.  We want people to take more risks.  That’s how people make money; that’s how new businesses are formed. But we want people to understand the risks that they are taking and not to take risks that have externalities or systemic consequences that they don’t take into account in making their decisions.  When we look at individual instruments, certainly we look at the degree to which any development is outside of a historical norm.  I think, generally speaking, we also try to look at a lot of information.  Certainly we are particularly interested in developments within the financial system and within systemically important institutions, but we also look at overall movements in credit in the nonfinancial sector, like in the first exhibit, because, in the past, that has been one of the indicators of systemic risk.  Looking backward, that is something that we could see clearly in 2006 and 2007.  We look for an erosion in credit terms and other things, like we do in those exhibits. And then we also look for other things that aren’t in the exhibits because we just don’t see them right now:  embedded leverage within the financial system; a lot of short-term funding; maturity transformation going on to finance things that if sentiment were to shift quickly, that financing would disappear and people would have to unwind positions.  That was missing from my exhibits because while we have seen an increase in the willingness to bear risk in some places, we haven’t seen much appetite for employing leverage. Now our indicators are imperfect, but we haven’t seen it in those indicators or in our conversations with market participants. I think, in general, it is really hard. We really would love to be able to identify when risk-taking was excessive.  I think we try to be prudent and just look for when there is risk-taking and not think we know too well when it is excessive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the challenges and approach of examining risk-taking and systemic consequences in the financial system. They mention various factors and indicators they consider, but there is no clear argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 128.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of gratitude or acknowledgment, not indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 129.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions President Pianalto without providing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 130.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you.  I also have a question for Michael concerning financial stability.  First of all, I want to thank you for an insightful and important presentation.  But one concern I have around financial stability is an unexpected sharp rise in interest rates, and I applaud the work that’s being done to see how banks can handle an interest rate shock, as well as our CCAR exercise where there’s an adverse scenario that considers such interest rate movements.  I think those results will help us understand and give us some insights into how banks will react. But I also think that we should be examining how community banks and other investors will adjust to a sharp rise in interest rates.  My contacts report that the FOMC asset purchase programs have led investors to take on more duration and credit risk, and, while, as you   point out, Michael, that may be the FOMC’s intention, they are starting to express a number of concerns.  Senior officials who I talked to at a large mutual fund company noted that $1.5 trillion has moved from money market funds into bond funds, making individual investors’ portfolios more vulnerable to rate increases when they come. In addition, my contacts have stressed that this current low interest rate environment is unfamiliar and is starting to upset some of the longstanding behavioral patterns of investors.  For example, I’m being told that younger people are staying out of the stock market because all they’ve mainly seen is losses over this period of time, while retirees are moving into the stock market to get the dividends. Given that people may be changing their behaviors and not reacting as they did in the past, I think we should be aware of the unintended and perhaps unexpected consequences of this low interest rate environment.  I don’t see a sharp rise in interest rates on the list of the risk scenarios that were handed out in the package on financial markets and institutions, and maybe we should consider putting it on that list.  The memo that was circulated mentions that such developments bear watching.  So my question is, how are we thinking about monitoring and assessing that risk as we think about financial stability in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, expresses concern about the potential consequences of a sharp rise in interest rates and suggests that it should be added to the list of risk scenarios. She mentions that her contacts have raised concerns about the impact of the FOMC asset purchase programs on investors and their portfolios. This suggests that there may be disagreement or differing perspectives on the potential risks and consequences of the low interest rate environment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 131.
 MR. KILEY.  We think it’s very important to monitor that risk, and we have done so in a variety of ways related to the CCAR exercise or the exercise you referred to with regard to banks.  Let me talk about a few things that we’re looking at and doing and a few things about which some people are concerned and some people aren’t as concerned yet.  As you know, there has been guidance issued over the last several years that banks should be focused on interest rate risk, so certainly, with supervisors going out to smaller banks, not just those involved in the CCAR exercises, it is on their radar screen. In thinking about other investors, certainly we’ve heard—and we have teams that monitor thinking about developments in pension funds or at insurers—and there have been signs of some changes, perhaps, in the duration of their assets or in their willingness to take on credit risk at insurers, for example.  They are heavily regulated, and they actually do go through quite a few interest rate scenarios as part of their normal stress testing.  They’re called the New York Seven, and they involve various changes in the shape of the yield curve and movements that can be sizable.  That’s performed; we don’t necessarily see all of those results, but we know that’s going on, and it’s something we want to be more attuned to.  But I don’t think we’ve seen any large changes in the positions at large insurers, for example, over the last several years.  There seem to be some gradual shifts, but nothing dramatic. One thing that some people have talked about is this shift into bond funds from more retail money, perhaps facilitated to some degree by ETFs.  And there are staff members who are wondering about the degree to which, if that money were to reverse, it would place strains in corporate bond and loan markets—that those markets just are less liquid, and not especially liquid today.  So if there were a large reversal, I think there is potential for concern there.  That concern could involve individuals losing a lot of money.  There is a question about the degree to which that is a financial stability risk.  One might imagine, for example, that some retail investors, to the extent they’re driving bond funds, may move out quickly for a retail investor, but they will, perhaps unfortunately for them, have moved out after highly interconnected dealers or others may have moved out.  So we are not as clear on the degree to which that is a financial stability risk, but it is something we want to think about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Some people are concerned about the potential strain in corporate bond and loan markets if there is a large reversal of money from bond funds, while others are not as concerned and are unsure if it poses a financial stability risk.


Passage number 132.
 MR. POTTER. I should add that something Bill did when he started at the Desk was increase our contacts with the buy side, and we are meeting with a variety of people and tracking pretty similar information there.  I think from 2005 onward, we would have done well to have listened more to what the buy side was doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes an action taken by Bill and suggests that it would have been beneficial to listen more to the buy side.


Passage number 133.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 134.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Plosser without providing any information that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 135.
 MR. PLOSSER.  To shift from financial stability back to the forecast, David, you talked a lot about uncertainty and pessimism and how those two perhaps either interact or differ or are the same, and the slow process by which that is likely to be removed; that represents a big headwind on the economy from the staff’s forecast.  I actually happen to believe that general proposition, but I have two questions.  One is, what does FRB/US tell you without that adjustment about the path of the economy. In other words, how important is that in the nature of your forecast.  That would be one question I would have, and I don’t know how much light you can shed on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a request for further information and clarification.


Passage number 136.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t think FRB/US speaks to uncertainty per se—I’m looking to Dave Reifschneider.  What we’ve done and what I was describing is a sort of judgmental overlay.  It’s a modest effect.  For example, I think that we’ve assumed that related to the fiscal cliff, the uncertainty component alone will take something on the order of about ¼ percentage point off GDP growth over the first half of this coming year, and then that will lift as a restraining factor. Boy, at this point, our ability to discern those kinds of effects is pretty limited.  John Stevens had another panel that I thought was really nice yesterday that showed analysts’ mean expectations of earnings and the dispersion among analysts.  Now, the dispersion is a rough and imperfect proxy for analysts’ true uncertainty, but there’s a fair amount of literature suggesting that there is probably something to it as a proxy for true uncertainty.  Those two things are very highly negatively correlated.  So when pessimism increases—in other words, when the mean expectation comes down—uncertainty goes up, and that reverses pretty reliably on the other side.  That suggests that there’s quite a lot of colinearity between those two variables.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any direct contention or disagreement. It presents a discussion of different factors and variables, such as uncertainty and analysts' expectations, without expressing conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 137.
   MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.  I appreciate that, but I was also noting that, particularly in the bottom-right panel, the blue line representing the policy uncertainty index is actually highly volatile, it seems to me.  So the way you described it and the Tealbook described it, you’ve got this pessimism and uncertainty sort of waning very gradually but continuing to weigh on things for what appears to be a fair amount of time into the future.  Yet this index seems to be highly volatile, and it could turn out that it could drop very sharply under some circumstances, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is questioning the description of the policy uncertainty index and suggesting that it could drop sharply under certain circumstances.


Passage number 138.
 MR. WILCOX.  It could.  Now, I haven’t given you enough history here on the panel for you to be able to discern.  The main thing that’s happened to that blue line is that it’s just higher post–2007 than it was before.  One of the key points that I was trying to illustrate is that we’re getting conflicting readings from these two different gauges, and we’re trying to wrestle with this.  Our measurement tools are pretty imperfect, and the analytical apparatus itself is a little creaky, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the blue line is higher post-2007 and there are conflicting readings from different gauges. It also mentions that the measurement tools and analytical apparatus are imperfect, but there is no disagreement being presented.


Passage number 139.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 140.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not include any content or information regarding President Kocherlakota's actions, statements or any form of disagreement or contention. It seems to solely mention the individual's title and does not provide any context or details to suggest the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 141.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of quick questions and comments on the financial stability report, and they build, I think, nicely on President Pianalto’s remarks. I think she pointed out that we are having a very unusual experience, from at least the postwar experience in the United States, in terms of how long interest rates have been low and are expected to remain low.  But there are other countries that have had these low interest rate environments for extended periods:  Japan in the past 15 years or so; the United States in the 1930s.  I’m wondering to what extent we can look at those historical experiences as guides to what we should be looking for in our current environment to try to build up notions of  financial excesses in these low interest rate environments.  They may not be the same as what we experienced in 2006 and 2007; it may take different forms. Second, President Pianalto mentioned her concern about interest rates spiking upward, which I think is very much a risk we should be keeping in our minds.  But I’m actually also concerned about the possibility of longer-term interest rates sliding down further.  Because interest rates are so low, people don’t think about this risk as much, which is, I think, a reason to think about it more.  If you think about inflation expectations sliding down from where they are right now or, maybe even more possible, a further flight to quality driven by European events, both of those would drive down longer-term yields still further. So I was wondering what would be the effect on financial stability if we had a 50 to 100 basis point fall in longer-term Treasury yields over the course of 2013.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating some observations and expressing their own concerns and questions.


Passage number 142.
 MR. KILEY.  On that second point, I think we certainly should acknowledge that interest rates can definitely go lower or higher. In the CCAR exercise, the stress test we’re putting the banks through, long-term interest rates fall about 50 basis points further, and the economy is quite weak.  So at least we’ll have some information from that process on the developments on the banking side, in terms of the credit losses from the very weak economy.  In thinking about low interest rates due to a very weak economy, that’s where much of the concern will be.  In terms of thinking about the international experience, we certainly have looked at Japan, and I know many people throughout the System have.  The Japanese had low interest rates for a long time.  One hasn’t seen them get out of that experience, and one hasn’t particularly seen too many issues related to financial stability. There haven’t been crises in Japan where you’ve seen a further leg down.  Now, they have had significant strains on some institutions.  In the late 1990s, seven large insurers failed.  They failed for reasons that perhaps reflect what caused them to get   into a low interest rate environment, rather than the low interest rate environment itself.  They actually had much riskier portfolios than insurers in the United States, and the combination of a decline in stock prices with the fact that they competed with a government-run insurer that was able to underprice them and had a government guarantee essentially made them uncompetitive, so they went out of business. I think we want to look further there.  One thing that I, of course, don’t want to bet on but that we talk about is that a lot of people are concerned that the risk to financial stability will arise when the economy looks like it’s getting better, perhaps quickly, and people start changing their behavior.  And that will be the situation where the Committee will be thinking hard about whether interest rates need to go up.  I think we want to be attuned to the persistently low interest rate environment creating incentives for people to do new things that they underappreciate, and we’re on the lookout for that.  Going forward—I guess my bias, and I hope it doesn’t drive us too much—we really need to be concerned when people start being really optimistic, not during this current period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and discussing different perspectives on low interest rates and financial stability. There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 143.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 144.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I wanted to make one quick point to add to Steve Kamin’s observations.  Having just come back from Germany and taken advantage of the trip that Dennis Lockhart, Christine Cumming, and I took to get some insight into Schäuble’s mind—it’s a relationship that goes back a very long time.  And by the way, he had a full willingness to discuss with me his feelings because I’m not an employee of the federal government, and he knew that I would not pass it on except to this Committee.  [Laughter]  He does not share his feelings with employees of the U.S. government.  First of all—and we reported some of this information back to Steve Kamin—Germany is nowhere near its breaking point politically, in   terms of support for Europe—I think that’s important—and for paying to make the European project work because he said “the guilt is in our bones; we know that.”  The opposition to bailouts is stronger than the CDU–CSU coalition. What’s very interesting about seeing him work is that he was the interior minister.  He has intelligence on every single one of them, and he’s extremely effective in terms of getting folks to work.  So point number one is they are nowhere near a choking point on their willingness to continue, and point number two, for what it’s worth, is he’s certain that another Greek restructuring is more or less inevitable. Just two other quick points.  With regard to financial stability, I thought Michael’s presentation was excellent.  You know, one of the rules of thumb has been that when sovereign wealth funds start to buy things, it’s a bottom—that is, you want to get out.  And just going through some of the recent issues, I notice that for Disney’s issue—it did a 3-year, 10-year, and 30-year recently—30 percent of the takedown was sovereign wealth funds: Norwegians and others.  I don’t know if that’s atypical, but that’s something you may begin to just watch.  I don’t know if that’s out of proportion or not, but the rates were extraordinary.  It was, along with Texas Instruments, 45 basis points for the 3-year and now to 370 for the 30-year issue. I don’t know if we have a measurement as to how normal that is, but 30 percent seemed a fairly high number to me.  I would just suggest that—and maybe it’s not, but it is a general rule that at least most shrewd investors that I know follow—by the time they pile in, it’s time to sell them something.  Just an observation.  But I do want to thank you for this work.  This issue of financial stability is something that President Rosengren and President Kocherlakota and I and other presidents have been deeply interested in; so thanks to you, Nellie, sitting in the back row, and thanks to you, Michael, for your presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and observations from a recent trip to Germany.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "President Bullard" does not provide enough context or information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 146.
   MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just have one question on exhibit 1, figure 1, which is “Private Nonfinancial Sector Credit-to-GDP Ratio.”  I’m just wondering what your interpretation of this figure is.  First of all, is the trend here the trend given by the HP filtered through these data, or is it HP filtered through something else. I think it is through these data.  And should I interpret it to mean that, according to this metric, deleveraging is overdone already or something like that, where you’d expect credit to ramp up again, or is that not where you want to go with this picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any specific contention or disagreement. It only consists of the speaker asking for clarification on the interpretation of a figure.


Passage number 147.
 MR. KILEY.  Yes.  That would be the strong interpretation, which I don’t think we’d want to take.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Kiley simply states his opinion that a strong interpretation would not be desirable.


Passage number 148.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 149.
 MR. KILEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or content provided. The given text, "MR. KILEY," is not sufficient to make a judgment.


Passage number 150.
  We look at this measure because there has been a fair amount of research really emphasizing that credit booms— MR. BULLARD.  So it’s HP filtered through these data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the measure is used because of the emphasis placed on credit booms in research. The mention of "So" suggests that the speaker is adding to or elaborating on their previous statement.


Passage number 151.
 MR. KILEY.  That’s right, and it’s HP filtered through all of these data. We understand that when you do that, you have a real problem with the endpoint:  Where does the delevering cycle end. It could be that we still have quite a way to go, and the fact that it is below the trend line could be misleading. My colleague, Rochelle Edge, has done research investigating some of the work by folks at the BIS and elsewhere on the usefulness of these measures in real time, and she’s found that they’re not hugely useful in real time but nonetheless are valuable to look at.  So I think we wouldn’t go further than saying it appears that firms and households in total are still delevering—that that process may be advanced, but we’re unsure.  So I’d put big confidence intervals around that red dotted line, and I wouldn’t take seriously the idea that we’ve overshot yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges some uncertainty and suggests caution in interpreting the data, but there is no direct dispute or disagreement.


Passage number 152.
   MR. BULLARD. Maybe I could just suggest an alternative metric to compare this one with:  just take a nominal GDP—these are nominal figures, right.—trend and look where it is compared with nominal GDP from 1990 till today. I think credit ramped up dramatically over the decades and has come down some but would still be way above the nominal GDP trend.  Maybe that would give you the idea that, yes, there’s been deleveraging, but it has still got a long way to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is suggesting an alternative metric to compare and analyze the credit levels in relation to the nominal GDP. He is stating that while there has been some deleveraging, it still has a long way to go, indicating agreement with the notion of ongoing deleveraging.


Passage number 153.
 MR. KILEY.  Yes, I think essentially that’s really close to what’s here, if not almost exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the statement mentioned.


Passage number 154.
 MR. BULLARD.  Oh, is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a short statement that does not express any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 155.
 MR. KILEY. I think it’s literally a ratio of private nonfinancial sector credit to total nominal GDP, not private nonfinancial GDP. If you don’t view there being a secular trend, I think it indicates that we had a long credit boom, and that long credit boom has not been unwound, if you really think there’s some sort of stable ratio that we could see if we went significantly further back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kiley, is presenting their perspective and explaining their understanding of a specific ratio. There is no clear opposition or disagreement from anyone else.


Passage number 156.
 MR. BULLARD. I’m sorry. I’m stating it wrong.  It should be flat, according to my notion, and it’s not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Bullard, expressing his own notion or belief that something should be flat.


Passage number 157.
 MR. KILEY.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's right" agrees with or supports the previous statement or idea.


Passage number 158.
 MR. BULLARD.  Got you.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply thanking someone for their response.


Passage number 159.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A two-handed intervention from the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions a two-handed intervention from the Vice Chairman without any conflicting or contradicting information.


Passage number 160.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The problem with assessing this ratio is determining where you should be.  And there are two big drivers:  one, the amount of financial intermediation that’s going on in the economy, which presumably is increasing over time, and which would tell you that there should probably be a secular uptrend, at least as you get to a higher level ofeconomic development; and, two, the tax code.  To the extent that you have mortgage interest deductibility and 401(k) plans, they’re also going to influence where you end up.  I think it’s very hard to know where we are today relative to where we’re supposed to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 161.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only mentions Governor Tarullo without providing any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 162.
 MR. TARULLO.  Michael, can you disaggregate the private nonfinancial sector credit-to-GDP ratio between households and nonfinancial business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 163.
 MR. KILEY.  We do, and that is in the QS report; I probably won’t be able to find the page.  It’s close to but after page 169.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kiley simply states that the information being referred to is in the QS report and acknowledges that he might not be able to find the exact page number.


Passage number 164.
 MR. TARULLO.  Just before I stopped reading.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Tarullo.


Passage number 165.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Even the page numbers have standard errors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply presents a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 166.
 MR. TARULLO.  That’s okay.  We can talk at the break if you want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage suggests a willingness to talk and a lack of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 167.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Corporate America has taken up their leverage ratio on purpose because they view that there is a sweet spot in terms of credit quality.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states the action taken by Corporate America and their perceived viewpoint.


Passage number 168.
 MR. TARULLO.  That’s exactly what I was wondering because my impression was that if you extended the trend line for household leverage that ran from 1975 to 2000, we are right now right about where that trend line would have taken you, but it was in 2001 that that line shot up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Tarullo is expressing his understanding or impression of a certain trend, and there is no opposing viewpoint mentioned or challenged.


Passage number 169.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Maybe Jeremy has the answer.  What’s the average rating for the corporate credit today compared with 30 years ago. It’s got to be a little lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and considering the possibility that Jeremy might have the answer to their question about the average corporate credit rating.


Passage number 170.
 MR. TARULLO. That’s why I was asking the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Tarullo is simply expressing a reason for asking a question.


Passage number 171.
 MR. KILEY.  So there was the danger of looking at a table of contents too quickly.  It’s on page 153 of the QS report.  So it’s actually before page 169.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing a clarification and stating the page numbers to reference in the report.


Passage number 172.
 MR. TARULLO.  Didn’t get to that either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is because the speaker is simply stating that they did not get to a particular topic, without expressing any opposing viewpoint or conflicting opinion.


Passage number 173.
   MR. KILEY.  You certainly see a much stronger trend in the household sector over the entire period and over the sample you talked about than you do for businesses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating an observation about a trend in the household sector compared to businesses.


Passage number 174.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 175.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 176.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Michael Kiley, on the house price overvaluation, you tell us that you’re looking at a metric that is based on the long-run relationship between house prices and rent.  What is the long-run relationship between house prices and rent.  How do you do that; how have we constructed the long term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Ms. Raskin to Mr. Chairman, seeking clarification about the methodology used to determine the long-run relationship between house prices and rent.


Passage number 177.
 MR. KILEY.  Maybe I’ll defer to Josh because he’s really the expert on this subject.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kiley is suggesting deferring to Josh because he is the expert on the subject, indicating trust and agreement.


Passage number 178.
 MR. GALLIN.  Okay.  Basically the way it works is we take a regression of the rent– price ratio on a time trend and on things like an estimate of the current interest rate to remove their effects; there are various ways of doing it, but that’s the basic idea.  Sometimes we include a change in the interest rate as well—just sort of a kitchen-sink version of this analysis.  And, over time, what we’re using is rents from the CPI, rents for tenants; there is an owners’ equivalent rent as well, but they basically move roughly in line with each other over long periods of time.  The reason we use the tenants’ rent is because that series has a longer history, and we can actually estimate the model over a longer period of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply describes the process of taking a regression analysis to remove certain effects and explains the choice of using tenants' rent for the analysis.


Passage number 179.
 MS. RASKIN.  So do you know offhand what that period of time is.  How far back in time do those series go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for a specific period of time.


Passage number 180.
 MR. GALLIN. Late 1970s—1975, 1977, something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This excerpt is a simple statement of a time period, and there is no indication of any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 181.
 MR. WILCOX.  The first quarter of 1975.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 182.
 MR. GALLIN.  If you were actually to have the long-run version, what you would see in the middle-right panel of exhibit 1 would be that there was an increase both in the relationship and the deviation from trend in the late 1970s.  House prices were relatively high in the late 1970s.  The way they got back down to trend was largely by sort of getting eroded by inflation— of course, in that time period, inflation was a lot higher. Then you can see the other house price boom was in the late 1980s, and again, in that case, house prices came back into line at the national level, but more through just a long period of not rising while rents increased. Now, there were some cities like L.A. and Boston in the late 1980s and mid-1980s that saw big price declines. The big difference in this episode, as you can see on the chart, is that house prices got much further out of line with rents than they had in the historical period, and obviously this time the correction did not occur through stagnation in house prices and rise in rents:  It occurred, as you know, through plummeting house prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing a description and analysis of historical trends in house prices.


Passage number 183.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a polite expression of gratitude, indicating agreement or consensus.


Passage number 184.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. In a minute, we can take a break for lunch, but when we come back, there will be the opportunity for participants to comment on financial stability issues. If anyone has any further thoughts on financial stability, that would be the opportunity to do that.  And then we will go to the economic go-round.  Forty minutes for lunch, say.  Come back at 1:55 p.m..  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the schedule and giving instructions.


Passage number 185.
 MS. DANKER.  I just also wanted to mention that we’ll be distributing during lunch a revised version of the statements, where the first paragraph of alternatives B and C is changed just a little bit to take account of the new employment data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that a revised version of the statements will be distributed during lunch.


Passage number 186.
 [Lunch recess] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay, why don’t we recommence.  At this point we have an opportunity for participants to comment on financial stability issues, and I have President Rosengren and Vice Chairman Dudley on my list.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the agenda for the meeting and calling on two individuals to speak on a specific topic.


Passage number 187.
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I very rarely have an opportunity to say good things in the financial stability go-round, so when there is good news, I think it is worth talking about.  And from my perspective, the actions that the FSOC took related to money market funds actually have had a more positive effect than I might have expected. Officials at some of the money market funds are now discussing floating-rate NAVs.  Some of the SEC commissioners are, at least publicly, saying that they now may support additional action, including floating-rate NAVs. I think that’s a really big move from where we were just last September, and that’s despite the fact that Mary Schapiro has announced that she’s leaving the SEC. Floating-rate NAVs would be a significant improvement over the current situation, where money market funds promise fixed NAVs while holding no capital and taking credit risk.  A floating NAV will make clear that prices can fluctuate and that investors need to consider the potential for fluctuations before investing in a money market fund.  I would note that even with a floating NAV, there are still run risks at money market funds.  Many assets of prime money market funds do not trade or trade very infrequently and include credit risk.  In addition, amortized cost accounting can obscure the value of assets.  Given that positions are generally not known until the end of each month, there’s still the potential for window dressing, which may raise suspicion among investors in a crisis that positions may have changed since the most recent public disclosure.  This uncertainty raises the issue of whether pricing of these products will be sufficiently sticky, that investors will run from funds with credit risk not fully reflected in the pricing, potentially causing fire sale prices and leaving the remaining investors with large losses. As a result, we should be open to options in addition to the floating NAV that might address the risk of runs at money market funds.  But I would say that the developments, while we’re far fromthe end, are a substantial improvement over where we were, and I’m greatly heartened.  It’s a positive sign that the FSOC is initiating actions in a way that looks like it is changing behavior.  So kudos to the Chairman and the FSOC process.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is expressing his positive view on the actions taken by FSOC related to money market funds and the potential adoption of floating-rate NAVs. He acknowledges the potential improvement but also highlights remaining risks and the need to consider additional measures. Overall, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 188.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Here, here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "Here, here." It is a common expression used to indicate agreement or approval.


Passage number 189.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you" indicates gratitude or appreciation, but it does not imply any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 190.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, can we also give kudos to Eric because all of us have received letters personally attacking him.  I kind of feel like that Far Side cartoon with the two deer standing next to each other.  One has got a big target on his chest, and he’s going like this [pointing]. [Laughter]  Seriously, President Rosengren has suffered the slings and arrows of standing on principle, and I think we ought to thank him.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing gratitude towards Eric and acknowledging the personal attacks he has received.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Here, here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Here, here" is an expression used to show agreement or support. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 192.
 MR. FISHER.  Good job.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 194.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Well, we still need one more commissioner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing a need for an additional commissioner without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 195.
 MR. KOCOHERLAKOTA. Let’s really put him in the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker merely states the intention of targeting someone without expressing any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 196.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We’re not quite there yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "We’re not quite there yet" does not imply contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that something has not yet been achieved or accomplished.


Passage number 197.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes, we’re not there yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "Yes, we're not there yet" suggests agreement with a previous statement or acknowledgement of a current situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 198.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  A few thoughts on Europe.  I’m generally pretty close to where Steve is.  I think there are two pieces of good news.  The ECB’s OMT program promising secondary-market purchases for Spain and Italy if they enter into a formal adjustment program has been effective in settling down sovereign debt markets.  And I think that has been important because it kept the bad equilibrium at bay—the equilibrium where debt-to-risk costs go up, which then feed back into bad fiscal performance, which leads to even higher debt service costs.That’s a good development.  Second, I think Germany has made a very conscious decision that it doesn’t want to kick Greece out of the EU, at least through the October 2013 German elections.  I think that’s important because if Greece isn’t going to get kicked out, then no one else is going to get kicked out in the interim because everybody else looks quite a bit better than Greece.  So the risk of a contagion event in Europe, or an expectation that other countries might be forced to exit, is very much reduced at the current time. And that’s important because it buys time for fiscal consolidation, structural reform, and pan-European institution building to actually proceed. In the near term, I am sort of where Steve is.  I don’t think that Europe is likely to be a source of big instability over the near term.  That’s the good news.  The bad news is that it’s not obvious to me, at least, that the time that they’ve bought themselves is actually going to be spent wisely or that the programs of fiscal austerity are going to soon generate a more favorable set of outcomes in terms of macroeconomic performance and sustainable debt-to-GDP trajectories. Of course, without better performance the political support for austerity may not prove sustainable, and we’re already seeing some backsliding in the case of Italy.  Also, I think that the reduction in market pressure is leading to backsliding in terms of pan-European institution building, which I think is absolutely essential for this to work in the longer run.  The European Deposit Insurance System now seems pretty much off the table completely, and the Europeans are having great difficulty reaching agreement on what the scope of an ECB-led pan-European bank regulator would be.  So bottom line for me is that the situation is a long way from being fixed, so I’m not really optimistic about the longer term, but it’s probably not going to go off the rails in the near future, which I guess is an improvement relative to where we’ve been for most of the last couple of years. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents both positive and negative views on the situation in Europe. The speaker acknowledges the effectiveness of the ECB's OMT program and Germany's decision not to kick Greece out of the EU as positive developments. However, they express concern about the wise use of the time bought, the potential negative outcomes of fiscal austerity, potential backsliding in terms of pan-European institution building, and the overall long-term outlook for Europe.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 200.
  MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to make a brief observation about the financial stability discussion.  First, I want to say that I have found the reports themselves and the discussion around the table very helpful and that it is important to keep thinking about where this tipping point is, if there is one, around risk.  I went back and looked at some of the discussion in the 2006 transcripts around housing.  And I think about my own experiences as a supervisor, as we saw commercial real estate concentrations growing in smaller banks, and how challenging it is to know where you are in that risk spectrum when it’s time to be worried. Like President Pianalto, I’m hearing more concerns in my region, whether it is people trying to manage funds or looking at banks taking on interest rate risk.  Again, I think supervisors are reacting to other things, but I’m just reminded that I think this discussion will be helpful, and we have to continue to press for where we are in that risk spectrum.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of personal observations and opinions without any opposition being presented.


Passage number 201.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Anyone else on financial stability. [No response] If not, we’re ready for our economic go-round, and I have President Williams, fresh back from India.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of events.


Passage number 202.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage MR.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 203.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Looking beyond the near-term effects of extreme weather on the economy, the underlying story of a gradual recovery remains intact.  Indeed, my medium-term forecast hasn’t changed much over the past few months.  I expect the economy will pick up steam over the next two or three years, with real GDP growth of about 2½ percent in 2013 and averaging about 3½ percent in 2014 and 2015.  However, this somewhat encouraging outlook hinges on two key policy actions:  The first is that the Congress and the President will reach an agreement that allows us to dodge the full brunt of the fiscal cliff.  The second is that we continue buying Treasuries and MBS, which I expect we will need to continue well into the second half of next year.  Without both of these policy actions, I would expect little,if any, progress in reducing unemployment next year and a real risk of falling further behind on our maximum employment mandate.  Further monetary accommodation is required to offset the stiff headwinds holding back aggregate demand.  Households continue to trim debt.  Many potential borrowers still face tight credit.  Public sector budgets are under pressure, and global economic growth remains sluggish.  It seems that every time a signal is about to turn green, the caution light flashes again.  In this regard, the sharp drop in December consumer sentiment was a reminder of how quickly households can lose their resolve in the face of contradictory signals over the outlook for fiscal policy and the economy. Businesspeople are particularly worried and uncertain.  This anxiety is undermining the willingness to engage in longer-term commitments, such as investing in capital expenditures and in hiring full-time employees.  My staff has studied how uncertainty affects business decisions about both investment and employment.  They found that when uncertainty rises, capital spending and full-time employment fall, but part-time employment rises. That is, under heightened uncertainty, employers hedge their bets, adjusting hours rather than jobs to meet output demand.  These effects are sizable and consistent with the downshift in business investment and the increase in part-time employment that we’ve observed in recent months.  Indeed, involuntary part-time employment has grown considerably this year, accounting for about 40 percent of civilian job growth since March.  The observed pattern of reduced investment and greater use of part-time employment provides additional evidence that heightened uncertainty is playing a significant role in holding back the pace of recovery.  And as I mentioned at previous meetings, this research also shows that uncertainty affects the economy like an adverse demand shock, reducing desired investment in employment while also puttingdownward pressure on inflation.  And these are exactly the kinds of shocks that monetary policy can and should seek to offset. Of course, the important question is whether the tools that we have left—I think mainly further asset purchases—will still be effective and, in particular, whether further reductions in longer-term interest rates will boost aggregate demand.  Certainly, there may be limited returns to pushing down long-term corporate bond rates and stimulating capital investment, especially, as I’ve said, because many businesses appear nearly paralyzed by uncertainty. But capital expenditures represent only one of the channels through which interest rates affect the economy.  Purchases of Treasuries and MBS have also helped lower auto loan rates and mortgage rates, thereby supporting consumer spending and the housing sector.  But there’s more.  The exchange rate is another important channel by which LSAPs affect the economy.  For example, according to the FRB/US model simulations, roughly one-third of the effect of monetary policy on real output occurs through the exchange rate channel.  My staff—clearly we’re at the end of the evaluation period, so I’m getting a lot of research from them at this time [laughter]—recently examined the response of the exchange value of the dollar to LSAP announcements.  Using intradaily data, they found that the dollar typically depreciated in response to surprise expansionary monetary policy announcements since the end of 2008.  Furthermore, the effects of the announcement surprises on the dollar over this period were similar in magnitude to the effects of similarly scaled surprise movements in the federal funds rate over the period from 1994 to 2008.  This analysis suggests that the exchange rate channel of monetary policy is still very much alive and kicking. Now, so far I’ve focused on the modal forecast, but there are also important risks to the outlook, notably the fiscal cliff.  As I mentioned, I hope that we’ll avoid the worst case scenario,  but we can’t rule out that negotiations might break down along the lines of the Tealbook alternative simulation, which would result in serious damage to the economy.  Moreover, I am worried that the Tealbook analysis may underestimate the potential fallout from going over the fiscal cliff.  Recently we had a symposium at the San Francisco Fed, with leading academic researchers from around the world discussing issues around the fiscal cliff.  The academic experts found that tax multipliers are significantly larger than typically assumed in models such as FRB/US. In addition, with limited options for increasing monetary accommodation, the tax multipliers are probably even larger than estimated in the recent literature that I’m referring to. Moreover, in a fiscal cliff scenario, there’s a danger that households and businesses could lose confidence in the ability of our elected leaders to govern.  The potential for a collapse in confidence is clear from the August 2011 brinksmanship around the debt ceiling, which resulted in plummeting consumer confidence. So together, the larger multipliers and indirect effects on confidence imply that going over the fiscal cliff could drag economic activity much more than what is shown in the Tealbook scenario. Finally, turning to inflation, the recent data have been a little softer than I had anticipated.  Compensation data have also been below expectations, suggesting little upward pressure on core or headline inflation in coming quarters, and I continue to expect that both headline and core PCE inflation will remain below 2 percent for the next several years. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, is discussing the outlook for the economy and the potential risks, particularly regarding the fiscal cliff. He mentions that there is a possibility that negotiations might break down and result in serious damage to the economy, and that the potential fallout from going over the fiscal cliff may be underestimated. He also mentions that tax multipliers are larger than typically assumed and could have a larger impact on the economy than estimated. This suggests that there is disagreement or uncertainty about the potential effects of the fiscal cliff and the ability of policy actions to mitigate those effects.


Passage number 204.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude towards President Rosengren.


Passage number 205.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It is a bit daunting to be attempting to forecast the economy at a time when government spending, government tax rates, and the potential for hitting the debt ceiling all could potentially alter the economic landscape quite dramatically in the short term. This elevated period of policy uncertainty is likely acting as a significant headwind to economic activity. Hence, while monetary policy is trying to reduce the cost of credit to accelerate spending decisions of households and firms, the fiscal policy uncertainty is causing both households and firms to defer decisions.  While it is unfortunate these policies are not working in tandem, it is not a reason for us to stay on the sidelines.  It is quite important that our actions continue to provide significant support for sectors such as housing and autos to partly offset these headwinds and bolster the economy through this fragile period. My forecast assumes that fiscal policy muddles through without causing a sharp retrenchment at the beginning of next year and that fiscal policymakers do not postpone the most important decisions, as doing so would, in turn, lead to a longer period of deferred household and firm decisions.  My outlook puts a fair amount of weight on these headwinds that are induced by policy paralysis, so that my view of the economy absent these headwinds would be a bit more positive than that of the Tealbook.  That does not imply that I see significant underlying strength in the economy, because I am also assuming more monetary policy accommodation than in the Tealbook.  Specifically, I assume that we continue significant asset purchases until the unemployment rate falls to 7¼ percent, which under the assumption of a benign end of the fiscal cliff is expected to occur shortly after the end of 2013 in my forecast.  I expect economic growth to gradually gain traction over the second half of 2013 and through 2014, with liftoff in short-term rates occurring in the middle of 2015.  I expect that we will continue to undershoot our 2 percent PCE inflation target throughout this period. My forecast anticipates a strengthening in the housing sector and related consumer durable purchases, which will continue to be a source of economic support over the forecast period, in part as a result of our asset purchases.  Most housing indicators have been improving, and housing prices have been rising gradually. One week ago, the New York and Boston Reserve Banks held a joint conference on determinants of the primary–secondary mortgage spread.  I highly commend the white paper from the conference, which provides some interesting perspective on why that spread has widened. Panelists at the conference highlighted the role of capacity constraints, which reflects reduced participation in the mortgage market by a number of large banks, in part due to their assessment that mortgage origination is now less profitable due to increased legal risks and the risks from the GSEs’ putback policies.  Despite these impediments, there seemed to be a consensus that our actions in September had a meaningful impact on mortgage rates of a bit less than 25 basis points. My staff has also been doing some work looking at prepayment activity in the mortgage market, which has an effect on how quickly our mortgage portfolio might decline for reasons other than refinancing.  Using the PSID data, they examined how often people move because of job change, upsizing, increased family size, or young adults starting new households.  They found that, on average, 4½ percent of homeowners move to another home in a given year.  Considering how many of these moves involve prepaying a mortgage, they calculate that between 12 and 16 percent of mortgages will prepay over five years because of the so-called own-to-own moves.  In addition, they find another 2 percent of prepayments that involve own-to-rent moves over a five-year period.  Thus, one of the advantages of a larger mortgage portfolio is that many mortgages will naturally be extinguished as people switch homes, regardless of the decline in refinances if rates rise. Looking forward to a time when we normalize our balance sheet, we may want to consider arguments for keeping longer-term assets on our balance sheet, including mortgages.  I can imagine that for either financial stability or macrostability goals, we might want to continue to hold some mortgages and longer-duration Treasuries so that we have the ability to tighten as well as ease specific market conditions or the macroeconomy by selling or buying long-duration assets.  This topic may well be worth considering at a future meeting. In terms of labor markets, the Friday report was better than expected but worse than needed.  Relative to the start of the year, my GDP forecast has unfortunately been relatively close.  But on the bright side, the unemployment rate is now lower than I had anticipated.  My earlier SEP submissions anticipated unemployment rates remaining above 8 percent this year, with only a slight decline by the end of 2013.  With the unemployment rate at 7.7 percent in November, it looks like I was too pessimistic.  One factor I did not sufficiently consider was how much exits from the labor force would contribute to a declining unemployment rate.  In part, that may be because I did not anticipate how quickly states would stop providing the Emergency Unemployment Compensation.  With 31 states losing their eligibility for these benefits between January and August of this year, research at the Boston Fed suggests that some of the decline in the labor force reflects recipients dropping out of the labor force when these benefits are not available. In summary, I see some positive growth in areas most strongly affected by accommodative policy, with weak growth in those areas most strongly affected by the fiscal uncertainty.  While my forecast assumes that as fiscal concerns abate we will see more of the underlying strength of the economy, I view the actions we have taken to date to be one reason we have performed better than many other developed countries.  As we will discuss more tomorrow, the economic recovery has depended on that support, so now would not be the time to reduce that support.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 206.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 207.
   MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I relate anecdotal input from my District, I will mention that my baseline outlook for the medium term has not changed significantly from the last meeting or my September SEP. The incoming data have made me mark down a little my economic growth assumption for this quarter and, as a consequence, the full year 2012 as well as the early quarters of 2013.  Those changes are modest, and I don’t view the basic growth outlook to have changed.  I am putting emphasis on this view that little in the outlook has changed since September and October because in the policy round, I will push the argument that the policy decisions I expect we will make at this meeting should be thought of as, and communicated as, a continuation of appropriate policy, not new stimulus. Now let me turn to some color commentary from my District.  In spite of a fixation on the immediate fiscal-cliff-related risks and a continued lack of near-term visibility, we detected an unexpected rise in optimism among our business contacts over the past month.  I think this positive sentiment is worth noting, but I don’t see it as translating yet into concrete plans to expand business operations and grow payrolls.  With some exceptions, businesses remain very cautious in their spending.  The unusual circumstances at this juncture seem to have elicited a bimodal approach to business planning.  One of our directors, the CFO of the country’s second-largest retailer, ordered her budgeting team to put down their pencils—I love that image—until there is some clarity about the outcome of fiscal negotiations.  Others, depending on industry, seem to be looking through the possible near-term effects of going over the cliff.  Moreover, the front-of-mind uncertainties constraining businesses are not limited to fiscal negotiations.  We heard a repeat of cost-related concerns, especially health care. At the same time, a number of our contacts believe there is some amount of pent-up demand on the part of   businesses and consumers resulting from deferred spending, and that this demand could be unleashed by removal of fiscal uncertainties. On prices, according to our most recent business inflation expectations survey, the year-ahead inflation expectations of business contacts in the Southeast rose a little bit, to a little over 2 percent in November, up from 1.8 percent in October. I don’t view this uptick as material, nor do I get any sense of growing anticipation of wage pressures.  Even though we hear of pretty significant labor shortages in some sectors, firms seem to be very hesitant to pay up for labor and to assume higher total payroll expenses. Turning to the balance of risks, I see the GDP growth risks, on balance, as weighted to the downside.  Given the shock potential of a failure of federal fiscal negotiations, I see unemployment risks weighted to the upside, and I see inflation risks as broadly balanced.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their outlook and observations, but they do not contradict or argue against any other viewpoints.


Passage number 208.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage given. The phrase "Thank you. President Fisher" simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 209.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am just going to comment first on my own District and on inflation, and then on what I am hearing from business interlocutors.  I thought President Williams made some very good points.  I am just going to address the one aspect of intentions to expand payrolls and capital expenditures. First of all, with regard to the 11th Federal Reserve District, 2012 is likely to go down in the record book as a pretty strong year.  We know 98 percent of our output is in one state:  Texas.  We think jobs grew 3.2 percent; the unemployment rate will likely fall to 6½ percent by year-end.  So I am all in favor of the 6½ percent target in alternative B; we have already arrived there.  And we think our real GDP likely grew about 3½ percent, so we are in a sweet spot within the country.  With regard to our own trimmed mean analysis of inflation, the 12-month run rate  for October is about 1.7 percent, and the 6-month run rate is about 1½ percent, so we are on the same run rate as the headline PCE, as posted in October, with energy mostly a nonfactor. With regard to my business contacts, President Lockhart and President Williams have mentioned the one thing that is a constant preoccupation, which is the fiscal cliff. It is almost impossible for people to budget around it.  If you look at the NFIB survey that came out this morning, it is highly negative.  I noted as reported in that survey only 6 percent of small- and medium-sized businesses felt that their credit needs were not being met.  That is down another 2 percent from the last survey.  Among all of the business leaders that I speak to around the country, the larger businesses—as we talked about earlier today—have really strengthened their balance sheets substantially and are in very good shape.  The issue is how they put it to work.  And, in essence, the bottom-line report is that their engines are just idling; they’re waiting for the rule book.  It is not a question of the strength of their balance sheets or the abundance of liquidity, nor is it a question of their ability to compete and put people to work very quickly.  I will just mention one specific case, which is a very large company:  AT&T. Its board approved $14 billion in capital expenditures for three years, if it decides to pull the trigger.  And the CEO has reported that, in terms of the final plan completion and so on, the company can get that done in 45 days.  None of its subs need financing; they are ready to go; everybody is healthy.  It is a very remarkable process as to how quickly it can turn that thing on.  But it is holding back, at the direction of the board, until it gets some clarity in terms of the fiscal situation. And if you don’t mind, Mr. Chairman, I am going to use a little barnyard analogy here, just to summarize again what I am hearing—for what it’s worth, the anecdotal evidence that is coming from those who employ people and try to put people to work.  I think as you know, Mr. Chairman, we have a breeding bull on our ranch in East Texas.  His name, as you know, is Too Big to Fail.  He is a 2,200-pound two-year old, and he breeds the longhorn cows that we have.  If we put a fence between him and the cows, obviously he is quite frustrated.  And forgive me, but in the case of this bull, there is no problem with liquidity.  He is ready to roll; he is ready to do his job.  But what makes him happy is when he can do his business, what we pay him for, with the cows.  But we have a fence between the bull and the cows.  Then, he can’t do what we pay him for.  In essence I think that’s what we are hearing from business.  There is a fence.  There is plenty of liquidity; they have plenty of wherewithal.  They are strong and well equipped to do what we want them to do, which is create jobs for American workers, to pump up consumption, and to pump up final demand.  But until that fence is removed, or they at least understand what the fence line is, then businesses are just not going to go to work creating jobs.  So I would say that summarizes it, Mr. Chairman, and that’s no bull.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with previous statements made by President Williams and President Lockhart, and is providing additional information and anecdotes to support their points. The speaker also expresses a sentiment that businesses are hesitant to expand and create jobs due to uncertainty about fiscal policies.


Passage number 210.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a polite message thanking President Lacker, but it does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 211.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply consists of a polite expression of gratitude and a mention of President Pianalto without any contradictory or conflicting statements.


Passage number 212.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have made only small changes to my projection for GDP growth since our September SEP submission.  Like others have mentioned, I expect weak growth in the current quarter to pull down economic growth for the year to a little less than 1¾ percent.  Looking ahead, I still anticipate a gradual pickup to a GDP growth rate of about 2½ percent in 2013, and slightly over 3 percent in 2014 and 2015.  With this pace of growth, I am expecting unemployment to gradually decline by a little less than ½ percentage point per year from 2013 through 2015.  Surprisingly, the labor market has shown more progress than I had anticipated earlier this year, and now my projection for the unemployment rate reaches 7½ percent in the fourth quarter of 2013. I expect inflation to remain close to our objective, at 2 percent or a bit less through 2015.  This path of moderate underlying inflation is very consistent with the median CPI over the past year.  The incoming compensation and income data also point to stable, low inflation.  Of course, energy prices are prone to spikes that may temporarily push inflation above 2 percent, but the medium-term inflation outlook looks to have settled in a bit below our 2 percent objective.  Indeed, in the Cleveland Fed’s inflation expectations model, which adjusts for inflation risk premiums, inflation expectations are anchored below 2 percent even beyond the 20-year horizon. I have not incorporated the full consequences that would stem from a fall off of the fiscal cliff into my baseline forecast.  As I have noted in recent FOMC meetings, my business contacts, as others have mentioned, are very concerned about the fiscal cliff, and many have reported that   uncertainty surrounding fiscal policy has slowed business investment.  As an aside, Warren Buffett visited Cleveland last week.  And while a brief meeting probably doesn’t qualify him for interlocutor status [laughter], I am including Warren Buffett’s comments with those of my District contacts. As I noted, the looming fiscal policy decisions are damping my contacts’ investment plans, but they also are frequently mentioning concerns about the low interest rate environment.  Our models point to the benefits of low interest rates on firms’ balance sheets and investments, but my contacts are frequently pointing out that there are also some complications of low interest rates, like rising contributions to defined benefit pension plans, which then limit further investments in their businesses.  Some of these complications are difficult to capture in our models, especially because we have no historical experience with some of them. I also met with senior officials at some large regional banks in the District, at some insurers, and at a large mutual fund company, to get their perspectives on the low interest rate environment.  In addition to highlighting the financial stability concerns that I raised earlier, these conversations helped me think about the appropriate path of monetary policy to underpin my outlook.  While the officials at the financial firms that I talked to do not have the sophisticated models that we have to evaluate the benefits of monetary policy, they firmly believe that the first round of asset purchases had a significantly more positive impact than our recent purchases.  And as we heard earlier from Board staff, although their analysis continues to show that additional purchases continue to be as effective as our earlier programs, they also acknowledge that predicting the likely effects is very difficult.  So based, in part, on some of the concerns that I have heard, I have incorporated somewhat more attenuated effects for additional monetary policy accommodation in my outlook than are implied in the Tealbook.Until we get past the fiscal cliff, my assessment of the risk to the economic outlook remains weighted to the downside for GDP growth and to the upside for unemployment.  Of course, the risks around the current fiscal situation may not all be to the downside. If an agreement that resolves long-standing issues is reached in coming weeks, that could provide a significant impetus for growth, so we can remain hopeful.  On inflation, I do continue to see the risks as largely balanced.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own projection for GDP growth and unemployment, as well as discussing their views on inflation and the impact of fiscal policy and low interest rates on businesses.


Passage number 213.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude by President Evans.


Passage number 214.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic setting for this meeting is not any better than what we faced the last few meetings.  Arguably, it’s a little worse.  Second-half GDP growth seems to be around 2 percent as the familiar host of uncertainties and headwinds continue to take their toll on the economy, as we’ve already heard around the table.  Businesses have continued hiring at a modest pace in spite of large fiscal uncertainties, and that seems like a plus, but they are doing so without meaningful capacity expansion.  BFI has been quite weak, and the forward indicators and anecdotal reports from my business contacts don’t suggest a change in this anytime soon. In addition, consumption has been softer than expected.  Real income growth seems weaker, and the headwinds from household deleveraging continue to be strong. On the international front, the recent news makes it even clearer that Europe is in recession.  The ECB has now projected a contraction for 2013, and the weakness is not limited to the peripheral countries.  More of my business contacts with exposure to Germany are finally thinking there will be a downturn there as well.  In China, growth has decelerated.  One of my largest manufacturing contacts with factories in China told us that on a recent visit he made there 100 percent of his business partners reported what he called positive stories regarding new   economic initiatives throughout China.  He said that in the past, such a positive consensus had been a good predictor of a strengthening in the Chinese economy.  So this information seems to corroborate the better incoming data on China that were discussed earlier. Putting all of this together, my national outlook is a bit weaker than it was in our September SEP submission.  Our near-term forecast for economic growth is similar to the Tealbook, and those are pretty disappointing numbers.  It also seems clear to me that the labor market reports since the October FOMC meeting do not meet any benchmark for a substantial improvement in the labor market outlook.  We’re a long way from the six months or so of job gains around 200,000 that I would want to see as a condition for concluding our open-ended asset purchases.  We are also not close to seeing a GDP growth path comfortably ensconced above potential growth, another reasonable condition for ending the program.  In our forecast, we get to this more favorable growth path for output and employment sometime in the latter part of 2013.  Indeed, by then we’re expecting stronger economic growth than in the Tealbook.  But this growth is premised on more-accommodative monetary policy.  This policy includes asset purchases through the end of next year and the additional stimulus I think we would get by adopting numerical thresholds into our forward guidance and delivering greater clarity regarding our future intentions.  In my opinion, we need this additional accommodation.  We have a weak forecast with continuing downside risks. Now, just as an aside, I’ve heard many business commentaries, like those President Fisher, President Lacker, and others were mentioning, about how businesses are sort of running on idle, keeping things on hold.  And as I listen, I can’t keep from thinking that this situation must be symptomatic of the fact that demand is very low in our economy.  I mean, it almost reminds me of—maybe there isn’t a Monty Python skit of this sort—a scene where there are a bunch of racers running on a track:  They’re at the starting line; the starting gun is fired; but there’s confusion at the outset, and nobody takes off.  They start arguing among themselves.  They’re on idle; they’re not doing anything.  Eventually somebody, though, decides that the gun has gone off, and they start running.  And after a while people think, “Wait.  There are people out there.  I have to catch up.” I just don’t quite understand how businesses can continue to be idle if their competitors are running away from them, which would be the case if demand picked up. But while demand is still low, you can have these types of stories and still be quite profitable.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their opinion and analysis of the current economic situation.


Passage number 215.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only contains a polite expression of gratitude and a mention of President Plosser without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 217.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude to President George.


Passage number 218.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Economic activity in the 10th District economy has generally strengthened since the last meeting, following a sluggish summer.  The District has seen a strong rebound in employment growth this fall, including growth in most state and local government payrolls.  Consumer spending has also picked up, as a number of contacts reported that spending increased before Thanksgiving; expectations for spending over the next three months also increased in November.  As in the rest of the nation, the housing sector is contributing to growth in the District, with the number of housing permits and value of construction contracts rebounding sharply over the last couple of months.  Despite the drought, 2012 net farm incomes are expected to be near historical highs, roughly 40 percent above their 10-year average. Livestock remains agriculture’s biggest challenge, with prices below breakeven as feed costs remain near historical highs. The relatively weaker spots in the District are the state of New Mexico and the manufacturing sector.  New Mexico’s weakness is related to federal cutbacks due to the state’s reliance on defense spending, and District manufacturing activity fell in November for the second straight month.  In addition, expectations over the next six months for new export orders and employment growth were somewhat soft, likely reflecting  the global slowdown and uncertainty.  However, expectations for production and capital spending have remained positive. My medium-term outlook for the real economy is essentially unchanged.  I expect growth to pick up as we move through next year and into 2014.  Assuming constructive resolution of our fiscal issues, I expect we may also see a rebound in business fixed investment as the labor market also continues to heal slowly.  Over the course of this year, I had assumed inflation would remain near 2 percent, with only a risk that it could move higher.  Now, assuming the Committee continues to ease policy with the proposed alternatives for tomorrow’s discussion, I would expect inflation to begin to rise above 2 percent in 2014 and 2015.  I would also note that longer-term inflation expectations based on the TIPS market moved higher after the September meeting and have remained near the upper limit of their historical range. Downside risks to my forecast are largely unchanged.  Uncertainty about how the fiscal cliff will be resolved continues to affect business investment and consumer spending.  A slowdown in global economic growth and the expectation of higher taxes and more regulation also continue to weigh on economic growth.  On the upside, the continued increases in housing activity and auto sales are consistent with a household sector that will be supportive of growth going forward.  In addition, economic growth could surprise on the upside over the next few years if there is an effective resolution of the near-term fiscal uncertainty that also improves the longer-term fiscal outlook.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any signs of contention or disagreement. It primarily presents the speaker's observations and analysis of the current state of the economy.


Passage number 219.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you. President Bullard" is a polite expression of gratitude and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 220.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have just a few remarks on the economic outlook.  In the Eighth District economy, we continue to expand at a modest pace, with unemployment below the national average on a Districtwide basis.  During the autumn, there has  been something of a disconnection between relatively upbeat households and relatively downbeat businesses.  I’ve been increasingly concerned that businesses are holding back planning for three reasons:  one, the global slowdown; two, mixed reports on the strength of the U.S. economy; and three, angst about the future policy environment in the United States.  A clear, credible deal on the U.S. fiscal situation would go a long way to reducing this angst, but it is unclear at this point whether such a deal will be made.  Some of the most recent anecdotal information from the District’s transportation sector seems to indicate positive momentum during the holiday season up to now.  I continue to be concerned about the global growth situation.  Anecdotal information from large District firms with operations in China seems to indicate, on balance, continuing slowdown there—that’s a little distinct from earlier reports here—perhaps tied to the deeper-than-expected recession in Europe.  Japan has moved back into recession as well. On the plus side, I’ve been impressed by the relative calm in the euro zone during the second half of 2012.  I was expecting a volatile period during the fall.  Instead, the situation in Greece has been papered over, at least for now. In addition, the ECB’s threatened intervention through the OMT program has generally managed to put substantial downward pressure on Spanish and Italian yields.  The ability of Spain to delay a request for aid and, therefore, to delay the actual implementation of the ECB’s OMT program has also surprised me.  My view has been that once such a request is made, the ECB may well come under heavy pressure, and volatility in European and global financial markets may return with a vengeance.  However, I have now revised down my probability that Spain will be forced to request aid, at least in the near term, such as over the next few months.A calmer Europe and a U.S. fiscal deal, therefore, seem to point to some upside potential for the United States.  In addition, some of the headwinds, especially in housing, that have been a drag on the U.S. economy seem to be dissipating.  Our own monetary policy is exceptionally accommodative. On balance, then, I’m relatively optimistic about U.S. growth prospects in 2013. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply presenting their observations and opinions on various economic factors.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 222.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Maybe it’s time for a coffee break.  So we will adjourn until, say, 3:25 p.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests taking a break and resuming at a specific time.


Passage number 223.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  We’re ready to recommence, and I’ll ask Governor Yellen to speak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 224.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At our last meeting, we discussed the rather puzzling disconnect that had emerged between the household sector’s optimism, reflected in upbeat readings on consumer spending and confidence, and the business sector’s pessimism, reflected in surprisingly weak indicators of capital spending and reports from our business contacts.  This tension has eased somewhat.  Unfortunately, the resolution has largely come about through softer data on consumption and diminished readings on consumer confidence rather than a brightening picture for business spending.  I agree with the Tealbook’s assessment that as a result, the near-term outlook, on balance, is weaker. Last Friday’s report from the Michigan survey suggests that consumers are, for the first time, focusing intently on the fiscal  cliff.  They are finally recognizing that impending fiscal policy shifts are likely to have negative implications for their own financial situations as well as for the performance of the economy and the labor market.  Although an increasing number of households now perceive a more-favorable trend in house prices, households’ expectations concerning the outlook for unemployment and for their own personal finances worsened sharply, and their expectations concerning future real income gains stand at rock-bottom levels. This assessment seems all too realistic in light of weak incoming data on compensation and disposable income, and the prospect that even with a successful resolution of the fiscal cliff negotiations, both the payroll tax holiday and extended unemployment benefits will end up on the fiscal chopping block. With respect to the labor market, I still see nothing in the data that convinces me that it is definitively on the mend.  The unemployment rate has declined more than I had anticipated, but as the staff memo on assessing conditions in the labor market emphasizes, even absent the distortions from hurricane effects, changes in the unemployment rate are best interpreted in light of a number of other measures.  According to my reading, those measures are not reassuring.  Given the staff’s best efforts to filter out the weather-related effects, payroll employment was consistent with only modest continued gains.  The decline in the participation rate, on the other hand, raises a question of whether the step-down in the unemployment rate actually reflects progress in reducing slack or, instead, signifies that the natural rate of unemployment is falling as discouraged workers, including those completing extended unemployment benefits, leave the labor force. The JOLTS data for October were released earlier today, and they showed that the hiring rate remains far below its pre-recession level, and the quit rate remains very depressed.  Such readings on turnover suggest no substantial improvement in the labor market outlook thus far.  My projection for the unemployment rate at the end of 2013 is now marginally lower than in September, reflecting the decline we have seen over recent months.  But my outlook, like that of the Tealbook, is for less improvement over the course of next year than I previously anticipated. In the absence of any significant improvement in the outlook for the labor market to date, and with my expectation that progress during the coming year is apt to be negligible, I see a need for us to maintain our longer-term asset purchases, and I expect that these purchases may be appropriate throughout the coming year.  That said, we do need to attempt ongoing evaluation of their efficacy and costs. The assessment of efficacy is challenging. It requires us to identify the partial effect of our policy actions on asset prices, real activity, and inflation, abstracting from all of the various time-varying factors that also affect these metrics. For example, we have not yet observed any noticeable pickup in economic activity, but that hardly proves that our asset purchases are ineffective. I think it is fair, in particular, to attribute the roughly 25 basis point decline in the 30-year mortgage rate since September to our policy, and I anticipate that improved housing affordability will stimulate the recovery going forward. With respect to costs of our asset purchases, I worry most that a prolonged environment of low interest rates and the yield curve we are intentionally flattening through our purchases may induce an excessive search for yield and a dangerous buildup of leverage.  I appreciate the careful efforts of our staff to monitor such threats to financial stability.  For now, I agree with their assessment that increased risk-taking has become evident in some sectors, but the use of leverage has not risen to any significant extent.  I also share the concern of many market participants and of President Pianalto that longer-term yields could jump as soon as the FOMC signals the conclusion or a reduction of our asset purchases, or the onset of active tightening, resulting in substantial losses for some fixed-income investors, including financial institutions that are exposed to interest rate risk.  Such concerns seem justifiable, given that we have previously seen sharp movements in longer-term yields when the FOMC has ended or signaled that it would soon end a period of highly accommodative policy.  For example, between January and October of 1994, the yield on 10-year Treasuries rose around 200 basis points, triggering steep losses for many fixed-income investors, including municipalities and companies that had undertaken leveraged, interest-sensitive derivative bets.  Longer-term Treasury yields also rose in 2004.  Between January, when the FOMC shifted its forward guidance from “considerable period” to “measured pace,” and early May, the 10-year yield rose about 80 basis points.  One important difference between the two episodes was that the 1994 tightening cycle entailed larger surprises about the path of the federal funds rate than the 2004 cycle.  According to the staff’s term structure model, roughly 100 basis points of the movement in the 10-year yield in 1994 reflected shifts in market expectations concerning the path of short-term rates—an expectational shift, it turns out, that was overblown.  It far exceeded the actual increase in short rates during that tightening episode.  In 2004, in contrast, shifts in the expected path of short rates accounted for only 30 basis points of the movement in longer-term rates.  It will probably not come as a surprise that the chair of the subcommittee on communications attributes much of this difference to strides in FOMC communications [laughter] since the early 1990s.  That said, staff models attribute a significant portion of the jump in long-term yields in both episodes to upward shifts in term premiums, amounting to 100 basis points in the earlier episode and about 50 in 2004, and we could see such shifts again. I see no theoretical reason why the entirety of the reduction in the term premium resulting from our asset purchases should rapidly unwind.  And I hope that our very considerable efforts to clearly communicate our policy intentions will mitigate disruption in fixed-income markets whenthe time arrives to signal the end of our purchases.  That said, Treasury yields and term premiums are at unprecedented low levels.  Many factors influence them, and we can’t have much confidence about how markets will react when they come to anticipate the end of our asset purchases or, for that matter, the approach of liftoff.  So while I consider it appropriate to continue our asset purchase program, I also think we should regularly and systematically evaluate its efficacy and remain vigilant to the potential emergence of financial stability risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by one person and there are no conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 225.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 226.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  For my forecast, I chose the “Robust Housing Recovery” scenario from the alternative scenarios in the Tealbook.  I, too, am still worried about the fiscal cliff, but I can’t figure out how to include those worries in my projections, so I am willing to accept the staff projections as being as good as any.  I also agree with the Vice Chairman about the financial strength of the businesses, the households, and the financial institutions; I actually had that in my earlier notes. In addition, I am quite encouraged by the continued signs of momentum in the housing recovery, helped, I believe, by our MBS purchases.  And I think this momentum may have even more potential than the staff baseline assumes.  I also believe that rising house prices will have spillover effects in confidence, but I am not sure it goes as far as the “Housing Reverberations” alternative. House price increases are currently being driven by very low inventories of both new and existing homes for sale, and to some degree by demand from improving household formation.  Many analysts, including in the staff forecast, temper house price expectations with concerns about shadow inventory, in particular, an expectation that large numbers of foreclosures have been held back and will be dumped on the market at some point.  I think that fear is overblown, as severely past-due loans are increasingly concentrated in a handful of states where legal   impediments are impeding foreclosures.  The legal situation doesn’t seem likely to change rapidly, but markets are heating up anyway in places like Florida and Las Vegas.  The two other states with foreclosure backlogs are New York and New Jersey, and now, adding hurricane damage to the mix, I confess that I don’t know how to think about what is going to happen in those markets. As I said, I think that rising house prices will be a positive influence on consumer confidence and consumer willingness to spend.  For a significant number of households, wealth—especially accessible wealth—is concentrated in home equity.  Increases in home equity can be tapped for emergency funds or used to invest in education or small business.  Young families expect to be able to roll over their equity into larger homes as their families grow, while aging couples may plan to cash out equity for retirement by downsizing their homes.  Whatever their financial vision, home equity plays a role, and improving home equity has to make the dream seem more achievable.  There is an analogy I was going to use to a holiday movie, and I was a little embarrassed by it, but if President Fisher is willing to make his barnyard analogy [laughter], I’ll move ahead with mine. In the movie It’s a Wonderful Life, they keep saying that every time a bell rings, an angel gets its wings.  So to make a somewhat cheesy comparison, I think that every time home prices tick up a notch, a household pops above water on its mortgage and so regains its financial wings. I also see hope on the residential construction horizon.  New home sales are picking up, but, more importantly, the mix of those sales has been steadily shifting from homes already completed to homes not yet started.  This shift implies more boost to construction than the sales of standing inventory.  When the largest homebuilders were in here last week, I was struck by the nature of their concerns—trouble finding labor, increased delivery times—as these are the   problems of an industry gearing up for more production, and certainly different from the near hopelessness that they projected in previous visits. I talked before about mortgage lending capacity, and it remains a problem, but I think capacity is beginning to expand.  Concentration of lending in the largest originators seems to have peaked, as others are attracted to expand or enter the business.  Bankers have strong incentives to increase capacity, lower rates, and ease standards over the next year.  They are still working on their 2013 budgets, looking for any revenue sources or cost savings to offset their declining interest margins.  From my conversations with them, it sounds like it will take at least 5 percent loan growth just to keep dollar margins even, and mortgage origination is the only business I know of that offers any real potential for fee income growth.  Earnings pressure seems, to me, to point to continued easing of credit for all loan types.  Admittedly, mortgage credit conditions will encounter additional headwinds as the new regulatory requirements that were contained in Dodd–Frank are finalized in January.  It looks like these rules will hit portfolio lending and private securitization especially hard, as there are likely to be carve-outs and exceptions for government-supported loans.  So I think the need for banks to produce revenue, along with some resolution of rep and warrant issues, could combine to offset these headwinds and gradually improve credit conditions for borrowers who meet the standards for GSE or government-guaranteed loans. Low mortgage rates will not, by themselves, compensate for all of the problems still stifling the housing recovery, but they could provide enough momentum for the positive factors to begin to outweigh the negative ones.  And a stronger housing recovery is the most likely scenario I can construct for a stronger economic recovery.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker agrees with several points made by others and expresses optimism about the housing recovery. There is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude by the speaker addressing Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 228.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only expresses gratitude towards Governor Raskin, there is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 229.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As many around the table have noted, the conundrum of what appeared to be a schism between consumer confidence and business confidence—business confidence was down while consumer confidence was up—is no longer a schism.  We now know that both are down, so we have one less puzzle to solve.  Looking at the glass as half full, there’s the good news.  [Laughter]  More seriously, aggregate U.S. household net worth is now approaching the level it had reached before the financial crisis cracked the nest eggs of many households.  Net worth has been driven up over the past few years by welcome gains in the value of homes and equities, and at the same time that these household assets have increased in value, household debt has been reduced.  In particular, home mortgage debt has been on a downward trend.  All told, the value of household net worth stood at $64.8 trillion at the end of the third quarter.  Although adjusting these figures for inflation and a rising population diminishes the positive wealth news story to some extent, it is still true that real per capita household wealth positions appear to have improved somewhat over the past few years, which should bode well for economic growth. But it’s not the whole story, and that’s because these are only the wealth effects, and any story about the household sector leans importantly on income, which is a much more significant driver. Income has been pretty lackluster in this recovery.  Over the most recent four quarters, real disposable income rose just 1½ percent, following an increase of just ½ percent in the preceding four quarters. The latest data are weaker than the staff had been expecting, and, of course, the anticipated expiration of both the payroll tax cut and the Emergency Unemployment Compensation program at the end of this year will further reduce households’ disposable income.  The effect this income drop is likely to have on consumption was foreshadowed by the recent drop in consumer confidence, which turned down as households pondered the possibility of repeal of the Bush tax cuts and payroll tax cuts and the accompanying lower monthly paychecks. The recent weak income is a further symptom of a weak economy.  It’s taking a long time for the typical household to recover.  The typical household, after all, probably has more housing wealth than stockholder wealth.  The typical household has been touched, if not brought down, by the effects of unemployment.  The typical household has flat real wages, so it is not experiencing a comfort in spending as had been typical for that typical household.  I’m very concerned with the slow dynamics of this recovery. In that regard, I found the Aaronson, Fallick, Nekarda, and Wascher memo on assessing labor market conditions particularly illuminating from a perspective of putting these slow dynamics into the context of different employment measures. We need to look at a variety of measures because a given level of unemployment today is translating into lower real wages for the typical household than it would have a few years ago.  One thing we’re seeing in this recovery is that more jobs don’t always mean jobs that produce enough disposable income that can move us out of the mud.  The unemployment rate alone doesn’t tell us much about the quality of the employment associated with the job creation.  Back in 2007, there was a small difference between the unemployment rate, which was 4.4 percent, and the measure of unemployment that included discouraged workers, which was then slightly higher at 4.6 percent.  Back in 2007, the U-6, which also includes marginally employed people seeking full-time work, was 8 percent.  Today, as President Williams and Governor Tarullo suggest, the differences in these labor market measures are much wider.  The standard unemployment rate is 7.7 percent, but it is higher at 8.4 percent when discouraged workers are included and even higher at 14.4 percent when the underemployed are included.  Having such a large set of people underemployed may be a reason that the employed are not generating much income. If the jobs that are available right now are increasingly low-wage, part-time, dead-end jobs, it will take more time for real disposable income to begin to rise rapidly enough to kick off a more promising recovery.  Even if the new jobs themselves are not inherently low-wage, part-time, or dead-end, for those households still in debt and attempting to pay monthly bills, for those households who have experienced a loss of a significant source of repayment for their debts and their bills, for those households looking to find a job with the same income-producing capability as before, with the ability to negotiate a higher starting salary still very much impaired—for those households, there appears to still be no sense of a robust recovery.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the positive news about household net worth and wealth, but then highlights the negative aspects of weak income, slow recovery, and low-quality employment. This suggests a disagreement about the overall state of the economy and the effectiveness of the recovery.


Passage number 230.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Thank you" expressed by the speaker does not suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 231.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Once again, many of my observations about the outlook have been eloquently exposited by others around the table, so I’ll be brief in the hope that I can get away with being a little bit more long-winded tomorrow. In terms of a modal forecast, I may be just a touch more optimistic than the Tealbook.  I had forecast unemployment to be about 7.4 or 7.5 percent at the end of 2013 versus the 7.8 percent figure in the Tealbook.  The story I would tell is that I expect things, as it sounds like many others do, to be slow over the first half of 2013.  And then with some luck, as the uncertainty from the fiscal cliff dissipates, or at least as the worst case outcomes are taken off the table, the underlying positives—again, that many people have mentioned in housing and autos, in credit availability, and in the balance sheets of nonfinancial firms—begin to assert themselves.  Businesses get up off the sidelines and step up a bit on hiring and investment spending.  So even with the remaining fiscal drag in late 2013 and going into 2014, I would expect economic growth to move up into something like the 3 percent range, which would start to make a dent in unemployment. But really the only point I’d like to make here is that this scenario, even if it’s the most likely case, is not the one that I think is the most relevant for us in terms of thinking about the policy choices that we’re actually facing at the moment.  I think the scenario we need to be visualizing and wrestling with, and it’s one that strikes me as only a little bit less likely, is the Groundhog Day scenario.  It’s where we wake up six months from now, and we wake up again a year from now, and in each case, unemployment is not 7.5 percent and we’re not really seeing any clear signs of progress.  Rather it is still in the 7.8 percent to 8.2 percent neighborhood, and, as best as we can tell, six months from now and a year from now, the forecast six months further out looks like it’s more of the same. Moreover, in the scenario I have in mind, it’s not due to any obvious terrible shocks that we can point to, but just due to some muddled mix of small disappointments.  And as Governor Yellen suggested, these kinds of disappointments would be just enough to make inferences about efficacy kind of tricky.  There’s this little bit of background noise, and we haven’t really learned that much about efficacy from the data over the last few years.  So it would be a lot to expect that we would learn much more about it in the next 12 months.  What would those disappointments be. Perhaps, following on the somewhat disappointing news about consumer sentiment we saw in Friday’s release, there will be some lingering pessimism.  Even if there’s somewhat of a resolution of the fiscal cliff, people will feel incompletely satisfied by that.  Or as I think both President Williams and Vice Chairman Dudley alluded to, you could imagine that even with a reasonable resolution, there’s going to be some fiscal drag, and maybe the fiscal multipliers associated with that are going to be a little bit higher than we anticipated, or Europe will be a little bit weaker, or something along those lines. Again, the situation I have in mind is one where it’s the end of 2013, and we can’t really argue by any reasonable metric that there has been meaningful progress in the labor market outlook, much less the actual state of the labor market. And to the extent that the Tealbook is calling for 7.8 percent as the modal outcome at that point, I think that the scenario I’m sketching is maybe a fraction of a standard deviation on the pessimistic side.  So as I said, I think this case is the one we really need to be wrestling with, and at some level, the whole framing of our open-ended asset purchase strategy, to me, hangs on two questions:  What do we want to be doing a year from now, if we are in this scenario.  And, second, once we figure that out, how do we solve backward from that point and explain it to markets in a coherent and time-consistent fashion.  I hope that we’ll spend some time on that tomorrow.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is sharing their observations and forecasts about the economic outlook and discussing different scenarios.


Passage number 232.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a polite expression of gratitude to Governor Powell.


Passage number 233.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My medium-term forecast has not changed a great deal since the last SEP.  Like others, I continue to believe that our economy will have a run of above-potential growth that will bring us nearer to full employment and full output.  In fact, I thought Vice Chairman Dudley did a great job of giving the case for optimism in the medium term.  However, I am increasingly doubtful that this improvement is going to occur during 2013.  I suspect that for most of 2013, we will remain in the world of 2 percent economic growth and 2 percent inflation, maybe even a little bit lower in both cases, with modest progress, therefore, on reducing unemployment.  Now, when I realized that that put me outside the central tendency in the SEP, I resisted the temptation to change my answer and decided to defend it.  I think I’m higher only than President Lacker, and my thinking starts, but does not end, with the fiscal negotiations. There is every reason to think—and here I’m going to flirt with Bill Dudley’s challenge to make a prediction and then ultimately disappoint you—that these negotiations will be as messy as the summer of 2011 debt ceiling standoff.  The 2011 situation was really a war of choice: It was about the debt ceiling and, to some extent, about discretionary spending.  It wasn’t about entitlement spending in a serious way. It was, all in all, kind of a self-inflicted wound, and sort of beside the point.  The current exercise is a war of necessity. The expiration of the tax and spending provisions makes it unavoidable, and this time a whole lot more is at stake.  As others have said, I think the most likely path will be some kind of a short-term agreement to raise taxes, keep the government open, raise the debt ceiling, and then set in place a legislative process to take place throughout 2013 to reform the tax code and control future entitlement spending. The House majority has made clear that it intends to use the debt ceiling as a leverage point again.  All in all, it could be as much as a full year—and I suppose even more—of very messy negotiations, and that will mean further blows to consumer and business confidence, a global risk-off environment, and a strong dollar.  In fact, I actually think that we should both expect and welcome this outcome; the last thing we need is a quick kick of the can down the road.  This stuff is very hard and very important, and if it’s not painful and messy, that’s probably a bad sign. I think we’re already seeing aspects of this narrative.  The consumer has been the bearer of our hopes these last few months, and some parts of the consumer story are still intact, particularly around houses and cars, but spending has been weak, as others have pointed out.  And then last Friday the Michigan survey showed a really precipitous, broad-based drop in expectations for business conditions one and five years out, for personal financial expectations, and for employment.  These are still high confidence levels compared with 2008 and 2009, but the delta, or the change, is remarkable.  I know it’s only one month, and I wouldn’t take too much signal, but at a minimum it’s a serious downside risk.  And, of course, the interesting question is, what brought this change on.  Developments in the real economy do not explain the change.  It has to be the fiscal negotiations, but they’ve only begun.  If this blow to confidence is coming in the second week of December, it could be a long year.  Although as Governor Tarullo indicated, it may be less about the beginning of negotiations and more about the realization of higher taxes coming, in which case most of the blow could be now.  But there are other signs of weakness:  I would point to corporate profits, which have been down; guidance has been down across the board; capital spending is down and weak.  My industrial contacts report nothing but weakness and significant layoffs in the coming months.The bottom line is that I don’t see a lot of momentum going into 2013.  I don’t see a 2½ percent growth year without fiscal headwinds, and I certainly don’t see it with fiscal headwinds, notwithstanding what I would characterize as my medium-term optimism.  I know there’s hope for progress in the second half, but I really do think that a successful outcome in the fiscal negotiations is far more important than getting back on track quickly in 2013.  And for now, that seems unlikely anyway.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their doubts about the improvement of the economy in 2013 due to messy fiscal negotiations, but they do not directly contradict any other opinions or statements.


Passage number 234.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Up to a sign error.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a humorous comment as indicated by the use of "[Laughter]" before the statement.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions for Bill.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there are questions for Bill, who is the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 236.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have two questions.  One, why do you think the “initially” would be taken as one-sided rather than two-sided.  I mean, in the context of the fiscal cliff being resolved in a good way or a bad way, you could imagine it being taken more symmetrically.  I’m just not sure how the market would take it.  And second, in the language that’s in brackets in B, “it sees a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market, the asset purchase program ends”—where the additional conditions are put in—how do you think the market would interpret the motivation for putting that in. Normally when we change things, we change things for a reason.  So I’m just curious what your thought is in terms of what people would draw from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a series of questions and statements seeking clarification and opinion, but there is no direct contention or disagreement.


Passage number 237.
 MR. ENGLISH. On “initially,” I agree, it could be taken either way.  I guess I thought it would be most likely seen as a way of softening the commitment, and, therefore, the direction  might be seen as more likely to be down than up. But I agree that, in part, it just kind of loosens things up and allows for more flexibility, which may be attractive to the Committee. On the extra words in alternative B, paragraph 5, toward the end of the first sentence, the idea there was to spell out a little bit the timing of the purchases versus when the funds rate would be increased.  Because there is a risk that there will be some confusion about the conditions for ending purchases versus the conditions for raising the federal funds rate, those extra words were intended to make it a bit clearer that the Committee will keep monetary policy accommodative for a considerable time after it stops purchasing.  So it spells that out:  “a considerable time after it sees a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market, the asset purchase program ends, and the economic recovery strengthens.” It’s just a way of putting some daylight between the guidance for the purchases and the guidance for the federal funds rate, which we thought some on the Committee might find useful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging different interpretations and providing their own explanation for certain choices made.


Passage number 238.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So what inference would you think market participants would draw from that insertion—a longer period of time between asset purchases ending and interest rates rising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply posing a question about the possible inference that market participants would draw.


Passage number 239.
 MR. ENGLISH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is just stating that Mr. English is present or agreeing to something. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 240.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  They’re not both at 6½.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It merely states a fact about the two entities mentioned.


Passage number 241.
 MR. POTTER.  I think it will depend on where they are.  If it’s the person who thinks we’re still going to be purchasing assets when we raise rates, it might lead them to change their mind.  And you know, in the distribution we have some quite short gaps between the ends of asset purchases and raising rates.  So this would seem to show some confidence that you would not be raising rates for maybe three or four quarters at least; is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own analysis and opinion, discussing the potential impact of a specific situation. They are not disagreeing with anyone else or presenting conflicting views.


Passage number 242.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Something like that, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Something like that, yes" does not show any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It is a vague affirmation or agreement that does not challenge or oppose any previous statement.


Passage number 243.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 244.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a comment and a question.  My comment is that I think we could shorten the statement greatly by making more use of the Chairman’s ex post optimality condition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a comment and asking a question, but there is no indication of disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 245.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Only if you check the math.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The humorous use of "laughter" suggests that the statement about checking math is meant to be perceived as a joke and does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 246.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  My question is about the penultimate sentence of paragraph 5 in alternative B.  This sentence says, “In determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, the Committee will also consider,” and so on.  I didn’t know, and I suspect other readers will be confused, too:  Is that sentence intended to be describing the Committee’s behavior after the thresholds are hit, or is it intended to describe the Committee’s behavior potentially before the thresholds are hit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The passage is simply a question and does not express any disagreement with the information provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 247.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think it’s potentially both.  It’s saying that rather than just looking at these two variables that we just talked about, unemployment and inflation, we’ll be looking at a bunch of stuff and reacting to a bunch of stuff, and I think potentially that could cut either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there could be contention or disagreement because the speaker states that the situation could "cut either way," indicating the possibility of different perspectives or outcomes.


Passage number 248.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is a polite response expressing gratitude.


Passage number 249.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 250.
 MR. FISHER.  Just one small point, although I’m confused by it:  In paragraph 2, we talk about a medium-term 2 percent inflation objective; yet in paragraph 5, we talk about a longer-run goal of inflation of 2 percent.  Is it longer run or medium run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 251.
 MR. ENGLISH. The sentence in paragraph 2 is saying, if you wanted to really spell it out, that inflation over the medium term is likely to run at or below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective for inflation.  So it’s using 2 percent, the longer-run objective, as a benchmark and saying that in the medium term, which is presumably sooner, you’re expecting  the inflation rate to be at or below that 2 percent figure.  So I think there actually is a distinction being made between a forecast over the medium run in paragraph 2 and the Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. English, argues that there is a distinction being made between the forecasted inflation rate over the medium term and the Committee's longer-run objective of 2 percent. This suggests that there may be some contention or difference of opinion regarding the expected inflation rate in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 252.
 MR. FISHER.  I raise that question because I worry that it could create some confusion.  And then we talk about “no more than ½ percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.” What I worry about is that we’re shifting a little bit here, and particularly when we introduce the ½ percentage point above the longer-term goal. A lot of this, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me, depends on your press conference.  You’ve already drafted that; it has been vetted.  Some of us haven’t had the privilege of seeing those drafts. I’m assuming—just to cut to the chase here—that it must be geared toward an alternative, and I would assume that it must be geared toward a variation of this alternative.  And if we go down this path, we have to be very, very careful that it be well articulated.  The statement itself isn’t sufficient, even though we try, by adding these sentences that other people have mentioned.  To me this whole thing depends on how you explain it at the press conference, and we got a very good insight into that by this exercise you put us through earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Fisher raises concerns and expresses worry about potential confusion and a shift in the approach being discussed. He mentions that the success of the alternative plan depends on how it is explained at the press conference, indicating potential disagreement or disagreement about the effectiveness of the plan.


Passage number 253.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I can tell you what I say about it.  I describe it, and then I say monetary policy, however, is not on autopilot.  And I make three points: The first is that—I don’t say it exactly this way—these are thresholds, not triggers; in other words, it is an “at least” condition, not an absolute trigger.  Second, I say that as we consider unemployment in this condition, we’ll want to comfort ourselves that the decline in unemployment is associated with higher payrolls, hours, et cetera, as opposed to a weakening of the labor market—withdrawal, participation declines, and so on.  And then the third part is about the fact that we’re looking at   the projection of inflation, which means that we’ll have to make judgments about where inflation is likely to be, assuming we continue the low-rate policy.  Moreover, I would add that in my general discussion of efficacy and cost, which is more directed toward the LSAPs than to the thresholds, I mention that financial developments are in the list here because one of those costs obviously is financial stability concerns.  So I think I’m more explicit about what we’d be looking at and why there isn’t a simple mechanical formula.  That’s the thinking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any clear contention or disagreement. It is primarily a description and explanation of the speaker's thoughts on monetary policy.


Passage number 254.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher is expressing gratitude.


Passage number 255.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Certainly. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
 MR. BULLARD.  I’m looking at the first figure on page 1 of the handout, the dealer survey versus alternative A, alternative B, and alternative C.  Alternative B is sitting up here, and all the dots are down to the right and south.  It’s making me a little nervous that market expectations are a fair amount off from where we are as a Committee or what we’re thinking of.  Is that how you would interpret this graph, or are you not as concerned about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard expresses his concern about the market expectations being significantly different from the Committee's thinking, indicating some disagreement or tension between the two.


Passage number 257.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think that’s correct for what this graph shows, but there was a graph in Simon’s briefing earlier today that looked at the average probability distribution of the dealers’ assessments of where the balance sheet is going to come out in 2014 when the purchases are done.  The distribution there is very wide, all the way from less than $2.5 trillion to more than $5 trillion, with a lot of weight on figures that would be consistent with either alternative B or alternative A. As I tried to say at the end of my discussion of this first exhibit, there’s a lot of uncertainty in the market participants’ minds about where the purchases are going to end up.  The top of this exhibit shows their point forecast, but around that is a very wide confidence interval, and I think that means that they will be more likely to adjust what their expectations are in response to incoming information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different graphs and noting the wide range of expectations and uncertainty among market participants.


Passage number 258.
   MR. POTTER. We haven’t seen that yet because the outlook really hasn’t changed that much.  If the outlook improved a lot, similar to the handout, then if they didn’t move their expectation back in, that would suggest they have a different view of what the reaction function is or the cost-benefits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have not seen a change in outlook yet, and speculating on what that would suggest if it were to occur. There is no explicit disagreement or conflicting views presented.


Passage number 259.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 260.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context about Governor Tarullo's actions or opinions, so we cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 261.
 MR. TARULLO.  Bill’s answers to some previous questions have answered my question, which has accordingly morphed into a comment, which accordingly belongs tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that the previous answers have addressed their question, turning it into a comment that will be discussed tomorrow.


Passage number 262.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’ll reread the transcript.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It includes an indication of laughter and a statement about re-reading the transcript, but no conflicting viewpoints or arguments are presented.


Passage number 263.
 MR. POWELL.  I am following up on Jim’s question.  If the market were to read the first bullet point in the lower-left corner of page 1—“Eight of you indicated that your balance sheet projections did not differ materially from staff’s”—what would that do to the mass of the dealer expectations distribution that Simon talked about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. 

The speaker is simply seeking clarification on what the market's response would be to a specific point mentioned in the document.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 264.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think they’d actually have to read all three of those bullet points.  That eight of you were reasonably comfortable with what the staff was writing down; that’s alternative B.  Seven of you felt there should be more purchases than that, and four of you less.  Given that, I think their distribution would move down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that seven people felt there should be more purchases than what was recorded, four people felt there should be less, and eight people were comfortable with the staff's writing. This indicates differing opinions and a lack of consensus.


Passage number 265.
 MR. POTTER.  They would also be very interested who the seven were as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions. It is a straightforward statement about the interest in knowing the identities of the "seven."


Passage number 266.
 MR. ENGLISH. Yes, of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Mr. English. Yes, of course." It is a simple response indicating agreement or understanding.


Passage number 267.
 MR. POWELL.  Generally, though, it could move the distribution to the left.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a general statement about the potential effect of something without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 268.
  MR. POTTER.  If they saw that the unemployment rate forecasts that were associated with this alternative were a little bit higher, that would be confusing to them because, as Bill said, they have slightly lower unemployment rates than the forecast that we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing a hypothetical situation where others might be confused if they saw higher unemployment rate forecasts associated with an alternative.


Passage number 269.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you recall what their unemployment rate for the fourth quarter of 2013 is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a straightforward question asking for the recollection of a specific piece of information. There is no room for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 270.
 MR. POTTER. I have it; let me see if I can find it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply stating that he has something and wants to find it.


Passage number 271.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. Well, while you’re looking, President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the given passage. The statement is a neutral response and does not involve any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 272.
 MR. ENGLISH.  It would be about 7½ percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states a percentage and does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 273.
 MR. BULLARD.  So, Bill, it seems to me like one of the things that is happening is that we may give more guidance on the policy rates, but we’re not giving a similar guidance on the balance sheet, or should I reread alternative B as somehow giving that kind of guidance. Because what we have in mind is:  You’re going to end one program, then you’re going to continue for a while, and then you’re going to end the other.  What is it about our statement that’s meant to give that sort of impression.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and understanding about the guidance being provided on policy rates and the balance sheet.


Passage number 274.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Sorry.  Do you mean on the timing or on the size of the purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is a simple question seeking clarification.


Passage number 275.
 MR. BULLARD.  I mean, what I’m sensing around the table is we have in mind that something goes on for about nine months or a year on the balance sheet and goes on longer than that with the policy rate, but I’m not sure that’s being conveyed out there to the market, and that’s why we have this kind of a picture in the graph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Bullard expressing his perception of a discrepancy between the understanding at the table and the perception in the market.


Passage number 276.
 MR. ENGLISH. That sense of the relative timing of purchases versus the funds rate is conveyed qualitatively in the words at the very top of page 7 of the handout that Vice Chairman Dudley asked about a few minutes ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. It simply refers to a discussion about the timing of purchases and funds rate and Vice Chairman Dudley's inquiry about it.


Passage number 277.
 MR. BULLARD. “The asset purchase program ends,” at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is stating a simple fact that the asset purchase program will end at a certain point.


Passage number 278.
MR. LACKER.  Paragraph 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement in paragraph 4 as it is not provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 279.
 MR. ENGLISH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the fact that someone named Mr. English is responding or opposing something or someone in the conversation.


Passage number 280.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Did you find the number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply asks a question and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 281.
 MR. POTTER. It’s 7.5 percent.  They moved down from 7.6 to 7.5 percent.  So they’re at the lower end of the central tendency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not express any form of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a fact about a percentage without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 282.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of Governor Duke do not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 283.
 MS. DUKE.  Bill, will this information about what all the participants thought about the balance sheet or the size of the program be in the minutes in the discussion of the SEP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 284.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Normally we have a paragraph in the SEP write-up that goes through the information from the SEP on balance sheet expectations, and something like this information, I think, would be there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple explanation of the normal procedure for including information in a paragraph of the SEP write-up.


Passage number 285.
 MS. DUKE. So that paragraph would include this information.  Okay.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply acknowledging the content of a paragraph and expressing gratitude.


Passage number 286.
 MR. POTTER. It was in last time, and they didn’t seem to notice an inconsistency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states that an inconsistency was present in the previous time, but nobody seemed to notice it.


Passage number 287.
 MS. DUKE.  Well, last time it only said that 11 people expected to start purchases.  It didn’t say anything about the size of the purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the previous information they received, specifically about the number of people expecting to make purchases and the lack of information regarding the size of those purchases.


Passage number 288.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s right, but they should be able to do math and work out who those 11 could be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. The statement made by Mr. Potter is simply stating a belief or expectation about being able to identify the 11 individuals in question through mathematical reasoning.


Passage number 289.
 MR. ENGLISH.  But I actually do think—and I’d be interested if Simon agrees—that they’ll notice this information when it’s in the SEP write-up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests that they believe the information will be noticed, and asks if Simon agrees with their opinion. There is no indication of disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 290.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes, they didn’t seem to notice last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply stating that someone did not notice something previously. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 291.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How are you going to describe the staff benchmark there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for information on how the staff benchmark will be described, without presenting any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 292.
 MR. TARULLO.  That was my question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply restates their previous question.


Passage number 293.
 MR. ENGLISH. Only qualitatively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. English is stating that something is only qualitative, indicating that it is based on qualities or characteristics rather than quantities or numbers.


Passage number 294.
  MR. TARULLO.  So seven people think it’s going to be higher than some unspecified benchmark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply reporting the opinion of seven individuals without any indication of disagreement or differing views.


Passage number 295.
 MS. DUKE.  Or you could say seven people think it’s going to be 750.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting two possible options, and there is no indication of any disagreement between individuals.


Passage number 296.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without more context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 297.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  One of the challenges that President Bullard showed with that figure, I think, is partly the result of the Tealbook being more pessimistic on the unemployment rate than most of the rest of us.  The central tendency is 7.4 to 7.7 percent for 2013, and the Tealbook is at 7.8 percent.  So if you looked at the central tendency of the voters that are voting for this was, my guess is that that dot would be a good bit lower than the dot that you’re showing right now.  I can understand why the dealers are coming up with a different answer, which is that substantial improvement in labor markets doesn’t look like something higher than where we are now.  I think some of the inconsistency is tied to that paragraph 4, and the difference between the Tealbook and some of the rest of our forecasts that are shown in the economic projection.  So they’re not going to see those three dots for A, B, and C, but I do think that some of that disconnection is tied to the differences in both the forecast and people’s reading of paragraph 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: There is disagreement between the Tealbook's forecast of the unemployment rate (7.8 percent) and the rest of the group's forecast (7.4 to 7.7 percent). This is causing some inconsistency and a disconnect in people's interpretation of paragraph 4.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions for Bill. We obviously will have plenty of time tomorrow morning to continue.  Okay, we will adjourn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply acknowledging that there will be more time to continue the discussion tomorrow morning.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 299.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman. I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I'm sorry" indicates that the speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, apologizes for something or disagrees with something that the chairman said or did.


Passage number 300.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "President Kocherlakota" without providing any context or indicating any controversy or disagreement regarding him. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 301.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I apologize.  I came in late.  Is it possible to make your handout available on SDS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a potential disagreement or contention in the passage. This is indicated by the phrase "I apologize" which suggests that the speaker might have done something wrong or made a mistake by not having the handout available.


Passage number 302.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 303.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 304.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  We’ll reconvene tomorrow morning at 8:30.  Obviously, if you have any changes in your SEP projections, please provide those as soon as possible.  A reception is now available upstairs, followed by dinner.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information and instructions regarding scheduling, providing updates, and announcing a reception and dinner. There is no indication of any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 305.
 [Meeting recessed]   December 12 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We’ve had our opening presentation by Mr. English, and so we’re ready to begin our policy go-round.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply gives an update on the progress of the meeting and indicates that they are moving on to the next agenda item.


Passage number 306.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude and does not show any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 307.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you. President Plosser" does not provide any indication of disagreement or contention. It is simply expressing gratitude towards President Plosser.


Passage number 308.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 309.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 310.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  On the date-based guidance, were you saying “with its most recent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 311.
” MR. LOCKHART.  I suggest either to say the “most recent date-based guidance,” so that there is no confusion as to the two previous date-based guidances, or to say, “The Committee currently views these thresholds as consistent with the mid-2015 forward guidance introduced last September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, is suggesting alternative wording to avoid confusion or ambiguity regarding the different date-based guidances mentioned.


Passage number 312.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 313.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Rosengren.


Passage number 314.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I closely associate myself with the remarks of Vice Chairman Dudley.  His eloquence makes it easy to justify my practice of being succinct. I support alternative B with the language in paragraph 5 that includes thresholds.  The improvement in interest-sensitive sectors is an important counterbalance to the headwinds created by fiscal policy uncertainty.  Given the fragility of the recovery, as well as the practical limits to the size of MBS purchases, it is prudent to continue Treasury purchases of $45 billion as the maturity extension program expires.  Both the Board memo on asset purchases as well as   research done by the Boston research department indicate that this purchase program will provide important support to an economy still experiencing economic growth too slow to get substantial improvement in labor markets.  Such a policy action will also help us reach the inflation target that we stated at the beginning of this year.  In both my forecast and that of the Tealbook, we’ve continued to undershoot our inflation target for the entire forecast horizon.  If one excludes the volatile food and energy sectors, the four-quarter moving average of the change in core PCE has been below 2 percent for four years, and we expect it to remain below our target for another three years. To my eye, it is difficult to consider monetary policy highly accommodative when we undershoot on our inflation and employment targets for an expected seven consecutive years.  Even if we just had one mandate and that was an inflation mandate, I would argue that we should be doing more.  Additional asset purchases are needed to shorten the time we continue to miss on both elements of our mandate. If we do conclude asset purchases are being less efficacious, we should actively seek alternative policies that will more quickly reach our mandate.  We should change our tool, not our goal.  So I don’t agree with the Groundhog Day analogy.  I think that if we find that what we’re doing now is not being efficacious, then we have to search for other ways to try to reach our dual mandate. I strongly support the introduction of thresholds in paragraph 5.  We should calibrate the likely path of our policy on economic outcomes, not on calendar dates or purchase amounts.  This is a particularly good time to announce a communications guideline that serves as an automatic stabilizer so that markets do not overreact to the inevitable fiscal bumps that are likely over the next several months.  The proposed threshold makes clear that we are focused on economic outcomes that are more consistent with our mandate and that we intend to take forcefulactions to shorten the time until we re-attain our inflation and unemployment goals.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is expressing support for alternative B and the language in paragraph 5. He agrees with Vice Chairman Dudley and argues for the continuation of Treasury purchases and additional asset purchases to reach the inflation and employment targets. He also supports the introduction of thresholds and calibrating policy based on economic outcomes.


Passage number 315.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards someone, specifically President Evans.


Passage number 316.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B with the threshold language in paragraph 5. I support the LSAPs as they are described and the flow quantities in alternative B.  After listening to Vice Chairman Dudley speak so well about the efficacy and the cost of purchases language in the alternative, I think that’s highly appropriate.  I thought your comments yesterday were a good initial framework for our future discussions about that, and I look forward to those discussions and evaluations over the coming year. As I said, I support paragraph 5 on thresholds in the alternative.  It’s artfully crafted to take into account some of the concerns that were raised at previous meetings.  It describes the economic conditions that would prevail after some time is passed, after the recovery has strengthened.  It captures our commitment to the longer-run inflation goal of 2 percent and conveys that a symmetric view of that goal allows a moderate overshooting of 2 percent. Indeed, the ½ percentage point upside threshold on the goal is about the same magnitude as the undershooting of inflation over the next few years currently projected in the Tealbook, and it operationalizes quite well the idea that 2 percent is not a ceiling, but it’s a symmetric goal. The paragraph also notes the wide range of information we will consider to make sure that the unemployment rate is not sending a misleading signal about the economy, and it emphasizes the balanced approach we will take to policy once we begin raising rates.  In other words, paragraph 5 implements many of the important characteristics of an optimal policy path with commitment. I disagree with the contention that we haven’t thought enough about this or seen enough analysis.  In fact, we’ve seen lots of analysis going back to last summer. In 2011 we first saw thresholds analyzed in the context of FRB/US.  And we know that theory indicates that such a path can deliver better outcomes with regard to both the employment and inflation components of our dual mandate— specifically better outcomes than a completely discretionary policy and better than one that adheres to a simple rule that doesn’t account for the extended period in which policy has been constrained by the zero lower bound. I’m optimistic that we can communicate to the public that this is a threshold, not a trigger. All we have to do is talk about it a little bit more, you in your press conference and others around the table.  All of us can help clarify that, and I don’t think anybody has the desire to confuse that.  It’s in the public’s interest to understand it better.  As many people in this room have noted, there are serious drawbacks to using calendar dates to communicate our commitment to keeping rates low for a time after the economy has strengthened. In current circumstances, we want to reinforce the public’s understanding that we will leave policy in its highly accommodative state beyond the point at which, in the absence of the period of zero bound constraint, the economic outlook would typically dictate raising the funds rate.  Importantly, this liftoff point is defined in terms of economic conditions, and because the outlook will change in response to the inevitable arrival of exogenous shocks, things like your g, the date we would expect to reach these conditions will also change over time. In our current statement, we’ve been using the calendar date—and it changes—to convey this deviation from what we would ordinarily do.  That is a pretty indirect way to get across our message.  We can provide much more clarity to the public by making a statement in terms of well-known indicators, like unemployment and inflation, of the economic conditions we’ll need to see before considering raising rates.  Such a statement would also mean that it will be more obvious if we deviate from this marker. I would say that this is helpful discipline for our policies.  This is analogous to thestandard argument that announcing an explicit numerical inflation objective provides a better anchor for inflation expectations.  Thresholds provide a better anchor for our state-contingent policy intentions.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 317.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 318.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you for your confidence.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 319.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would prefer no further expansion of our balance sheet with longer-term Treasury purchases at this meeting.  In yesterday’s go-round, several people offered important insights on labor market conditions, noting the challenges that remain in achieving full employment.  And yet, the recovery in labor markets has made significant progress over the past year.  In particular, the 1 percentage point decline in the unemployment rate over the past year is a notable improvement in labor market conditions, and the progress is greater than expected last year. For example, in last year’s fourth-quarter survey, the Survey of Professional Forecasters anticipated the average unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of this year to be 8.7 percent.  Looking at the individual forecasts, the current unemployment rate is below every estimate except one in the panel from a year ago. While a portion of the decline in the unemployment rate is due to the 0.4 percentage point decline in labor force participation, nonfarm employment growth has exceeded professional forecasters’ expectations over the past year by a total of about 600,000 jobs.  Similarly, the developments in the housing sector have outpaced forecast.  A year ago, the median forecast in the Survey of Professional Forecasters was anticipating an average annual pace of about 710,000 housing starts in the fourth quarter of this year.  The pace in October was closer to 900,000, suggesting that improvement in housing activity has also been outperforming expectations over the past year.  Given that improvement in labor and housing market conditions have exceeded expectations, applying more accommodation to better-than-expected data strikes me as potentially inconsistent with appropriate monetary policy.I also see the effect of even lower longer-term rates as unlikely to provide sufficient benefits to the economy to justify the future risk and costs that may come with a larger balance sheet.  A recent analysis by my staff looked at the New York Fed’s consumer credit panel and noted the steep decline in the number of consumers taking on more debt during the recession.  While this measure is slowly recovering, it continues to suggest that relatively few borrowers are taking advantage of the current level of historically low interest rates.  Tight credit conditions are one explanation, but my staff’s analysis indicates demand factors are at play, too.  Even consumers with excellent credit scores, those living in affluent areas, and consumers from parts of the country that were less affected by the housing bubble are reluctant to take on more debt compared with earlier behavior.  Thus, it appears to me that the level of interest rates is not the primary consideration to consumers when deciding to take on more debt. Finally, in terms of guidance, I agree with others that moving away from the calendar-based guidance is important.  Turning to thresholds raises other issues, but to the extent they are, in fact, interpreted as indicative and not binding, as Vice Chairman Dudley notes, they may improve our communication.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. George, is expressing her own opinions and observations but does not directly contradict or argue against any other opinions or statements.


Passage number 320.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only expresses gratitude towards President Pianalto.


Passage number 321.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have been concerned for some time now about the consequences of large-scale asset purchases for future financial stability issues, market functioning, and our ability to unwind our balance sheet in a safe and timely manner.  I also think that the marginal benefits of asset purchases are likely to be declining, and the marginal costs and risks are likely to be increasing.  So for me, today, the litmus test for additional purchases is whether I think the marginal benefits exceed the marginal costs and risks.  At a scale of   $1 trillion, which is evidently what is expected by market participants, I think the benefits fall short of the risks.  There are a few considerations behind my concerns. The staff’s note on the implications of additional security purchases for the exit strategy principles cautions that a purchase program greater than $500 billion next year could result in a portfolio that is difficult to unwind, according to our published exit principles, without impairing market functioning.  Rising interest rate scenarios in which we are not remitting earnings to the Treasury, and we are taking capital losses, are also scenarios in which private investors are likely to be taking large capital losses.  As I mentioned yesterday, my financial market contacts are very concerned about how a range of investors might react to these circumstances. I understand that future financial stability issues are particularly challenging to assess, but they should not be dismissed.  I was sitting right here in this very chair in 2004, 2005, and 2006 when we were reviewing charts that were showing housing prices rising.  We were looking at the subprime mortgage markets, and the Committee concluded that we could not do much about housing prices rising and that the subprime mortgage market was so small that it wouldn’t cause damage to the economy.  We were focused on price stability and maximum employment.  So it is important to me that we put more emphasis on financial stability.  The work being done by the staff is a good start.  The financial stability reports continue to be very effective and continue to improve.  But I want to make sure that we think outside the box and not just focus on those risks that got us into the most-recent financial crisis, but also think about some risks that we might be facing in the future. Based on these concerns, I would be more comfortable with an asset purchase program of the size that is assumed in the Tealbook—that is, a total of $750 billion in security purchases.  For a program of this size, I think that it would be more appropriate to start with a pace ofTreasury purchases that is smaller than is incorporated in alternative B, such as the purchase rate of $35 billion that President Bullard mentioned earlier, for many of the same reasons that he mentioned.  The slower pace would give us more room to extend the program in the second half of the year and still keep the program at about $500 billion of purchases next year.  In your case number 2, Mr. Chairman, that you presented yesterday, it may take more time in particular to assess the improvements in the outlook for labor markets.  And if we do not start with a slower pace, we will need to start tapering as early as March.  And then, we are going to have to be prepared to explain to the public why a slower pace in March is necessary, even though we have not seen an improvement in labor markets.  Now, I agree with the comments that President Lockhart made about the communication challenge that we are going to have.  I do, though, realize that my preferred, more-gradual pace of purchases would be a surprise to financial markets at a time when markets are already on edge because of the concern about the fiscal cliff.  Under these circumstances, we may have to proceed with a $45 billion Treasury purchase program.  But we also should begin to take some steps to send a signal to markets that the Committee does not necessarily see that the ultimate size of the program is going to be as big as they are expecting now.  Mr. Chairman, you can use your press conference to clarify that the asset purchase program could be scaled back, relative to current market expectations, as progress is made on the outlook for labor markets and as risks to financial stability and our exit strategy grow as our balance sheet expands. I can very reluctantly support alternative B as long as we do take some steps to ratchet back market expectations.  Right now, as we have all been commenting, they are focused on improvements in labor markets. I think it is also important for us to remind them that we are also very closely reviewing the efficacy and the cost of purchases. President Fisher made the  recommendation that if we remove the labor market reference in paragraph 5, it might help—it is a very small step, but at least it is removing labor market improvements in one more place in the statement.  As a Committee, we just have to continue to closely monitor the efficacy of the purchases and more important the implications for financial stability and for our exit strategy. Apparently, as I am speaker number 11, the minutes are also going to help pare back market expectations because there has been a lot of discussion by many of the participants about the concerns associated with the large asset purchase program and the implications for financial stability and our balance sheet. Finally, I remain open to adjusting the language of the forward guidance to be data-driven.  I have some of the same concerns, again, that President Bullard mentioned in using a forecast for inflation. When we had this conversation about forward guidance, I mentioned that I do have some concerns about using a forecast for inflation.  I continue to think a 7 percent unemployment rate would make a better threshold than 6½ percent because I have an estimate for the longer-run unemployment rate at around 6 percent, in which case waiting until the unemployment rate falls to 6½ percent carries too much inflation risk for me.  That said, I am willing to compromise on the unemployment threshold as long as we remain vigilant in the application of the inflation threshold.  I am also willing, Mr. Chairman, to support the threshold language, again, if you use your press conference to explain the motivation behind the change and to make the necessary qualifications, including an explanation of what additional measures we will be looking at for the labor market conditions as well as the kinds of measures that we will be looking at in projecting inflation.  Again, my biggest concerns with the threshold language—and I know I’m sounding like a broken record at this meeting—are the same concerns that I have around the larger LSAP program, and that is that we should not only be focused on   the unemployment rate and price stability, but also make sure that we stay focused on financial stability developments. And that is in the statement language, and, again, it can be emphasized through your press statement.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 322.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite acknowledgment and expression of gratitude.


Passage number 323.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not stated, and therefore, there is no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 324.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The economic situation calls for additional, ongoing monetary stimulus, and continuing our Treasury and MBS purchases is a good way to accomplish that.  Vice Chairman Dudley summed up the arguments for a combined strategy very well, and I agree with his comments in terms of using both Treasury and MBS purchases.  I would also mention that I agree with him that I would strike the bracketed “it sees a substantial improvement” phrase from paragraph 5.  In terms of LSAPs, I will echo President Lockhart’s remarks. My own view is that appropriate policy will include extending these purchases well through most of this year, probably ending them in the fourth quarter.  That is just my own expectation.  And I would like to respond to President Fisher’s remarks about the research done at the San Francisco Fed. It is true there are issues about how do the Treasury purchases affect financial conditions.  They have identified those—both a signaling channel and a term-premium channel.  There is a lot of uncertainty about how much of a role each channel plays.  Of course, both are beneficial to the economy.  But, again, going back to the Vice Chairman’s comments, there is a lot of uncertainty about these tools in general, so that argues for using both of them.  That’s my own conclusion from reading that research. I do support the thresholds language in paragraph 5, but I confess to seeing this as a closer call than the decision to extend our asset purchases.  On the positive side, thresholds are a simple and clear way to link our policy to economic outcomes in a way that conveys that we are staying low for longer.  Nonetheless, quantitative thresholds present challenges and risks of both  substance and communications.  First of all, we should recognize we are shining a very bright spotlight on the unemployment rate.  I find the theory of rational inattention developed by Chris Sims and others instructive in this regard.  It reminds us that people have limited capacity to absorb information, and are, therefore, selective in what information they pay attention to.  When we stated a specific date for liftoff, the spotlight was cast on the calendar, and that’s what everyone focused on, for better or for worse.  Once we start talking in terms of an unemployment threshold, it will be the unemployment rate that takes center stage, commanding all of the attention of our audience.  Of course, it is important that we communicate the various modifiers and exemptions and footnotes around the use of thresholds.  But in the end, we should be realistic and recognize that most eyes will be following the spotlight.  Second, we don’t have a solid foundation on which to base our specific numerical choice for the unemployment threshold.  That came out in some of the comments already.  Over time, with new information and analysis, we may regret choosing a 6½ percent threshold.  For example, as I mentioned at our previous meeting, movements in r* or the natural rate of unemployment could change the appropriate conditions for funds rate liftoff.  Now, this is not just a theoretical concern.  A year or so ago a 7 or 7½ percent unemployment threshold seemed eminently reasonable.  In the future, we may well find ourselves in the awkward position of having to change the announced threshold either up or down.  Third, thresholds represent a major intellectual shift in how we think about and communicate policy compared with, say, a standard linear reaction function.  Even if we just focus on unemployment and inflation, our usual reaction function is a function of both unemployment and inflation together.  We don’t normally shine the policy spotlight on either unemployment or inflation separately.  Looking further ahead—I am still looking to the time when interest rates are above zero—once rates do rise above zero, our use of thresholds will  create some new challenges as we try to explain our return to a normal policy approach and communications. Weighing these costs and benefits—and, important, in the current situation where the funds rate is stuck at zero and our other policy options are limited—I am comfortable supporting thresholds.  Many of the communications challenges specific to this approach can be addressed in your press conference, Mr. Chairman—we’re loading everything on the press conference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The author expresses support for alternative B and continuing Treasury and MBS purchases, but raises concerns and arguments against using quantitative thresholds for policy decisions. The author mentions the challenges and risks of using thresholds, such as the focus on the unemployment rate, uncertainty in choosing the numerical threshold, and the shift in approach in communicating policy. Therefore, there is disagreement regarding the use of thresholds.


Passage number 325.
 MR. FISHER.  No pressure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. FISHER. No pressure" suggests that there is no disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 326.
  [Laughter] MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The presence of laughter indicates a light or jovial tone, suggesting a harmonious atmosphere rather than an argument or disagreement.


Passage number 327.
 WILLIAMS. But more generally, I think as President Evans said, we must recognize that our future policy communications challenges may not be any easier than they were when we provided forward guidance in terms of a calendar date. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with President Evans' statement.


Passage number 328.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of expressions of gratitude and addressing Governor Yellen.


Passage number 329.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  Given heightened uncertainty about the economic outlook, due in part to the fiscal cliff, and the lack of clear improvement in the outlook for the labor market, I consider it imperative that we continue our longer-term asset purchases at the current rate of $85 billion per month.  I agree with President Lockhart that this is essentially a continuation of current policy, and it is a policy that I believe is working. I recognize that market expectations concerning the ultimate level of purchases under this program exceed the comfort levels of some members of the Committee, but I am very concerned that a reduction in the pace of purchases at this critical juncture would undermine what we are trying to accomplish and could have a very destabilizing effect. The phrasing of our September statement intentionally emphasized that our purchases would run at an $85 billion rate.  We turned $85 billion into a focal point for the markets.  Disappointing the very natural expectation that our purchases will continue at this same level,absent some tangible evidence of improvement in the labor market, and without any rationale for why the efficacy and costs of purchases have changed, will create lasting confusion in the markets and undermine our own credibility.  Over time, though, I think it is entirely appropriate for us to vary the pace of our purchases as evidence pertaining to the progress of the labor market accumulates.  Inclusion of the word “initially” in paragraph 3, coupled with omission in that same paragraph of any total for the quantity of purchases, signals that the pace of these purchases will be subject to review.  And as I indicated in my remarks yesterday, I agree that we need to review the efficacy and costs of this program going forward, and I thought the framework that the Chairman set out yesterday is very helpful for thinking about how to do that.  As I noted, I, too, am particularly concerned about the possible emergence of market behavior that could threaten financial stability. While I do worry about the costs and risks associated with our asset purchase program, I think it is essential to recognize that we do not have any riskless policy options.  We face a profound risk that slow progress in moving the economy back toward full employment will not only impose immense costs on American families and the economy at large, but may also do permanent damage to the labor market.  We also face the serious risk that inflation, which we currently forecast to run below our target, could decline further over time, raising real interest rates and thereby making it yet more difficult for monetary policy to provide meaningful stimulus.  Under such circumstances, there is an important benefit from conveying that we do not intend to take the punch bowl away just as the party is getting going.  Frankly, I worried at the time of our September meeting that our open-ended purchase program would be interpreted by markets as tepid support for accommodation.  Instead, just the opposite occurred.  By linking our purchases to significant improvements in the outlook for the labor market, and coupling this   commitment with the statement that we intend to keep rates low as the economic recovery strengthens, we communicated that we will at least keep refilling the punch bowl until the guests have all arrived, and will not remove it prematurely before the party is well under way. It is natural and appropriate for central bankers to be cautious, to worry about risks, and to convey their resolve to tighten when appropriate.  But even though we have shifted expectations about how aggressive we will be in providing accommodation, we have not seen any sign that inflation expectations have become unmoored.  Importantly, we should be very careful not to repeat the mistakes that, in my view, the Bank of Japan has made for the past 15 years.  Every time there is even a whiff of recovery the BOJ makes clear that it is ready, willing, and able to end quantitative easing and is prepared to reduce its balance sheet back to normal in a heartbeat.  In addition, the BOJ conveys its skepticism that QE works even when undertaking new purchases.  Arguably, as a consequence, that economy has remained mired in deflation.  Losses on the central bank’s balance sheet can raise questions among politicians and the public about a central bank’s performance. But prolonged failure to meet the central bank’s mandate can be just as damaging to its reputation and independence. Regarding thresholds, I wholeheartedly support adopting them.  I won’t review all of the arguments we have previously discussed for thresholds and the logic that supports choosing the particular values specified in alternative B.  Important, to my mind, the articulation of these thresholds should help the public better predict how the date of liftoff will likely shift in response to economic news, and that response will serve as an automatic stabilizer. I also agree with President Dudley that tightening, when the time comes, is less likely to cause market disruption with these thresholds in place.  It will also be a relief for us not to have to continue to reconsider our calendar guidance.  To manage the transition from calendar-date guidance to economic conditionality, I support the inclusion in today’s statement of language stating that the new thresholds are consistent with our earlier date-based guidance. I also like the final sentence of paragraph 5, which importantly suggests that when rates do rise we expect to be patient in returning them to normal levels. I support the inclusion of language in B(5) stating that we will look at additional measures of labor market conditions in conjunction with the unemployment rate.  However, the staff memo on assessing conditions in the labor market makes a strong case for considering the unemployment rate as the primary indicator of labor market conditions.  It is quite sensible for the threshold to be framed in terms of this variable.  I also think it is desirable to state the inflation threshold in terms of projected inflation because we need to look through transitory fluctuations in inflation relating, for example, to commodity prices.  Given that we will be talking about our projections, I think it will be important for us to rationalize these forecasts in terms of observable variables like core or trimmed mean measures and to discuss our thinking relative to that of outside forecasters.  I would note, though, that adopting a projected value for inflation will require the Committee to make ongoing collective determinations as to whether we expect inflation between one and two years ahead to be below or above 2 percent.  I don’t think it is appropriate for us to rely on the SEP for those determinations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 330.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any information that would suggest contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone to Governor Duke.


Passage number 331.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given statement. It consists of a polite expression of thanks and a mention of Governor Tarullo, suggesting a respectful tone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 332.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The decision to support alternative B is, for me, not a close call as it is for Betsy, but I find myself sympathetic to much of what she just said.  From my point of view, the situation that we confront is the one that Janet alluded to earlier, which is we agreed on a program in September that most, if not all, of us thought would not be perceived with quite the heft that it was by markets.  That leaves us, or at least me, in something of a dilemma.  On the one hand, given my quite strong view that more accommodation is appropriate at this time, one of the few things I am sure about is that labor markets are not anywhere near healthy yet.  Given that belief, I wouldn’t want us to do anything now that would remove any of the heft that we got in September.  I think dialing down the Treasury purchases would be a signal that would at best be uncertain and unclear and almost surely would be perceived as some removal of accommodation, but markets wouldn’t quite understand why and what had changed.  On the other hand, for many of the reasons that Betsy and Dennis have already alluded to, I am not as sanguine about the communication challenge here as some of my fellow supporters of alternative B are. I think Betsy has rehearsed the problems well, and so I won’t repeat it.  That is also why I, like Betsy, thought you might want to pair the thresholds language with the first time that a signal was being given that this thing may   not extend quite so far as market expectations believed it would.  But as I said, given where we are and where alternative B is, I have no trouble supporting it today. I would say that with respect to the issues around the LSAPs, there are two sets of distinct issues that are of greater or lesser relevance to people depending on their substantive positions.  One is the actual question about the purchases.  As I listen today, there are a number of people who would be perfectly comfortable stopping them right now—would prefer that we had not even undertaken them in September—and so that is a pretty clear answer. Although no one has said so in an unqualified way, I suspect that some of us around the table expect that they will be comfortable for some time to come continuing purchases.  So, from their point of view, the communication challenge of trying to ramp back expectations is not as imminent a problem.  And then, there is a group of people in the middle—I suspect Elizabeth is one of them—who are genuinely not certain how long they may be comfortable because they do want to see what kind of impact is being had and may sense that they will get a better idea of the efficacy question along the way.  To the degree that that group of people actually becomes an important fulcrum of future decisionmaking—no inside information here, but the Chairman may well find himself in that middle position at some point along the way—we do want to preserve optionality for the Committee as a whole. And so the question, just to restate it is, how does one begin to communicate in such a way as to affect expectations.  And, like Betsy, my eyes were drawn to the Tealbook assumption that investors will gradually realize that cumulative purchases will be about $500 billion.  Well, how exactly is that going to happen—that it is nice and gradual. How can we achieve that without giving negative signals quickly, which would thereby undermine some of that heft that I indicated earlier.  My personal sense is today is not the day to begin giving negative signalsbecause it would undermine the heft.  A clearer statement of criteria in a somewhat abstract, disembodied way is probably the best that can be done. But this is a challenge beginning, probably with the March press conference, and maybe even the February monetary policy testimony, and a challenge for all of us individually and collectively because, boy, this one has “Babel” written all over it with everybody coming out and giving their views of what LSAPs mean and what improvement in a labor market is and where the costs or where the benefits are. That has not proved helpful for the institution in the past.  However, people do have different views and feel greater or lesser compulsion to state them.  I put that on the table as a difficulty, which I think is a shared difficulty, of figuring out how to thread that needle over the course of the next few months.  It is dependent, of course, on people’s substantive views as well as a communications challenge. On thresholds, I have come around, as I have said earlier.  The fact that I have come around reveals the fact that I think there are some shortcomings or costs as well as benefits, and people have already mentioned them today.  If I had my druthers, I would get rid of all of the other verbiage besides the thresholds themselves in paragraph 5.  But I am not going to win that one, so I won’t even pursue it.  The only specific thing I would say is, Charlie Plosser, on this one, I actually think the potentially incomplete information given by the unemployment rate works in your favor on thresholds, given what I understand to be your policy inclinations, because to the degree that the unemployment rate comes down more quickly because of transitory labor market participation developments, that would get us to the point of thinking about tightening sooner. In this context at least, I don’t think those kinds of problems that Sarah and I and others have talked about are of particular concern, but that’s not to dismiss all of the communications concerns around thresholds.  I think the problem with thresholds is that   everybody is for reaction functions and communicating reaction functions, but then people begin to get nervous when you actually get specific.  Well, if you don’t get specific, and you just restate all of the things you think about, then you are not communicating the reaction function.  At some point, you’ve just got to pull the trigger and say, “Okay.  This is the best we can do.  We’re going to do it.”  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, expresses sympathy for Betsy's viewpoint but ultimately disagrees with her. He also disagrees with some of his fellow supporters of alternative B. He mentions that there are different views within the group on whether to continue purchases or stop them, and how to communicate effectively about the decision. This shows that there is disagreement on the best course of action.


Passage number 333.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: no


Passage number 334.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The expectation for additional accommodation that we put in place in September still seems appropriate to me.  What appeared to be actual improvements in the indicators of consumer spending at the October meeting have turned out to be fleeting.  Real disposable income is rising less than we expected, and I think it will be some time before we see considerable momentum in labor compensation sufficient to drive consumption or help create a virtuous cycle of economic growth.  At the same time, inflation appears to be well contained. If inflation works primarily through wage pressures, there don’t appear to be any such broad-based pressures developing at this time. In my view, the primary risks to the outlook are still large and to the downside.  We have not yet bumped up against financial stability or market operation constraints, and monetary policy works in part through expectational channels, so I support not dialing down the accommodation that we agreed upon in September.  That said, I am not giving an opinion on a total LSAP size and am prepared to engage each month in a careful efficacy evaluation to determine the appropriate size of continued monthly purchases.  We have to engage each month in rigorous analysis of financial stability and market operation, as well as transmittal effects from financial markets to economic growth.  It is appropriate to be cautious.   Looking at the statement as a whole, I think its thrust and tone is to be clarifying for economic agents our commitment to better outcomes.  With this overall thrust and tone, the lower tail of possibilities that households and businesses might worry about gets partially cut off.  For instance, the odds that this Committee begins to tighten at the first sign of good labor market news, and prematurely slows the economy, should remain small. Similarly, the chance that this Committee will greet worsening economic data with a shrug and a “we have done all we can” should seem less likely to economic participants.  We want to make sure that households and businesses understand that the Committee remains committed to the promotion of future economic recovery rather than perceive an expectation of future economic weakness.  It is important that our statement as a whole continue to convey this commitment, especially in the current context of the fiscal cliff and the current economic environment.  An important step for future statements, I should say, will be to reflect the balance of this commitment to the promotion of an economic recovery with concerns about efficacy, financial stability, and market operation.  The communication of this balance in a way that doesn’t destroy the beneficial expectational aspects of our accommodative policies, and in a way that doesn’t make us look like Governor Yellen’s characterization of communications by the Bank of Japan, will require careful work.  Adding to this communication challenge will be a layering of a communication strategy regarding remittances that we are only now beginning to contemplate. I continue to believe that there are good arguments to be made for being even more explicit with our forward guidance.  I like the formulation of alternative B that includes the paragraph specifying quantitative thresholds in the context of other qualitative indicators.  We have now had plenty of deliberation and consideration of these values.  We have discussed that they are thresholds rather than triggers, and we have constructed a qualitative set of additionaldeterminants such as other measures of labor market conditions and indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations.  Moreover, the market has been conditioned to be receptive to the way this paragraph is crafted.  Obviously, though, I am concerned with President Bullard’s sense that the formulation will be viewed as triggers rather than thresholds and will lead to inadvertent tightening.  I sense that markets understand the proposed formulation, but I am also moved by President Plosser’s fears that the communication is flawed.  However, I am trying to compare the proposed communication not with language that we have not yet crafted, but with calendar dates.  Calendar dates give absolutely no information, and the statement’s proposed language is better than that. It gives more information—limited information, but more—and is at least marginally clarifying.  What I also continue to like about thresholds is that if the markets and the public believe that we have a lower inflation threshold than we do, then when inflation moves above the level there might be some concern that we have lost our resolve or our ability to keep inflation in check, and that could raise inflationary expectations.  If instead market participants fully understand that we are merely temporarily allowing inflation to rise, as long as it remains below the 2 percent objective with ½ percentage point margin, inflation expectations seem more likely to remain steady. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Raskin is expressing her support for alternative B and providing her analysis and views on the current economic conditions and the appropriate size of continued monthly purchases. She also discusses the importance of effective communication and forward guidance.


Passage number 335.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is simply a polite and thankful statement from the speaker to Governor Stein.


Passage number 336.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a polite statement of gratitude and acknowledgement. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 337.
 MR. POTTER.  “Employ other tools” is the condition on the previous one, and that gets ruled out if you do, “after the asset purchases end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contradictory statements or conflicting opinions. It simply presents a conditional statement related to the end of asset purchases.


Passage number 338.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context in the given passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 339.
 MR. LACKER.  I just didn’t hear what you said, Simon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. In this passage, Mr. Lacker simply states that he did not hear what Simon said, suggesting a lack of understanding or clarity in the conversation.


Passage number 340.
 MR. POTTER.  There is a plan B option, which is “employ other tools” as well.  “Will continue its purchases and employ its other tools as appropriate.”  That’s in paragraph 4 under the conditions, what actions would be taken.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining a plan B option and stating that the Fed will continue its purchases and use other tools as necessary.


Passage number 341.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But that is not an option.  It is already in there, you say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something is not an option and acknowledges that it is already in there, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 342.
 MR. POTTER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement by Mr. Potter and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 343.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I see. So you’re saying that’s a problem with this language.  However, we are not saying anything about the other tools—if we were to use other communications approaches, for example.  Again, the majority of people wanted just to strike this.  Are there others who want to include the asset purchase part only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the problem with the language and then clarifies that they are not referring to other tools or communication approaches. They simply mention that the majority of people wanted to remove the mentioned section, but there is no indication of opposing views or a dispute.


Passage number 344.
 MR. POWELL.  I did.  Or is your question are there others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply confirms that they did something without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 345.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the actual passage provided, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage for more accurate analysis.


Passage number 346.
 MR. POWELL.  I’m not sure I followed Simon’s point and your point, although you guys obviously follow it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Powell is simply expressing his confusion and acknowledging that Simon and the person he is speaking to understand the point that was made.


Passage number 347.
  [Laughter] MR. POTTER.  The condition was a substantial improvement in the labor market outlook, and we would use our tools to achieve that.  Our tools are not just the asset purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a statement made by Mr. Potter.


Passage number 348.
 MR. TARULLO.  But that was not actually your concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 349.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I don’t think there is anything logically wrong with what Governor Powell is suggesting.  I think it does establish a little bit of a separation between asset purchases and the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement suggested in the passage. The phrase "I think it does establish a little bit of a separation between asset purchases and the funds rate" indicates that the speaker has a different perspective or opinion than Governor Powell.


Passage number 350.
 MS. DUKE.  And in thinking about it, referencing the asset purchase program ending does a little bit of what I would have preferred, which is tie the threshold language on fed funds to reduction in asset purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is simply reflecting on the asset purchase program ending and suggesting a preference for tying the threshold language on fed funds to a reduction in asset purchases.


Passage number 351.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement involving President Fisher.


Passage number 352.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, having suggested eliminating the entire bracketed portion, I would second Governor Powell’s suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is seconding Governor Powell's suggestion, indicating agreement.


Passage number 353.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. I’m seeing a little bit of a swing in that direction. What we are proposing, then, is “remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends,” no comma, “and the economic recovery strengthens.”  Any objections. Any further comments. President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a proposal and asking for objections or further comments.


Passage number 354.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I am unclear about what the Committee is doing in terms of the choice at the end of paragraph 5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing that they are unclear about the committee's actions and the choice mentioned in paragraph 5.


Passage number 355.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We are choosing the second of the two options.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the second option is being chosen without any indication of conflicting perspectives or disagreement.


Passage number 356.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Choosing the second.  Okay.  Your preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement of a preference without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 357.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  My preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It merely states a personal preference without any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 358.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Well, that’s perfect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as the statement "Well, that's perfect" is a positive response.


Passage number 359.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  If there are no other comments, we’ll take the roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that if there are no other comments, the roll will be taken.


Passage number 360.
 MS. DANKER.  Okay. Let me just make sure I’ve got this.  The only changes are in paragraph 3—we are putting “maintain” instead of “put” in paragraph 5, not 5′; we are eliminating the things between brackets except maintaining “the asset purchase program ends,” no comma, “and;” and then, for the final bracketed part of that paragraph, we are choosing the second option, which is, “its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent.” This vote covers that statement and the associated directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing the specific changes that need to be made in a document. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 361.
 Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke Yes President Lacker No President Lockhart Yes President Pianalto Yes Governor Powell Yes Governor Raskin Yes Governor Stein Yes Governor Tarullo Yes President Williams Yes Governor Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, thank you very much. I listened very carefully these past two days and learned a lot, and I will continue to work with all of you to try to make this program as effective as possible. Ms. Logan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and stating that they will continue to work with all the mentioned individuals.


Passage number 362.
 MS. LOGAN.8  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We are just passing out a handout, which is the draft Desk statement.  Based on the directive, the Desk intends to expand the SOMA’s holdings of securities by purchasing $45 billion per month in longer-term Treasury securities and reinstitute Treasury reinvestments after the maturity extension program is completed.  In addition, the Desk will continue to purchase $40 billion of agency MBS per month, as well as maintaining the existing policy for reinvesting principal payments on agency debt and agency MBS into MBS.  The Desk intends to release a statement with operational details at the same time as the FOMC statement.  A draft of that Desk statement is being provided to you for your reference.  We will make one adjustment to that draft statement, which is to replace the word “put” with “maintain,” in order to be consistent with the FOMC statement change.  A revised set of frequently asked questions will also be posted later today. 8 The materials used by Ms. Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 8). The Desk plans to distribute the $45 billion in monthly Treasury purchases across seven sectors based on the approximate weight shown in the table in the Desk statement.  This distribution differs somewhat from that used in the maturity extension program.  The purchases would encompass securities with 4 to 30 years of remaining maturity as compared with the 6-to-30-year range under the MEP.  This wider distribution of eligible securities increases the amount of supply available for purchase.  In conducting purchases, the Desk will maintain the existing limit of buying only up to 70 percent of outstanding issuance per security.  The average duration of monthly purchases under this wider distribution will be roughly nine years.  This is nearly equivalent to the net duration of the MEP, as purchases averaged about 10½ years’ duration and sales averaged about 1½ years’ duration.  Of course, the proposed distribution could be altered if market conditions warrant, but we would aim to keep the average duration at roughly the same nine-year point and consult with the Committee regarding any material deviation from this plan. At this point, the Desk anticipates conducting 18 purchase operations per month with the size of those operations ranging from just under $1 billion to over $5 billion, depending on the sector.  A schedule of the purchase operations to be conducted over the following month will be released on the last business day of the month.  As directed, the Desk will also resume the process of reinvesting maturing Treasury proceeds at auction.  Given the MEP sales of short-dated Treasury securities, the SOMA portfolio has limited holdings that will mature in the next three years. Specifically, the maturing proceeds would require reinvestments of just $21 million in 2013 and $475 million in 2014.  As a minor technical adjustment, the Desk will not reinvest proceeds for maturing Treasury securities of less than $2 million for operational efficiency and will refer to this technical adjustment in the Desk’s statement with details provided in the frequently asked questions.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


