Passage number 1.
 Davis, MS. Greene, and Mr. Mullineaux, Vice P r e s i d e n t s ,  F e d e r a l  Reserve Banks of Richmond, Dallas, .4inneapolis, Kansas C i t y ,  New York,and P h i l a d e l p h i a ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y  Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage simply provides a list of names and positions without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 2.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Oh, yes, I must bring in the T-shirt. But I haven't got it because immediately when I brought it home my wife confiscated it. And she said she wanted one from every Federal Reserve Bank so she could have 1 through 12, or A through L or whatever it is. Is it L or K. What's San Francisco. It's L. I thought I was right the first time. So I must follow that up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and discussing their personal experience with obtaining a T-shirt from a Federal Reserve Bank.


Passage number 3.
 MR. MAYO. I must add for the benefit of everyone else that this T-shirt is being offered to member banks for $2.00 and to nonmembers for $10.00. It's part of our improvement of service.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Mayo is simply stating the price of a T-shirt being offered to member banks and nonmembers. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the text.


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's a reversal of policy. We have been r u i n g  the Fed for a long time offering things to nonmembers for $2.00 and to members for $10.00.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a change in policy regarding the pricing of offerings to nonmembers and members of the Fed.


Passage number 5.
 MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, most of us don't have as much fat in our budgets as Chicago does to buy these T-shirts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that most people do not have as much money as Chicago to buy T-shirts.


Passage number 6.
 MR. MAYO. Mr. Black, I shouldn't admit this, but the T-shirt was issued by our credit union, which is independent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply admits a fact about the source of the T-shirt.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, let's move on to our meeting. Our first action is to approve the minutes of the meeting of April 17. These have been circulated. Are there any changes or corrections. Hearing none, we will record those as approved. Second is a report on 5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -3- foreign currency operations since the last meeting, and Gretchen Greene is here today to give us that report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply providing a brief overview of the meeting agenda and mentioning the individuals responsible for certain tasks.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
 MS. GREENE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough context to determine the nature of the contention or disagreement. The mention of "MS. GREENE" indicates that there is a statement or opinion being expressed, but without the surrounding information in the Appendix, it is impossible to determine the specifics of the disagreement.


Passage number 9.
] CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Gretchen. Any questions. Yes, Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange of thanks and a request for questions.


Passage number 10.
 MR. EASTBURN. Take Henry's question first, because I have a question for Ted Truman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that Mr. Eastburn wants to address Henry's question first before he has a question for Ted Truman.


Passage number 11.
 MR. WALLICH. Gretchen, when you operate as agent for the Bank of Japan, can you tell anything from the way the orders are given and what rate indications are given about how forceful they want to be in defending the yen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for information.


Passage number 12.
 MS. GREENE. Not completely because their instruction is based on their close in Toyko. And how that relates to rates in New York depends very much on what has happened between the time of the close in Toyko and our opening in New York. In general I would say their instruction has been to limit the further weakening of the yen in New York, with the greater burden for intervention on them in Toyko rather than in New York.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of Ms. Greene's opinion regarding the instruction given to them in Tokyo and the burden of intervention on the yen.


Passage number 13.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it does not provide any information or statements that could involve conflicting perspectives or opinions.


Passage number 14.
 MR. EASTBURN. This question comes out of the Greenbook Supplement, so I would like to ask Ted if I may. With the improvement of the balance of payments position, why don't you expect a better performance of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or further explanation from Ted.


Passage number 15.
 MR. TRUMAN. The improved balance of payments position does give us encouragement, as Gretchen has pointed out. But our feeling is that we probably have some ways to go. The United States current account position still is in deficit in a world where Japan, Germany, and Switzerland still have--[though it's1 less substantial--a surplus. So the feeling is that under current conditions we probably need a surplus to be out of the woods. That's the first point. The second point is that we need the exchange rate adjustment to be maintained in order to get us there. As you know, our staff forecast does show a current account surplus beginning in the first half of 1980. [Another] point though, as Gretchen mentioned, is that inflation rates have come up abroad on average. Taking a longer-term perspective and putting that together with our forecast, inflation rates abroad are still below ours on average and are expected to be below ours over the forecast period. In those conditions a stable dollar in nominal terms will in fact mean some real appreciation. So too much more of that would tend to make the market think we would not quite get there in terms of adjustment. For what it's worth, the forecast for the dollar as [implied by] the forward rate would suggest a 1 to 2 percent depreciation over the next year or so. So we are in some sense more optimistic than that reading of the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting various points and perspectives on the balance of payments position, inflation rates, and exchange rate adjustment, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict between different parties.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage without actually providing the passage itself.


Passage number 17.
 MR. PARTEE. Gretchen, I've been interested in the strength of the gold price during this same interval when the dollar has been 5/22/79 -4- strong. What do you hear about that or what is your view on the movement in the gold price.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking Gretchen for her perspective or information on the movement of the gold price during a specific interval.


Passage number 18.
 MS. GREENE. Well, there is a variety of factors: demand, supply, and psychological. On the supply side, of course, is the fact that the Treasury has announced a halving of its [gold] auction [amounts] and the IMF has announced a modest scale-back in the amount it will auction. There appears to be some lesser willingness on the part of the Russians to sell gold, and that has been going on much of the year. So the supply picture is tighter than it had been. Industrial demand appears to be quite good, even at these higher prices. And, of course, gold reacts very [strongly] in an environment in which there is a sense of scarcity of certain important strategic commodities. It is also reacting strongly to substantial demand for other precious metals, particularly silver. The relationship between silver and gold is extremely important in our [unintelligible] here. So, even as the dollar has improved, the price of gold has continued to go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It primarily provides information on various factors influencing the price of gold without expressing conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 19.
 MR. PARTEE. It could also be consistent with your comment that it’s not so much that people have improved their opinion of the outlook in the United States but that the outlook has deteriorated everywhere else. So all currencies are looking almost equally bad, which leaves gold as the alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement that suggests a possible explanation for a situation without conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 20.
 MS. GREENE. Well, the demand for gold is quite strong, interestingly enough, in Zurich and in Paris, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that there is a strong demand for gold in Zurich and Paris.


Passage number 21.
 MR. PARTEE. Zurich and Paris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the cities Zurich and Paris.


Passage number 22.
 MR. TRUMAN. Where in fact the price of the local currency has gone up much more [than the dollar].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the price of the local currency has increased more compared to the dollar.


Passage number 23.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 24.
 MR. COLDWELL. Gretchen, what is the level of our yen balance at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply asks a question to determine the current level of their yen balance.


Passage number 25.
 MS. GREENE. It‘s just under $200 million, about $195 mil 1 ion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the amount of money, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions being present.


Passage number 26.
 MR. COLDWELL. Are we participating in yen intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Coldwell is simply asking whether they are participating in yen intervention.


Passage number 27.
 MS. GREENE. We haven’t in recent weeks. We have not for some time. We have not purchased any yen since the last FOMC meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Greene states that they have not purchased any yen recently or since the last FOMC meeting.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. [Our earlier purchases amounted to] $185 million [equivalent], as I recall. Of course, [their dollar value] changes with the value of the yen, doesn’t it. So I’m not sure [what it is] from day to day. Our next order of business is to ratify the transactions in foreign currency operations since the last meeting. I suppose a historic note on paying off all of our swap debt is in order. You have received the [written] report, I believe. Are there any comments or questions. If there’s no dissent, we will ratify the transactions. Thank you very much, Gretchen. Let’s move to the report on domestic open market operations from Peter Sternlight. 5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -5- M R .  STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing various financial transactions and asking for comments or questions, but there is no indication of any disagreement or dispute.


Passage number 29.
] CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Peter. Questions or comments. Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude followed by an invitation for questions or comments.


Passage number 30.
 MR. WALLICH. Peter, you mentioned that prior to the Treasury financing there was a change in the funds rate [objective] and you moved expeditiously so that the market would be apprized of that. How important do you regard it generally, other than in circumstances associated with a Treasury financing, that the market be apprized of exactly what the objective is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 31.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the System has its objective and I think we want that objective to be apparent to the market. We felt at the time that it was particularly important that the message get through clearly and quickly or it might otherwise have [been an issue as the Treasury auction] approached. Sometimes it's convenient to let the market tighten on its own if that is the [desired] direction of change and just step in to indicate the bounds of any change that might be indicated. But in this case the change was made on a Friday and the Treasury's auctions were going to be on Tuesday and Wednesday. We wanted to make it known that we were aiming for something higher and, since our initial step would be in the direction of pushing the funds rate higher, we wanted to be sure we would have time to indicate to the market just how high--to indicate an upper bound as well. I'd say it's ordinarily important to let the market know what we want, but at times like that it is particularly important to let it know very promptly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 32.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, Peter, thank you very much. Excuse me, Phil, [did you have a question].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is politely asking Phil if he has a question.


Passage number 33.
 MR. COLDWELL. Peter, in your visits with the dealers what is your reading now of the dealer market. about developments in the economy and market prospects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a question being asked to Peter about his interpretation of the dealer market.


Passage number 34.
 Are they becoming pessimistic MR. STERNLIGHT. I'd say they've become more conscious of the flattening or softening in the economy at least for the near term. Whereas a few weeks ago there was a fair amount of sentiment that rates were likely to push higher in the near term, I'd say that is not the expectation at the moment. At least there is a feeling that for the near term there is likely to be little change, though many people in the market still feel that over a little longer horizon, say the next several months as against a shorter outlook of only the next month or so, there might well be a need for higher rates because of persisting inflationary pressures. The sentiment among quite a few in the market is that the economy has not reached a peak and might well continue on a strengthening course, although only moderately gaining strength.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing an assessment of the current sentiment in the market regarding interest rates and the economy.


Passage number 35.
 MR. COLDWELL. I haven't looked over [the data] but have they followed that questioning judgment in terms of their portfolios.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell is simply expressing that he hasn't reviewed the data yet.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. They have. There had been a tendency to keep their inventories of securities very low or modestly short until the time of this last refunding. In that refunding they took on a substantial supply of the 10-year and 30-year issues. As I mentioned, the distribution of those issues was quite slow, although it would 5/22/79 -6- appear that even when some retail demand developed some of the dealers at any rate were not all that eager to get rid of their supply. Some apparently are a little more willing now to hold on to their supply in the anticipation that maybe those securities will rise in price.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of dealers being "not all that eager to get rid of their supply" suggests that there is some disagreement or conflict between the dealers and potentially other parties involved in the situation.


Passage number 37.
 I wouldn't call that-- MR. COLDWELL. Have they been building their long positions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 38.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. In the longer area there is a net long position, which was not true a month ago. What they did was to take on a long position--this is in the over 5-year area--with the refunding and it has been whittled down some. But they still have a net long position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 39.
 MR. PARTEE. Would they have a negative carry on that, Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question to Peter without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 40.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. Just about even at this point, I would think, or maybe slightly negative. M R .  EASTBURN. Peter, could I ask you a question about the discount rate. Is the market now in a mood to make a distinction between a technical adjustment of, say, 1/4 point and not confuse that with a signal for tighter money. M R .  STERNLIGHT. It might well be because I think there is an appreciation [of the current situation] among market players. Even though they don't see the grounds for a general push to higher rates, they are conscious of the growth in the volume of borrowing, and they are aware that borrowing has gotten up to the level that on some past occasions has triggered a rate increase. So I think that might be a fair characterization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Sternlight and Mr. Eastburn are discussing the potential market response to a technical adjustment of the discount rate. While Mr. Eastburn asks a question, Mr. Sternlight agrees with the possibility that the market may distinguish between a technical adjustment and tighter money. They both seem to be in agreement about the potential perception in the market.


Passage number 41.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Our next action is to ratify the transactions on the domestic side since the previous meeting. You have the reports. Are there any comments or questions. If there is no dissent, we will record the transactions as approved. I asked Murray Altmann at the last meeting to give me a rundown on how we've been doing with our individual forecasts. Did you distribute this to everyone. Well, I must arrange for you to get this [tabulation], which has your forecasts from March of last year when we looked at the period from quarter four '77 to quarter four '78. It turned out that the actual increase in real GNP was 4.3 percent. The staff had 4.4 percent. So, Jim, I must say that's fairly close. However, only 5 of those governors and presidents who were then participating had c4.31 percent within their ranges. Now. on prices, the actual increase was 8.8 percent. The staff had 6 . 6  percent, not so close. Nobody had a figure as high as 8.8 percent. The highest were our perennial optimists, Henry Wallich and Willis Winn, who had 8 percent as the top of their ranges. But they were the only ones with an 8 even showing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is reporting on the results of previous forecasts and there is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 42.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What period are you talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification about the time period being referred to.


Passage number 43.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. This was the fourth quarter of 1978 over the fourth quarter of 1977. We were meeting in March of [19781 and [since] that time we haven't done any update. Unemployment at the end of the period, in the 4th quarter of 1978, was 5.8 percent. The staff 5/22/79 -7- had forecast 5.9 percent. And five of the participants had 5 . 8  percent within their ranges. Now, in June [of 19781, we looked at the [first] quarter of '78 to the [first] quarter of '79. The growth in real GNP was 3.1 percent and not a single person came in that low, nor did the staff. Everybody was higher. The staff had 3.8 percent. No one was as low as 3.1 percent. Prices rose by 9.1 percent. No one even came close. The staff had 7.3 percent. And the unemployment figure was 5.9 percent and, of course, the staff was at 5.9 percent, having figured that precisely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states the figures and forecasts for various economic indicators but does not indicate any disagreement or contention among individuals or groups.


Passage number 44.
 MR. PARTEE. But not knowing the real GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only mentions Mr. Partee's lack of knowledge about the real GNP.


Passage number 45.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. There were four of us who had that also. In the future when you consider the staff forecasts and criticize them, remember they're not too bad compared to those made by the rest of us. So we turn to you now, Jim, for your new forecast and how you see things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 46.
 MR. KICHLINE. I don't know what to do after that. M R .  MAYO. I assume the staff put these figures together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers are simply stating their own thoughts and perspectives.


Passage number 47.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, we didn't want the staff [of the Research Division] to do this; Murray did it so we'd have an objective [observer]. The other members of the staff didn't even know it was being done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply clarifying that the staff did not want to perform a certain task, and instead, one specific person, Murray, did it in order to have an objective observer. The lack of knowledge by the other staff members regarding this action also indicates a lack of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 48.
 MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.] That completes my presentation, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that he has completed his presentation.


Passage number 49.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Jim. Are there any questions before we go on. Yes, Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 50.
 MR. ROOS. Jim, do you have any specific figure that you are using to reflect the effect of energy price increases on inflation. Have you quantified that even in a rough way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question asks for a specific figure or quantification, indicating an inquiry for information rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 51.
 MR. KICHLINE. You're talking about in something like the deflator.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 52.
 MR. ROOS. Yes. What has happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a simple response, acknowledging that something has happened.


Passage number 53.
 MR. KICHLINE. Well, in the second quarter of this year, for example, our estimate of the business product deflator in total is 10.3 percent. If we exclude food prices, in the second quarter of this year it goes down to 10 percent. Excluding food and energy, it's 8-1/4 percent. So the energy component [accounts for] about 1-3/4 percentage points in the second quarter alone on the aggregate inflation rate. Energy in these accounts are only worth something like 7 percent by weight, but we're getting increases of 40 to 50 percent at an annual rate in many of the energy components.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about different estimates of the business product deflator in the second quarter of the year, including the impact of food and energy prices.


Passage number 54.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 55.
 Phil Coldwell MR. COLDWELL. Jim, I assume you saw that note sent to me concerning the parallelism between 1973-74 and 1978-79 on retail sales and real sales versus the peaks and troughs. How do you interpret that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple exchange of information and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 56.
 5/22/79 -8- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Sent by whom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only provides a date and who sent it, but does not mention any conflicting ideas or opposing views.


Passage number 57.
 MR. COLDWELL. It was sent to me by one of the members of Jim's staff in response to a question I asked at a Board meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about a document that was sent to Mr. Coldwell. There is no contention or disagreement present in this statement.


Passage number 58.
 MR. KICHLINE. I think it has been distributed to all the Governors. I would interpret the data with some degree of confusion, I guess, in the sense that there are a number of major differences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion about the interpretation of data, but there is no indication of any disagreement or conflict with another person or viewpoint.


Passage number 59.
 A s  I believe the memo pointed out, retail sales peaked in February of 1973-- MR. COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact that retail sales peaked in February of 1973.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
 On a real basis MR. KICHLINE. --on a real basis, which was about 10 months before the trough in economic activity. The peak in real terms [in the current cycle] would be December of 1978, so we've experienced four months of declining sales. But there are a number of major differences. One is the behavior of consumers. In that earlier period, the saving rate was considerably higher and consumers seemed much less willing to take on goods and spend as freely as they have this time around. So I'm a little disturbed about trying to make that comparison because of different consumer behavior. Secondly, though the energy situation was a bit similar as 1973 went on, that was a period when we had the storage situation by early 1974 combined with very rapid price increases. And it strikes us that at this point the situation is considerably different from what we experienced in 1973.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kichline, expresses his disturbance about comparing the current situation with the one in 1973 due to different consumer behavior and the differences in the energy situation. He disagrees with making a direct comparison between the two periods.


Passage number 61.
 MR. COLDWELL. One point that struck me was the percent of real disposable income being devoted to energy and food. The data show a quantum jump in '73 and it looks as if we're getting another one now, although the figures aren't complete nor are they [measured] in precisely the same fashion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a point that caught their attention and mentioning the data they have observed.


Passage number 62.
 MR. WALLICH. But what is really impressive is the reduction over the years in the fraction [of disposable income] people have to spend on food and gasoline. Since the ' 6 0 s  standards of living have risen enormously in that respect and what's happening now is just a small catch-up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their viewpoint about the impressive reduction in the fraction of disposable income that people have to spend on food and gasoline. They mention that standards of living have risen enormously in that respect over the years and what is currently happening is just a small catch-up.


Passage number 63.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, we need higher prices for food.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "we need higher prices for food" is presented as a simple assertion or opinion without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 64.
 MR. PARTEE. Higher for [food] and for gas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Party is simply stating that prices are higher for both food and gas.


Passage number 65.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. John Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to answer this question. The passage is not provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 66.
 MR. BALLES. Jim, we've had this unexpected bad news for the first quarter in terms of real growth at about .4 percent. It's evident that real final demand actually declined and that what skimpy growth we had was in fact in inventories. In view of that and of the weak news we've gotten so far for the second quarter for those series for which we have data--1 don't think there's a single strong report out so far that I'm aware of--what is the case for a bounceback of real GNP in the second quarter. I must admit I'm getting pretty skeptical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles expresses skepticism about the possibility of a bounceback of real GNP in the second quarter, indicating disagreement with a potential argument or case for such a bounceback.


Passage number 67.
 This is a devil's advocate type of question, but there are weak spots in the economy and that is spreading-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. John, you mean a bounceback to 2.2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, John seems to be agreeing with the statement that there are weak spots in the economy and that it is spreading. The mention of a bounceback to 2.2 percent is not related to any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 68.
 5/22/79 -9- MR. BALLES. Yes, a bounceback.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or contrasting ideas. It simply mentions a bounceback without any further contention or disagreement.


Passage number 69.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. A hop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 70.
 MR. KICHLINE. One major area to point to is business fixed investment. The first quarter was quite depressed in the construction area [but] the March numbers came roaring along with a bounceback. I would suspect that in the second quarter both shipments and, importantly, nonresidential construction activity will average substantially above the pace in the first quarter. That’s one area. Housing may well turn out to be less of a negative in terms of expenditures in the second quarter compared to the first. It‘s not that I expect it to be rising and contributing to growth, but it may well be less of a drag on average for the quarter. Consumer spending, I think, is a very questionable area. We do anticipate a bounceback, but it is by no means a certainty. [If we don’t begin to see that,] ’I would say that over time one would have to get concerned about that. State and local construction activity is also an area that was depressed in the first quarter due to weather effects. The evidence seemed to suggest a bit of an increase in March, but not a great deal. We are banking on the view that that sector will perform similarly to business fixed investment, particularly the construction part. The bounceback that we have forecast is nothing like that in the first quarter of 1978, when [GDP growth went from1 about zero to 9 percent. We’re really talking about fairly small changes. Also, I think the infomation coming in has to be discounted to some extent. Industrial production is a clear case where we know the nature of some of the problems. But, as this [reported weakness] goes on, I’d say one would have to be more concerned about the possibility of a weaker picture than a stronger one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there may be a bounceback in some areas of the economy in the second quarter, but expresses skepticism and uncertainty about consumer spending. They also mention that the information coming in needs to be discounted and express concern about the possibility of a weaker economic picture.


Passage number 71.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Jim, the information on durable goods orders will be released at 2:30 today. Do you have those data yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a question asking if the recipient has the data.


Passage number 72.
 MR. KICHLINE. No. We’ve tried--unsuccessfully--for the last two months to get them and have not been able to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that they have been unsuccessful in obtaining something for the last two months, indicating a lack of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 73.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. They will show a significant decline in orders in April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply states that there will be a significant decline in orders in April. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the statement itself.


Passage number 74.
 MR. PARTEE. Including defense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage does not involve conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions.


Passage number 75.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I don’t have the details. Overall it is quite a significant decline. Bob Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker merely states that they do not have specific details about something and then adds that there has been a significant decline overall.


Passage number 76.
 MR. MAYO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Jim, to what extent do your figures embrace the latest increases in crude [oil] prices by the individual OPEC countries. And, secondly, do you allow anything for the increased pressure on the oil companies to deal in effect in the black market on the spot market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It consists of an individual asking questions about figures and allowances related to crude oil prices and the oil market.


Passage number 77.
 MR. KICHLINE. well, let me [defer to] Ted to answer the first question. how to answer that. Implicitly we have built in huge increases in crude oil prices and we have also built in a change in Department of Energy regulations on the pricing as well as pricing between various grades of gasoline. Putting all that together makes us come out with With regard to your second one, I don’t know quite 5/22/79 -10- a big number. That's the sort of thing we've done. It's very clear that the gasoline that is being imported directly has gone up substantially in price. There are reports now of gasoline reaching New York that has an Amsterdam spot price of 85 to 87 cents a gallon. So if you're talking about dealing in the spot market in that way, at the margin it is very expensive crude and very expensive in terms of refined products.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining the factors that have led to increases in crude oil and gasoline prices.


Passage number 78.
 MR. MAYO. But you feel that has already been built into your forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement of agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 79.
 MR. TRUMAN. I was going to answer that in part, President Mayo. The forecast went to bed a little over ten days ago or so, and in the Greenbook we had forecast a fourth quarter-over-fourth quarter increase of 23-1/2 percent on the OPEC market for crude adjusted, compared with a little under 21 percent in the previous [Greenbook]. The announcements have come out since the Greenbook forecast was finalized, so essentially [what has happened] in the last week would add another 1 percent [or maybe a little less] to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about a forecast and the adjustments that have been made to it. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 80.
 MR. MAYO. That's all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Mr. Mayo has finished speaking.


Passage number 81.
 MR. TRUMAN. Well, to the extent that we've kept track of the increase in the surcharge, which we've tried to do, [that is our estimate].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the speaker has attempted to keep track of the increase in the surcharge.


Passage number 82.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage does not provide enough context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. 


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 83.
 Frank MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I just want to say that I am pleased that Jim had such a good record last year because I have a very strong feeling that his record is not going to be as good in the next twelve months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses a disagreement or contention with Jim's future performance, suggesting that it will not be as good as it was in the previous year.


Passage number 84.
 It seems to me that we have-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you want me to tell you your record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or arguments that express disagreement or contention. It is a statement followed by a question, without any conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 85.
 MR. MORRIS. It wasn't so good in the last twelve months. It seems to me that we have a classic cyclical decline; the [evidence] is almost overwhelming. And I think the latest piece of evidence that you cited--that there was a [big] decline in durable goods orders is the last straw. Now, the staff projection does assume--as it has all along--a 6 percent rate of growth in M1 adjusted for ATS, and we have not gotten that for seven months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Morris expresses disagreement with the staff projection and raises concerns about the decline in durable goods orders.


Passage number 86.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 87.
 Except for April MR. MORRIS. Yes, there was one month. But that was generated by the IRS and not the FRB. So I think we have not created the financial climate that you've been predicting. Would you want to comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris simply presents a fact and asks for the other person's comment or response.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 88.
 MR. KICHLINE. Sure. I'd make two comments. One is that in terms of a concern about the cyclical turn, I could perceive three possible scenarios right now. continued very strong growth that presses against resource availability and intensifies inflation. I would say that the information coming in tends to weaken that case, if not remove it. The second possibility is that we have a situation with serious distortions and one would anticipate either a deep or a prolonged One is that we will have a situation of I 5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -11- contraction in activity. I don't think we have those sorts of distortions. So what I am left with then is the middle course, which we believe is reasonable at this time; it involves small real growth. Now, whether or not that will turn out to be a technical recession in the sense of two consecutive negative quarters, where those negatives are very small, is not really a big issue as far as we're concerned. It's the general pattern of what happens that is important, and we think the economy is in for that kind of period of small real growth. But it may well slip into a mild contraction in the technical sense. With regard to the monetary aggregates, one of the things we have been getting that we did not anticipate is a further downward shift in the money demand function. So what we have in effect with the slower growth of the aggregates is interest rates that have been about on track with our forecast for some time. In addition, we've assumed that the rate of growth for M1 at 6 percent adjusted for ATS was over a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter period so that if there were shortfalls we would get back within the ranges and stay on track. Hence, to the extent there was a difficulty, we assumed it would be very short-lived and we'd have a resurgence of growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker presents three possible scenarios for the economy, and while the first and second scenarios are dismissed, the speaker expresses belief in the third scenario. This suggests disagreement or differing opinions on the potential outcomes for the economy.


Passage number 89.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only provides the title or position of Chairman Miller without any additional context or information to suggest any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 90.
 Henry MR. WALLICH. Jim, am I right in thinking that among the various price indexes--the deflator, the business fixed weight deflator, and the CPI--there has been an unusually wide discrepancy in the recent months. I see the CPI increase for the first quarter of this year was 13 percent. The other indexes are in the 10 to 11 percent range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the discrepancy in the various price indexes without expressing any disagreement or debate.


Passage number 91.
 MR. ZEISEL. I think mortgage interest rates probably played a part in the differential. are driving that measure up; they don't play that kind of role in the gross business fixed weight price index. weighting is probably the most significant variable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and making an observation about the role of mortgage interest rates in driving up a certain measure.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 92.
 They have a heavier weight in the CPI and I think the difference in MR. WALLICH. It does make a difference whether the rate of inflation was 10 percent or 13 percent over the last three months, even if we give it the usual Federal Reserve discount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich believes that the difference in the rate of inflation (10 percent or 13 percent) over the last three months makes a difference, while the other speaker suggests that it does not.


Passage number 93.
 MR. PARTEE. Was it a 13 percent increase on average over the [first] quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of fact that there was a 13 percent increase on average over the first quarter.


Passage number 94.
 MR. WALLICH. No, it was [measured] end-of-quarter to end-of quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a straightforward response to a question and does not involve any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 95.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, that's one difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only presents a statement made by Mr. Partee without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 96.
 MR. WALLICH. That accounts for some of it, probably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 97.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot decide which movie to watch.


Passage number 98.
 MR. PARTEE. I just wanted to say that I think Jim gave an admirable answer to Frank on probabilities except that we do have the energy situation, which is very, very difficult to [judge]. It is such a new factor. Obviously it's going to lead to more inflation than otherwise. It's also obviously going to lead to less spending than otherwise. But how far either will move, I just don't think 5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -12- there's any way of knowing. One can imagine that the inflation effect will fan out because it will show up in wage demands and automatic cost-of-living increases and that kind of thing, and we may get as much secondary effect from it as initial effect. One can imagine on the spending side that not only will people have to lower spending for other necessities, but that it will have a great psychological effect on spending, as you say, for durables, for housing, for vacation homes, and for tourist travel. We're getting into the summer season when tourist travel is a very important element in budgets. Who knows what's going to happen. So there's an unusual amount of uncertainty connected with the energy situation today. But I think it's on the negative side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and stating that there is uncertainty and difficulty in predicting the effects of the energy situation. They do not mention any opposing viewpoints or engage in a debate with others.


Passage number 99.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN MILLER" without providing any context or information about their role or any potential disagreement or contention involving them. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement in the given passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 100.
 Nancy MS. TEETERS. Have you evaluated the economic impact of sharply rising interest rates, Jim. Have you looked at what the Wall Street Journal or [people on] Wall Street have said. Suppose the prime rate went to 13 percent. What would be the effect of that on your forecast. M R .  KICHLINE. Well, if it went to 13 percent, one would have to ask why. If it went to 13 percent because all these numbers are wrong and we have a rip-roaring economy under way, that's a different situation than if it went to 13 percent as a result of policy actions. But I don't see a rip-roaring economy in the cards. Given available information, I'd presume we'd be talking about a substantial increase in the funds rate to get the prime to 13 percent. And I think we would be talking about a substantial downward push on real activity over the period ahead and some improvement in our inflation forecast-- but for the time period of a year and a half, relatively little on the inflation side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline believes that if the prime rate were to go to 13%, it would indicate a substantial downward push on real activity and little impact on inflation. However, Nancy Teeters questions if this would be the case and suggests looking at the opinions of Wall Street experts for a different perspective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 101.
 MS. TEETERS. My other question is: Is there a reason for the peculiar pattern that you have on real disposable income. It seems to have a quarterly pattern that comes and goes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning the reason behind the pattern of real disposable income, suggesting that it has a quarterly pattern that fluctuates. This implies a level of contention or disagreement regarding the cause or significance of the pattern.


Passage number 102.
 MR. KICHLINE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. This is because "MR. KICHLINE" is not a passage or statement that can indicate any contention or disagreement. It is likely a reference to a person's name or a fragment of a larger text. Without further context, it is not possible to determine any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 103.
 It comes and goes with social-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's the July 1 factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something, identified as the "July 1 factor," appears and disappears in relation to social dynamics.


Passage number 104.
 MS. TEETERS. The social security.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information that suggests contention or disagreement. It only includes a person's name and a mention of "social security," which does not indicate any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 105.
 MR. KICHLINE. It's social security, which is worth about $ 9 . 8  billion in July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply providing information about the value of social security, without any conflicting viewpoints or contradicting information.


Passage number 106.
 So there's a third-quarter blip upward-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. That will fill many columns of newspapers in July. Willis Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there will be a third-quarter blip upward that will be widely covered in newspapers.


Passage number 107.
 MR. WINN. May I borrow a little sand to feed my machinery. I still get the reading that the financing of [housing] has been turned off almost absolutely. And there is about a 3-month lag between financing and starts. On that basis, starts should [fall] very sharply starting by the end of June. Insurance industries, in contrast with the banks, report very little demand for financing at the moment, which is rather surprising. All of that leads me to feel that commercial construction is in for a rather sharp decline, though maybe not until the third quarter. 5/22/79 -13- The other comment I’d make is that the trucking industry reports rather sizable declines in the last two weeks. Now, whether that’s the adjustment to the after-strike effect or whether there’s something basic happening, I don’t really know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement of observations and opinions.


Passage number 108.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you all for your questions and comments. Let‘s turn now to Steve for his observations. Then we’ll do our go-around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 109.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Steve. I would suggest we begin to go around the table. I think last time we started with Larry [Roos], didn't we. We'll switch over this time and start with Roger [Guffeyl and come around the other way. I think the procedure we've been using recently has been helpful and I would suggest that we follow it again. That is, let's limit comments on the economy to any variance from what has been projected by the staff. Then each of us should give a general indication of the policy posture that should be followed without specifying the exact numbers. Just say generally whether it implies steady as we go, a tightening or easing up, or any other thing. So let's start with Roger and go around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contrasting ideas. It is simply a suggestion on the order of discussion during a meeting.


Passage number 110.
 MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, we have very little quarrel with the staff projections, particularly as to the pattern, but our forecast is perhaps a bit weaker in the latter part of 1979. Our analysis suggests that the housing figures might be weaker in 1979. In talking with some savings and loan people in our District, the impact of this money market certificate change has been very dramatic. That, coupled with usury rate ceilings that apply in several of the states in the High Plains region, essentially has closed down any future housing commitments by the savings and loans. There is apparently nothing in the works that would pick up that slack. Thus, we would anticipate that overall the housing projection by the staff might still be a bit high, even after the adjustment they made this time. In looking at the Board's model and trying to work through the housing starts and the potential for a bit of an increase in the saving rate, the [growth] drops off very quickly it seems. So our best judgment would be that in the latter part of 1979 and into 1980 we would have somewhat lower growth than the staff has projected. With respect to policy, [my view is] cast against the background of growth in the aggregates being very slow. numbers that have been published for the first quarter and what the April numbers now show, there is not a great deal of strength--even if the April numbers are adjusted. It would be my judgment that now is certainly not the time to take any additional tightening actions. And perhaps not until we see the figures in May and June would it be time to consider easing. As a result, it seems to me that for policy purposes we ought to be looking at [maintaining] the interest rate Given the 5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -16- level and adopting [a directive based on] money market conditions without regard to where the ranges may be. I've not thought about Steve's proposal for wider ranges. ~t is not very attractive to me at the moment. Nonetheless, I'd like to see interest rate levels stabilized as they have been in the recent past. I'd also like to endorse a proposal that I think [was implied in] Dave Eastburn's question. And that is that it is tine for the Board to consider an increase of 114 percentage point in the discount rate, which is merely an alignment. We're seeing considerable pressure. Loan to deposit ratios are increasing in our part of the world, and understandably so. It's that time of the year. But I think the pressures are getting fairly strong. Lastly, if one looks at bank credit, which some apparently are prone to do, our information, as best as we can track it down, is that a great deal of the support for bank credit may be coming through the Eurodollar market. And if there is an increase in the reserve requirements for RPs, as the Board has proposed, it's going to make the Eurodollar market much more attractive--a cheaper source of funds. Unless there's some way to police the movement of funds offshore that come back in through the Eurodollar market, I think we would just be worsening that problem rather than making it better with that [proposal], M r .  Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of one individual sharing their analysis and perspective on various economic factors and policy considerations.


Passage number 111.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Roger. Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a thank you message from the speaker to Roger.


Passage number 112.
 MR. MAYO. Well, I'll start off where Roger left off. I, too, feel that an increase in the discount rate would not be inconsistent with a policy position that is essentially a stable one. I think it would have some announcement effect in terms of our continued concern about inflation without really having a substantive effect, if I make myself clear. I think we have passed a [cyclical] peak in this current quarter. My guess, for what it's worth, is that in the years to come the National Bureau of Economic Research will record this quarter as the turning point. It has all of the ingredients, without some of the distortions, of the early '74 period. Credit expansion and many of the aspects of the real economy, as pointed out by the staff, indicate a turning point. I'm not ready, however, to see us respond to a recognition of that turning point--even if all of us agree that it is here--by a significant move toward easing. I think that would be premature because of our continued very high levels of inflation. It would be misinterpreted. I'm not sure yet whether I buy Steve's widening of the range for M1. I'm more inclined to narrow it and be willing to jiggle [the funds rate] up another eighth of a point or so if indeed the aggregates come in strong in the rest of May and June, although I don't expect them to do so. I am more ready than I have been in many months to see us ease, but I'm not ready to do so today. Let me put it this way: I have opened my mind a little more in that direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Mayo, expresses his opinions and considerations regarding the current economic situation and potential actions of the Federal Reserve. He discusses different possibilities and weighs the factors at play but does not argue against any specific viewpoint.


Passage number 113.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Mark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 114.
 MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like Murray's record to show that we agree substantially with all of the portions of Jim's forecast that are correct and disagree violently with those portions that are incorrect. 5/22/79 -17- M R .  MAYO. That's pretty good. Keep going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers are making a lighthearted and non-serious comment, expressing agreement and support for each other's statements.


Passage number 115.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. And give us the wisdom to know the difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is asking for guidance and understanding, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 116.
 MR. MAYO. And let us pray.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 117.
 MR. WILLES. Well, somebody told me that's [all] we're left with. I just have a couple of quick comments. We're very much in the staff's camp with regard to business spending. We still think that it could turn out to be a plus for the year and could be the sector that will carry us through with positive real growth. I must say that your report on new orders doesn't sound very consistent with that. I hope that turns out to be a fluke. On the inflation side, we think a case can be made that is slightly more optimistic than the staff's--not in the near term but in the longer term. If you think as we do that the basic rate of inflation is determined primarily by the size and direction of the federal deficit and by the stance of monetary policy, both of those basically have been moving in the right direction. That would suggest that the long-run outlook for inflation is a little better than we might suppose. Food and OPEC and all these other things somehow keep making life less orderly than we would like. But even so, our feeling is that we may be moderately pleasantly surprised on the inflation side. As for policy, we certainly wouldn't want to tighten up, whatever that means. I'd like to suggest that a tightening of monetary policy can be done in a number of ways, in our view at least, including a change in the rules of the game. And we would put the application of reserve requirements on RPs and things like that as a change in the rules of the game that would have a tightening effect. so we hope that will not be done. In terms of interest rates, I agree with what Steve said. In terms of the aggregates, I almost thought he was going to say that given what has been happening we could start to give more credibility to M1 and, therefore, we could narrow the range. He went in the opposite direction and he lost me. So, I'd like to think about that for a minute.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 118.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Mark. John. M R .  BALLES. Well, when I asked the question of Jim Kichline about what the case is for a bounceback in the second quarter, I probably tipped my own hand as to my increasing skepticism. I'm afraid that what I see is pretty much what Bob Mayo sees in terms of a probable cyclical peak in this quarter. As a matter of fact, our forecast for some time has been showing a short, shallow recession beginning in the second half of this year and going into the first quarter of 1980. But that's obviously just as judgmental as yours, Jim, and I don't know that it's any better than yours. Nevertheless, it is different. The recent news that has come in for the second quarter when we were expecting what I mistakenly called a bounceback and was corrected by the Chairman--it's more of a little hop, if anything--gives me some real concern. This is the time in the business cycle when we could get some very unpleasant surprises. We certainly got one in the first quarter and I would be prepared to see one in the second quarter, I'm afraid. 5/22/79 -18- As for what to make of this troublesome development whereby bank credit has been growing more rapidly than the aggregates, our staff has recently updated their analysis in that area. I must say, after looking at it, that I don't really think the strong growth of bank credit proves very much. If we look back at earlier cycles, we find that bank credit tends to be more or less coincident with the cycle. That was certainly true in the '73-'74 recession where the deceleration of monetary growth preceded the peak in that business cycle and the formal recession by quite a few months. bank credit would accelerate at this time in the cycle. Corporate liquidity is down, as Steve has correctly pointed out, and corporations wish to avoid locking themselves into high long-term rates. Hence, they turn to their banks for credit accommodation and try to wait out the period of high rates and plan to do some funding when long-term interest rates are coming down. So on balance I'm really not impressed at all by the fact that bank credit has been growing faster than the monetary aggregates. It peaks very shortly before a downturn. There are all sorts of reasons why During April we fought the "battle of the bulge," as I call it, on M1. It is said to have gone up at a 11 percent annual rate. [But] as the staff knows well, in view of the history of earlier Aprils, in our monetary theories it's tremendously difficult to compute seasonal factors for the month of April. I sympathize with the staff on this. But 17 percent could later turn out to be 8-1/2 percent or something like that. If we look at Aprils of preceding years, seasonal factor corrections have been made following the benchmark revisions and have involved some pretty [big] downward revisions. Whether that will occur for this April remains to be seen. But it's probably the most unreliable month in the year in terms of getting a good fix on what is really happening. Since the May figures as now projected by the staff--correct me if I'm wrong, Steve--show a 1 percent rate of growth for M1 and a 5.4 percent rate for M2. I wonder if it isn't time to unwind the snugging up of the funds rate that we did in April. We were leaning against what at that time appeared in the best judgment of the staff to be a bulge in the money supply. In view of the figures that we already have for April and those projected for May I wonder if we should inch the federal funds rate downward a bit. In short, based on my perceptions of spreading weaknesses in the economy and on the long cumulative impact of monetary growth well below the target range, even considering the April figures--and with May coming in on the weak side and the June projections weak--in my opinion this is no time to be snugging up any further. If anything, I would lean toward reversing the April action on the funds rate. That's all, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses increasing skepticism about a bounceback in the second quarter and argues against tightening monetary policy further, suggesting that the funds rate should be reversed. This contrasts with a potential disagreement from another person in the passage who argues that the strong growth of bank credit is not a cause for concern.


Passage number 119.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, John. Ernie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a simple expression of gratitude, with John thanking Ernie. There is no mention of any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 120.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I, too, missed the turn in Steve's comments. I thought it was [going to be a recommendation] to lean more on the aggregates and he winded up [suggesting] a wider range on the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Baughman, initially misunderstood Steve's comments and was expecting a recommendation to rely more on the aggregates. However, Steve ended up suggesting a wider range on the aggregates, which deviated from Mr. Baughman's expectations. This indicates a disagreement or contention between Mr. Baughman's initial impression and Steve's actual suggestion.


Passage number 121.
 But I assume-- MR. AXILROD. If I may, President Baughman, I did want to lean more on the aggregates but I didn't want to [suggest] that the Committee should tighten with growth rates as low as they are under these alternatives. That's why I [proposed] a wider range on the high side. 5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -19- M R .  BAUGHMAN. I'd like to toss in a couple of points which seem to suggest something a little different than some of the points that have been made thus far. One, we were advised that Sears Roebuck recently sent out mailings to most of its credit customers raising their [credit limits]. Sears apparently inspected its records and discovered that a high proportion of [its cardholders] were at the maximum amount authorized. It has been reported that they got a nice response, which I construed as indicating that those consumers at least were still willing to use credit that was made conveniently available to them. I have also encountered--and it seems impressive, possibly because it's surprising to me--a number of instances of what I would call small speculators on houses. People are acquiring ownership of several units of housing. Frequently a part of the explanation given is the recent increase to $100,000 in the amount of capital gains. I don't know how they're going to hitch that to gains on more than one unit, but in their minds they seem to be able to do it. A development that I am still unable to explain is the persistent decline in the number of active drilling rigs. In an attempt to check into that, we heard a whole array of what seem to me rather peripheral explanations. In total I suppose they have to add up to the fact that for increasing numbers of owners of these rigs-- most of them are for lease--people who would hire them apparently are not willing to accept the risks and the costs involved in drilling. But that seems to me to be an incongruous development. The housing bounceback that I've been inclined to expect in Texas in particular, with the revision of the usury law which seemed to be moving through the legislature satisfactorily, may not now materialize. We have a phenomenon in Texas at the present time which has been rather colorfully characterized as the "killer bees" where a miniority interest in the state legislature--but a group still large enough so as to prevent a quorum from being constituted--has simply absented themselves from the chamber. That has consequently stopped the forward motion of legislative action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It consists of one person, President Baughman, sharing various observations and thoughts.


Passage number 122.
 MR. PARTEE. Where else but in Texas would the legislators be fugitives from justice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that suggests Texas legislators might be fugitives from justice, possibly indicating a sense of humor or admiration for the state.


Passage number 123.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, the speaker of the Senate under his interpretation of the law has called the Texas Rangers into action and sent them out to find these fugitives and bring them back. But it's reported that they have crossed the border. And unless he's willing to create an international incident, he probably cannot reach them. I have no particular quarrel with the staff's projection. It seems to me about as reasonable as can be made in the circumstances. However, in our discussion I think it might be appropriate for us not to focus exclusively on whether real economic activity is going to be a small plus or a small minus--the difference is possibly not very great--but to continue to focus a little more on inflation. Inflation is probably doing more damage now and has more potential to do damage to our economy than whether the rate of economic growth is a small positive or a small negative. That's all I have, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Baughman expressing his thoughts and opinions on the situation.


Passage number 124.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Ernie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not suggest any disagreement or contention. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 125.
 Frank 5/22/79 -20- MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, as I indicated earlier, I think we are close to a cyclical peak. Conceivably, it may already be behind us, with weakness in consumption and housing being covered up temporarily by inventory accumulation, the classic form of a peak. I don't think we should casually assume that the recession is going to be very mild. We talk about the lack of imbalances in the economy. Very often we don't recognize the imbalances until sometime into a recession. For example, in late '13, I think no one forecast as severe a recession as we had in '74-'75. If we are seeking a soft landing, then I think we've got to move monetary policy now in a less restrictive direction. If we're going to recognize the lags of monetary policy, we have to do what we've never done before and that is to move before the evidence is overwhelming that we are in a recession. Now, this would take some explaining to the public because it would represent a radical departure from the past practice of always overstaying a policy of either ease or restraint. That has been the record of the past 15 years and I would hope that in this go- around we could break out of that cycle. [To do sol it seems to me that we have to move toward ease at this meeting. A modest easing in rates now, although coming at a time when inflation is very high, could very well forestall a need for very sharp declines in interest rates later on. So I think the moment is now. I'm sure I won't get much support for this proposition, but I feel very strongly that now is the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that the economy is close to a peak and that monetary policy should be adjusted to a less restrictive direction in order to potentially prevent a more severe recession later on.


Passage number 126.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Frank. Phil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
 MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I am delighted to see the slowing in the economy. I've been hoping for it for a year. I think we're getting some reduction in the level of activity and I hope it continues for a while longer. I think we need to look at our basic objectives here because we have a problem of whether we are aiming to maintain a semblance of real growth or to contain inflation or a combination thereof. It seems to me that our current posture has some elements of restraint but those elements of restraint are coming in the housing field, largely in the usury ceilings and the thrift flows, which of course are the traditional ways. I think we run a risk on two sides. We run a risk of recession, of course, and we run a risk of some acceleration in inflation. The latter stems primarily from what I'd call an energy tax, because we are being hit with a very sizable tax thrown at us by energy costs. I suspect we can weather the food cost problem, especially to the extent that we can open up our borders to further imports, if there is anything to bring in. But I don't think the energy cost impact is going to go away and it is going to [spread] throughout our economy. You may recall the last time around that it took several months if not a year or more [for the energy shock] to [exert] its full impact. I suspect that the retail sales picture is giving us the signal that things are being slowed by energy costs and agricultural or food costs. Frankly, I welcome the slowdown. I'd prefer it hadn't come from further energy cost increases, but maybe over the long haul this will do us a favor and force us into some actions we should have taken six or seven years ago. A s  for our monetary policy posture, I still believe that inflation will be our principal problem in the coming months and years. Whether we can achieve a reduction in inflation by a nice slow 5/22/79 -21- pattern is something we have not yet proved. I suspect it's going to require more strenuous efforts than have been mounted so far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage expresses disagreement about the current economic situation and the appropriate approach to take. Mr. Coldwell expresses delight at the slowing economy and hopes for further reduction in activity. He suggests that there is a risk of recession and inflation, and disagrees with the current posture of restraint. He also believes that inflation will be the principal problem in the future and that more strenuous efforts are needed to reduce it.


Passage number 128.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Phil. Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you, Phil" simply expresses gratitude and does not involve any conflicts or disagreements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 129.
 MR. WALLICH. I share Phil Coldwell's feeling. I think we're in some danger of excessive preoccupation with the business cycle. rt matters much more whether we come down from I percent to .4 percent growth than whether we go from .4 to -1 or -2 percent. So in that sense an important move is already behind us. I think inflationary expectations have increased substantially in the last quarter. The leading models have raised their projections of inflation for the next two years by about 1 percentage point. And as we know, we've always been below on our projections. I think we're now building inflation into the economy to a degree that we've never had it; consumer behavior shows that. We also have evidence that inflation in the American economy is much less variable than it is in other countries and is, therefore, much harder to bring down. what we see in our own forecast is that at best we have to look forward to a period of a very slow deceleration of inflation. I think that will be regarded as unsatisfactory. And I expect that this situation is going to cause us to adopt wage and price controls sometime this year or next year. people are sufficiently excited about the inflation and sufficiently disenchanted with the actions in the fiscal and monetary fields. If we don't succeed in bringing inflation down, then the predictable pattern is that after a mild dip we'll go into a renewed expansion starting from an inflation base of 8 to 10 percent, whereas last time we started at 5 percent. And that will land us in an area where not even Italy is today. We are now the country with the most inflation among the major countries except Italy, I believe. As far as monetary policy is concerned, I think we still believe that somehow there's a free lunch--that we can accomplish our objective of reducing inflation at no cost--and I believe that's no longer true. We will have some costs, either in terms of much more inflation or in terms of reduced economic activity and a less than soft landing. I agree with Steve that real interest rates are falling; and that I think is the basic stance of monetary policy. We are [now] accommodating an external shock from food and oil. It's no longer the view of the economics profession that external shocks should always be accommodated, but our policy is doing that. It's not surprising, therefore, that in the ranking of inflation fighters we find ourselves near the bottom of the scale, as the Redbook among other things shows. As is obvious from my remarks, I would urge a tightening, even though it is late in the game. I think the impact on the real sector would be very slight. The real sector is going its own way with little benefit from monetary policy. [A tightening] will have some favorable effect on expectations. I think we have to look at interest rates at this time. The aggregates have become so unstable; for six months there has been no growth [in M11 and then we get 17 percent in one month. Why should we allow our funds rate decisions to be triggered by that kind of mechanism. So I would agree with Steve to have a wider range--1 think that is fine--and a money market target, with a rise immediately in the rate. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich expresses concern about excessive preoccupation with the business cycle, while also advocating for tightening monetary policy and raising interest rates. This contradicts the views of others who may believe that a more accommodative approach is needed.


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Henry. Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 131.
 5/22/79 -22- VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have heard a great deal of wisdom even without our getting around the rest of the table, Mr. Chairman. I’m not sure it has yet resolved all of the uncertainties in my own mind. I do share a lot of the feeling that has just been expressed about inflation; I think we tend to duck that issue. Something was said earlier about there not being much precedent for bringing down the rate of inflation rapidly. I’m afraid there isn’t much precedent for bringing it down slowly over a number of years either, which is a measure of the difficulty of our problem. I’m impressed by the degree that inflation is now built into thinking in terms of the business outlook. I’m also impressed--the supporting factor--by the degree with which capacity problems and backlogs exist. But certainly the outlook is uncertain. The recent news hasn’t been very buoyant. So I would conclude that the time is not very propitious for much of a change in either direction. There’s a fair amount of time before our next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention/disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that they have heard a great deal of wisdom but are still uncertain in their own mind. They also express disagreement with the idea that there is not much precedent for bringing down the rate of inflation rapidly or slowly. Additionally, they mention that the recent news has not been very buoyant, suggesting a negative outlook.


Passage number 132.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. When is our next meeting. SPEAKER(.). July [ill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply asks for the date of the next meeting.


Passage number 133.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would think that with either new financial or monetary data or business news, the Chairman might see an occasion for at least a telephone consultation some time in that interim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests that the Chairman might consider a telephone consultation in response to new financial or monetary data or business news.


Passage number 134.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Paul, there’s some sentiment that we should act like Congress and go home for six months and everything would get better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 135.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I sometimes agree with that, particularly if the Committee were to make precisely the decision that I’d like; then, I‘d like to go home for 6 months, too. I can‘t foresee that. Frank Morris said that we can’t casually assume the recession will be mild. I suppose we can‘t casually assume it, although it looks that way to me now--if we’re going to have one. But we can’t always be looking at the worst. If we’re going to balance these risks of inflation and recession we have to run not too scared that the recession is going to be worse than we expect. So it is a question of bringing about a balance. A s  I thought about what to do, I arrived at the same conclusion that Steve did up to a point--that maybe for lack of anything better we should go back and look at the aggregates a bit. I certainly think we ought to widen the range. I just don‘t see how we can operate on a narrower range even with less than the extreme volatility that Henry just mentioned. My disagreement with Steve would be that I was thinking of widening the range mostly in the downward direction rather than widening it on the up side. But I do think that’s a reasonable approach as we watch both the aggregates and the business news in the next six weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. There are differing opinions and considerations being discussed, but there is no direct conflict or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, I come to exactly the opposite conclusion that Steve did. I think we ought to pay careful attention to the aggregates and the growth in the aggregates in the period ahead. I’d widen the range on the funds rate and guard to see that we don’t have undue weakness in the aggregates. There‘s a good chance that the turn has already occurred in the economy, that March will have been the high in industrial production and that the second quarter--and we’re two-thirds through the second quarter--will be the high in real terms. 5/22/79 -23- There is a very good chance that that's true. We've always, with no exception that I can recall, had great difficulty keeping the aggregates growing in the early stages of a recession. To go to an interest rate target now at this turning point in the economy would be exactly the wrong prescription for the Committee to follow. S o ,  I would say that we ought to have an aggregates target with modest growth. What we ought to do to fight inflation is to see that we have only modest growth in the aggregates over a sustained period of time, not crunch the economy into what--1 agree with Frank--could be a very serious recession. I think we could be in a much more serious recession this year than the one in '74-'75. So I would like to see quite modest growth in the aggregates over a sustained period, and I think that probably means that we ought to have a wider funds rate range. If I could echo what was said I guess by John Balles, it may be that a somewhat lower funds rate would be consistent with the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee disagrees with Steve's conclusion and suggests a different approach to monetary policy. He argues for paying attention to the aggregates and ensuring modest growth, while also widening the funds rate range.


Passage number 137.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 138.
 MS. TEETERS. I find it interesting that everyone is saying that they agree with the staff projection but we're all, almost to a person, talking recession for the first time. I don't see the strength from the consumer side to keep [the economy] going at the rate that is being projected by the staff. These low levels of disposable personal income are such that they won't support an expansion in that range. In essence, I think we have accomplished much of what we started out to do last fall, which was to slow the growth in nominal GNP. Now, it came out of real growth and not inflation, but that shouldn't surprise any of us given the action by OPEC. I also think a move to tighten at this time is just out of the question as far as the domestic economy is concerned. And it would be the wrong prescription for the international situation; I think it would make things worse in trying to keep the [exchange] values of the yen, the mark, the Swiss franc, and the dollar all together. Evidence of further tightening here would just lead to a further appreciation of the dollar in the international market. However, I'm not quite ready to back down [completely]. little. And the only reason I think we should move [the funds rate] down a bit is that it's six weeks until the next [meeting]. I believe the rest of the information coming in over the quarter is going to be poor. But we do have our telephone network. Consequently, I would recommend staying where we are and, if anything, I would probably widen the fed funds range. And if I understand it, I can understand why [Steve was] calling for a widening of the ranges on the monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters expresses her disagreement with the staff projection and suggests that the economy may not have the strength to sustain the projected growth. She also disagrees with the idea of tightening at the current time and believes it would be the wrong prescription for the international situation. Additionally, she disagrees with the idea of moving the funds rate down completely, but suggests a small decrease and widening of the fed funds range instead.


Passage number 139.
 I think we should be backing down a CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy. Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply thanking Nancy for a suggestion or comment.


Passage number 140.
 MR. BLACK. M r .  Chairman, we have various [developments], all of which have been mentioned but in slightly different combinations. For some months now we have been fearing that [the economy] might be near a turning point, and we could argue that conceivably we might have passed it now. We could see a little more weakness in consumer spending because of attrition in real income and less [strength] in residential construction. This flurry of indicators that we have had, ending with a decline in new orders that you reported to us, creates more than just a mere suspicion that the economy has weakened 5/22/19 -24- significantly. So, our guess is that it is right at a turning point or even beyond it. Now, having said that, I end up in roughly the same position as Governors Coldwell and Wallich in saying that I think inflation is still the major policy problem that we have to confront. I think it's good to bear in mind the fact that following the November 1973 turning point inflation accelerated for some time, credit demand expanded, there was a lot of upward pressure on interest rates, and M1 grew fairly rapidly. So I think we've got to be concerned about this and, as Chuck was suggesting a while ago, our objective ought to be to get the rate of growth in the aggregates down--gradually, but nevertheless down. So far as the discount rate is concerned, M r .  Chairman, I recognize the arguments posed by the current spread [between the discount rate and the funds rate]. I wish that in the past we had adjusted the discount rate more promptly to keep it more closely in alignment with the federal funds rate, but we have not done that. If at this particular juncture we are in fact near a turning point, [to move the discount rate up now] would look rather bad on the record, so I would not favor it for that reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses concern about the weakening economy and the need to address inflation, but does not disagree with anyone else's views or opinions.


Passage number 141.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Willis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 142.
 MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I sense a growing ugly mood in our society. I don't know whether the reaction is going to be in the political sector or in the economic sector or in the racial area, but I suspect it won't be a moderate reaction. So I think we are in for some rather volatile times ahead that could throw these estimates off, but I certainly don't want to predict them. My feeling would be that this is not the time to tighten. But in view of the uncertainties and the inflation problem and other problems, I would say that we would be well advised to stay where we are in terms of the current status of policy. I would favor a slight increase in the discount rate because of the position of the banks; the inviting differential there is hard for them to resist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses a sense of uncertainty and acknowledges the potential for volatile times ahead. They mention different sectors (political, economic, racial) that could be affected and states that they do not want to predict the exact outcome. Additionally, the speaker suggests staying where they are in terms of policy but also mentions a slight increase in the discount rate. These conflicting ideas and perspectives indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 143.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Willis. Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude from one person named Dave to another named Willis.


Passage number 144.
 MR. EASTBURN. I continue to think that we are going to have a recession of probably moderate dimensions and I believe we may be pretty close to a turning point if not there. I would agree with Frank that ordinarily we should be anticipating that and should not run the risk of overstaying the expansion as we have often done. In view of that, I have spent a little time trying to think through the strategy for the next year or so. In thinking about that I am assuming that we will continue to have substantial inflation and that the dollar will continue to be in some jeopardy. And if we do have a recession, even of relatively modest proportions, the budget situation will turn around and we'll see increased deficits. So we will be getting more stimulus from fiscal policy. Given the characteristics of the situation that we will be confronted with in the next year, I think we should probably have less easing in monetary policy than we ordinarily would in a recessionary environment. This leads me to feel that we should not be as hasty to ease as we ordinarily might be. And when we do ease, we should perhaps not be overzealous in easing and should strive for what Chuck has suggested--the kind of moderate increases in the aggregates that we need to have for some sustained period of time. With that kind of a strategy for the longer range, it 5/22/79 -25- seems to me that the message for today is that we ought to hold where we are. I'd watch [developments] and not be hasty to ease. So, I would stay where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Eastburn, is discussing his thoughts on the current economic situation and his strategy for the future. He expresses his belief that a recession may be approaching and he suggests a cautious approach to monetary policy. There is no indication of disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Dave. Monroe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 146.
 MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, we have just concluded a series of meetings with business leaders around the District and two impressions continued to come through almost monotonously. One was the fear of continuing and even escalating inflation and the other was concern about the supply of gasoline. Coming from those meetings I guess we have more reason to believe that we are now in or very near some business slowdown. I'm not saying that that's bad; it may be bad or it may be timely. Frankly, we have reason to hope it's true and that the slowdown will be moderate and last for some modest period of time. Our projections are pretty close to those of the staff. We [agree with1 those generally. Moving [on to other1 concerns that we heard in these discussions, many related particularly to the recreational field. Cruise ships are altering drastically their pattern of going to ports where they cannot be refueled. For the first time since it opened, Opryland in Nashville, Tennessee had motel rooms available over the weekend before last. Travel in the area is limited over the weekends, not because gasoline is unavailable but because people fear that it may not be available. The coal operators that we talked with characterized [their business] as a disaster area. Inventories are tremendous; even at reduced [prices] there are no markets available. Some of the mines are simply discontinuing operations temporarily. In the natural gas area they are talking of abundant supplies and no limit until maybe it all comes to a screeching halt in late '81 or '82. Residential activity, particularly in South Florida, is of boom proportions. The activity there is just unbelievable, with much of it coming from offshore Caribbean interests that are buying not one, but four or five units at a time. Some are occupying units and some are not even bothering to occupy them. There is no restraint for funds that we detect from the banks; however, we are beginning to learn more and more of some restraints at the thrift institutions. In terms of the major feeling that came through in our discussions with these people, it was not one of recession but rather a modest [slowdown]. We are inclined to believe that the widening of the ranges that Steve is suggesting is fine; we don't have any difficulty with that. But, frankly, we would be very anxious to maintain the present posture with regard to the funds rate. We rather like it where it is and think it is taking its toll. If we had any strong feeling, it would definitely be against any downward drift [in rates]. We think that would be wrong and would be interpreted in the market as a feeling that we are giving up to some extent on our tug against inflation. As for the discount rate, we would favor a slight increase simply as an adjustment move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 147.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Bones. Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 148.
 MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, those of us who watch the longer- term behavior of the aggregates are not in the slightest surprised by the fact that we are seeing a softening in the economy. There is absolutely no question in our mind that this problem is with us; the 5/22/79 -26- only questions that we see are how deep the downturn or recession will be and how long it will persist. Of course, we believe that the key to how deep this recession will be and how long it will persist lies in the control of growth in the aggregates. We do not believe that the aggregates have a life of their own; we think they are controllable. We believe that as long as the Committee continues to attempt to stabilize the federal funds rate, we are going to have the volatility in the behavior of the aggregates to which some of the preceding speakers have referred. concentrating on aggregate growth, we would seek a 2 to 3 percent rate of growth in M1; that may be [equivalent to] a 6 percent rate in the old pre-ATS days. We don't think the upturn in M1 in April is necessarily conclusive evidence that growth will continue. We should watch it. The way we see it, any one month uptick or downtick in the monetary aggregates is not very indicative of anything. If we had our druthers--and we don't have our druthers--and were really concentrating on control of the aggregates, we would encourage a widening of the fed funds range and a narrowing of the target ranges for the aggregates. Finally, in anticipation of the inevitable tendency to swing [policy] around the other way and become expansive if a recession occurs--and we think one will occur--1 would hope that in the calm of this day we can resolve not to repeat past errors. Let's resolve not to panic at that time, not to move aggressively toward expansion or to respond to the political pressures to get ourselves out of a softened economy. Basically, I think we ought to be firm. I'd like to see us target on the aggregates; I don't think I will live to see it, but that would be our prescription, M r .  Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their beliefs and opinions about the state of the economy and their preferred approach to controlling growth in the aggregates. They are not directly addressing or responding to any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 149.
 If we were controlling and CHAIRMAN MILLER. With life expectancies what they are today, Larry, who knows. Thank you all very much. With that degree of wisdom--I cannot say unanimity--perhaps we should take a break and think about it. We can come back in 15 or 20 minutes and make a decision. Is that all right with everybody. We will recess now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests taking a break and coming back later to make a decision, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict among the group.


Passage number 150.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN MILLER. Are we all back. Anyone who is not here please speak up. Are any other chairs vacant. The durable orders figures are now available; they will be released at 2 : 3 0  p.m. so we should keep them confidential until then. I haven't seen the details but you now have them, Jim, so why don't you just give us the rundown. We are missing Phil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information and making a request for someone to give an update on the durable orders figures.


Passage number 151.
 MR. KICHLINE. Durable goods orders are down 8-314 percent in total.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a fact about durable goods orders being down by 8-314 percent in total.


Passage number 152.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. This is April over March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that April is over March without any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 153.
 MR. KICHLINE. Right, and this is the advance number. As you know, the numbers have been bouncing around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states that the numbers have been fluctuating.


Passage number 154.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. March was revised, incidentally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given phrase "March was revised, incidentally" is a statement of fact and does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that the month of March has been revised, possibly with no particular relevance to any ongoing debate or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 155.
 MR. KICHLINE. That's right, March is now up 2-314 percent. I don't have the earlier number with me, but that is not a big change. primary metals are down 8-1/2 percent; they were up 1-3/4 percent in 5/22/19 -21- March. Most importantly, nondefense capital goods orders are reported in this advance number as down 13-1/2 percent for April and they were up 6-1/4 percent for March. Even if one strips out aircraft, the numbers are very weak; so [the total1 is not bouncing around because of aircraft orders. It is a general picture of negatives across the board.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a series of percent changes in various industries and highlighting the negative trends observed.


Passage number 156.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Jim. To proceed with our discussion of current monetary policy and the domestic policy directive, I have asked Steve to take his unpopular theory, which didn't exactly gain wide support and enthusiastic applause, and reduce it to something specific so at least we can start off this discussion with something before us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is thanking Jim and asking Steve to clarify his theory, acknowledging that it may not have gained widespread support. However, they still want to have something specific to discuss.


Passage number 157.
 MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would recommend for Committee consideration the alternative B range for the federal funds rate, which is 10 to 10-1/2 percent centered at 10-l/4 percent--the prevailing federal funds rate. With regard to the aggregates, I would suggest an M1 range of 0 to 5-1/2 percent, which is a wide range, with more of an increase on the up side compared with alternative B than on the down side. That would mean, if the Committee adopted a money market directive as I would also suggest, that easing would occur until M1 got above the midpoint of the long-run range. With regard to M2, in view of recent events and to provide some room for the shifting of funds to banks because of the regulation Q action taken in the spring, I would recommend a range of 4 to 9 percent, one percentage point higher on the upper end than the alternative B range. In terms of M2 then, no tightening would occur until M2 was well into its long- run range. And as I indicated, M r .  Chairman, I believe that a money market directive is desirable under the current circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making recommendations and explaining their reasoning.


Passage number 158.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Steve, thank you. I think it might be helpful for the Committee to turn to page 10 of the Bluebook. There you have, in effect, a display of the alternative B ranges. Jot down in pencil that the alternative B range for the federal funds rate is 10 to 10-1/2 percent. All the other data for alternative B are there. You will recall that Steve is suggesting 0 to 5-1/2 percent [for the M1 range] but alternative B as printed is 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent; and the dotted line shows that 3-1/2 percent is the rate of growth we would need in M1 from April for six months to get us to the midpoint of our long-term range. Likewise, for M2 the alternative B range shown is 4 to 8 percent and Steve is suggesting 4 to 9 percent. Again, the dotted line--going out to 8 percent in the future--is the rate at which M2 would have to grow for six months to be at the midpoint of our long-term range. Why don't we start with our Vice Chairman. Paul, what would be your suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about different ranges and suggestions.


Passage number 159.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to raise a technical question and make a technical point. You estimate that about 10 percent of the April growth was due to the tax business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states the intention to raise a technical question and make a technical point.


Passage number 160.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod simply affirms the statement made by someone else.


Passage number 161.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have assumed that will be washed out in the next month or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply states a assumption without any conflicting or contradictory information.


Passage number 162.
 MR. AXILROD. That's right. We have a little stronger growth rate on average for April and May together than we think is the 5/22/79 -28- underlying trend. June itself. at around 5 percent, is closer to what we think is the underlying trend, even though that‘s a shade above it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's assessment of the growth rate for April, May, and June.


Passage number 163.
 S o  we washed out the April-- VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These numbers that we’re looking at for May and June are really below normal in some sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the numbers for May and June are lower than normal.


Passage number 164.
 MR. AXILROD. Well, we have zero for May. At current interest rates we think the normal rate would be more like 3-112 to 4 percent on average if the ATS stays as it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 165.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn’t be all that far from wheEe Steve is. On the funds rate, I have no problem. AS I suggested earlier, taking account of the unwinding of the tax effects, I would prefer to see the M1 range go from a minus number up to 4-112 percent: and I’d keep the M2 range near where it is. I would treat it during the period very much as Steve suggested: If [money growth] really goes down, I’d lower the funds rate; and if it goes to the up side, I‘d move up pending some dramatic business news. [at least] one piece of disappointing news. Housing starts [are disapointingl; durable goods are even more so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing the speaker's preference and agreement with Steve's suggestion regarding the M1 range and the funds rate. The mention of disappointing news about housing starts and durable goods does not indicate disagreement, but rather a statement of observation.


Passage number 166.
 Each meeting we get: CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Paul. Did you say you would agree with the money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that at each meeting they receive a thank you and a question regarding agreement with the money market directive.


Passage number 167.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I could go either way on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is indicating that they are open to either option and do not have a strong preference or opinion.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Now let’s start alphabetically. John Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests starting alphabetically with the name "John Balles."


Passage number 169.
 MR. BALLES. I wonder if I could ask first, Mr. Chairman, for a clarification by Steve to make sure I understand the ground rules regarding how this money market directive would work within the broader ranges that we’re talking about. I’m not sure I got that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply seeking clarification to better understand the topic being discussed.


Passage number 170.
 MR. AXILROD. As I would understand it, President Balles, the Manager would raise the funds rate from 10-114 toward 10-1/2 percent, at as deliberate a speed as the market could bear, when M1 and M2 on average got toward the top of their ranges. There would be a degree of flexibility as to whether he would start moving with M1 at either 5 or 5-112 percent. If it was over the range, he would then have to be at the top of the federal funds rate and would have to come back to the Committee for instructions. It’s symmetrical reasoning, of course, on the down side. So a money market directive would imply a less prompt movement relative to the aggregates than a monetary aggregates directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is describing the proposed actions and decision-making process of President Balles, the Manager. There is no conflicting view or argument presented.


Passage number 171.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. You mean an old money market directive instead of the managed money market directive we’ve been using.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a clarification or correction regarding the type of money market directive that has been used.


Passage number 172.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes, that’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person simply confirms that the statement made is correct.


Passage number 173.
 MR. BALLES. I thought I understood you to say, Steve, with respect to your 0 to 5-1/2 percent M1 range that no easing would occur until M1 got down to the zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles is simply stating his understanding of Steve's statement without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 174.
 MR. AXILROD. That’s right. But zero or half-- 5/22/79 -29- M R .  BALLES. Close to it at least.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod's statement is confirmed and supported by Mr. Balles' response.


Passage number 175.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. That would get [Ml] to the bottom end of the long-run range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a straightforward statement without any indication of opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 176.
 MR. BALLES. No tightening would occur, however, until M1 was growing at around 5-1/2 percent. I wish you hadn't called on me first. I could think about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion or preference about the order in which they were called upon, but there is no disagreement or conflict about the content of the statement itself.


Passage number 177.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you want us to skip you for a moment. M R .  BALLES. May I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It consists of a question and an individual asking for permission to speak.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Sure. Bob Black. M R .  BLACK. I'll be glad to help him out, Mr. Chairman. It seems likely to me that any further tightening could certainly aggravate any recession that might be developing. At the same time, I don't think we ought to abdicate to the forces of inflation. So I think Steve has done remarkably well in choosing the proper ranges. Though mine were slightly different, I can buy his ranges completely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses support and agreement with Steve's choices, acknowledging that although their own preferences were slightly different, they are still able to fully support and accept Steve's ranges.


Passage number 179.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. That is helpful. I didn't think I'd see that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "That is helpful. I didn't think I'd see that" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply expresses surprise and appreciation for something that was not expected.


Passage number 180.
 MR. BLACK. Well, it's for unusual reasons; I didn't get there by the same route he traveled.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's statement about how he arrived at his destination by a different route than the person being referred to.


Passage number 181.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil. M R .  COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, the ranges Steve suggested are just about one half point off my suggestion. I thought we ought to go from 0 to 5 percent on M1. On M2 I had 4 to 8 percent rather than the 4 to 9 percent; I could accept 8-1/2 percent. It seems to me that the 10 to 10-1/2 percent range on federal funds is a bit narrow, but given the way we are consulting I guess it doesn't matter if we're going to move it up [as necessary].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Phil M. R. Coldwell, does not express any disagreement or contention in the passage. They are simply discussing their suggested ranges for different variables.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Why don't we just do away with the Desk and have a daily conference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is proposing a suggestion or idea without expressing any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 183.
 MR. COLDWELL. That's a possibility. I do want to understand a little more [precisely], Steve, whether we're talking about the Desk not moving until we reach the 5 percent or the 8 percent levels or conversely the 0 or 4 percent levels. That means we're using up the entire range on the aggregates before there is any move off the 10-1/4 percent funds rate, which is the midpoint of the funds range you're talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 184.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 185.
 MR. COLDWELL. In other words, we hold the market steady until we hit the outer bounds, whatever they may be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell is describing a strategy of keeping the market steady until a certain limit is reached, without explicitly expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 186.
 MR. AXILROD. Or are very close to them. M R .  COLDWELL. A 16th or a 32nd of a point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or possibility without any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 187.
 5/22/79 -30- MR. STERNLIGHT. Within 1/2 percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a measurement or value.


Passage number 188.
 MR. AXILROD. I think within 1/2 point, [as] in the past, depending on how much certainty we have regarding the data on the aggregates. M R .  COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply stating a belief about the potential variability of data within a certain range, based on the certainty of the information. Mr. Coldwell's response is not provided, so there is no indication of disagreement.


Passage number 189.
 Well, I just wanted the ground rules straight this time so we don't have another-- MR. AXILROD. That's with the money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a desire to clarify the ground rules to avoid any future issues. The mention of the money market directive does not indicate disagreement but rather serves as an example of a previous situation that may have prompted the need for clear rules.


Passage number 190.
 MR. COLDWELL. That's all I have. I'd go with a money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their preference for a money market directive.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Phil. Bones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you, Phil. Bones" does not indicate any conflict or differing opinions.


Passage number 192.
 MR. KIMBREL. I like the idea of a money market directive. I, too, had in mind for M1 that maybe a range of 0 to 5 percent would be fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kimbrel expresses agreement and support for the idea of a money market directive and suggests a specific range of 0 to 5 percent for M1.


Passage number 193.
 And for M2 I had thought maybe 4 to 8 percent-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. And otherwise the same. The fed funds range is okay as proposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing a thought and agreement with the proposed fed funds range.


Passage number 194.
 MR. KIMBREL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states "Mr. Kimbrel. Yes." without any further context or information to indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 195.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Bones. Bob Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 196.
 MR. MAYO. I don't have any particular problem if we use a money market directive in going with 0 to 5 percent. On M2 I'm indifferent on whether the range is 4 to 8 or 4 to 9 percent. If we did go to a monetary aggregates directive, I would narrow the ranges on both M1 and M2. There is a little quirk here that probably should be mentioned, but it may not be of any importance. And that is that our present directive has a fed funds range of 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent. Granted, we don't let out the new information until after the next meeting, which is a long time from now. But I'm just wondering if it would look as if the Committee had indeed tightened up from 9-3/4 to 10 percent on the lower bound of our funds rate range. So I'd prefer an asymmetrical midpoint of 10-1/4 percent and I'd keep the 9-3/4 percent as the lower bound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their preferences and suggesting a possible adjustment to the directive, but there is no opposition or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 197.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 198.
 MR. PARTEE. I think that's an important point you made, Bob, about the funds rate range having been at 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent, so there would be an appearance of tightening if we went to 10 to 10-1/2 percent. Of course my view, as I expressed before, is that we ought to ease. So I would put the funds range at 9-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent, making it a little easier than last time. There has been plenty in the news to justify an immediate reduction of a quarter point in the funds rate. I'm referring not only to the new orders figures, which are going to hit like a ton of bricks, but also to housing starts, which were disappointing, and to industrial production, employment, and retail sales data. All those data have come out since the last meeting of the Committee and in addition we have the fuel shortage. In effect, it's all new news that we're looking at in today's meeting. So I would take 9-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent as the range, with a 10 percent midpoint and a prompt move to the 10 percent. 5/22/19 -31- On the aggregates, just judging from this longer-term chart, I would not like to see M1 as low as zero for the two months, which would put it below the bottom end of the range again. So I would suggest 1 to 5 percent for M1. On M2 I think we ought to recognize that money market certificates are doing much better in the banks because of our success in getting rid of the differential, and for M2 I think we ought to have 5 to 9 percent, which would also move us about to the bottom--perhaps just slightly above the bottom--of the range by the end of the projection period. And as I said before, I would take the aggregates directive. I think it's much more clearly indicated now than it has been at any time in the last six months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses his personal view and suggests a range for the funds rate and the aggregates, but there is no indication of disagreement or opposing viewpoints from other individuals.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 200.
 MS. TEETERS. I'd keep the funds range at 9-3/4 to 10-112 percent because if we do need to [ease policy], that gives us more leeway to do it. Also, I think Bob's point is right: I don't think we want even the appearance of tightening at this point. And I have no preference on the ranges for the monetary aggregates: 0 to 5-112 percent is fine and 4 to 9 percent is fine. I would go with a money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is agreeing with Bob's point and expressing her own preferences without opposition or contradicting anyone else's statements.


Passage number 201.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy. Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses gratitude to Nancy.


Passage number 202.
 MR. WALLICH. Well, the news isn't very conducive to [focusing on1 what I think is important. The news that we hear is all about the business cycle and very little about inflation. I think monetary policy at this time doesn't do very much to the real sector: it doesn't shape expectations. So I would go for a mild tightening. I agree with Steve on a widening of the ranges but I'd widen them at the lower side so as not to trigger a reduction [in the funds rate] if the very unreliable aggregates should come out [on the low side]. On M1 I'd say -1 to 4 percent and on M2 2 to I percent. I'd move the federal funds rate up to 10-1/2 percent within a range of 10-1/4 to 10-3/4 percent and adopt a money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 203.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Henry. Ernie M R .  BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I would prefer alternative B as specified in the Bluebook and with an aggregates directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

The passage indicates disagreement as the speaker explicitly states their preference for alternative B, while mentioning the Bluebook's specification and the aggregates directive. This implies that there is an alternative or different option being considered, leading to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 204.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Ernie. Dave. M R .  EASTBURN. I would agree with Steve's proposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with Steve's proposal.


Passage number 205.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Roger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 206.
 MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would go for an M1 range of 1 to 5 percent rather than zero on the bottom with the anticipation that we may get weak growth that would trigger a downward movement [in the federal funds rate]. I'd go with 4 to 9 percent on M2 and 10 to 10-112 percent on the funds rate with a money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Guffey with his suggested ranges for M1, M2, and the funds rate.


Passage number 207.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Roger. Frank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 208.
 MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I agree with Chuck Partee's aggregates of 1 to 5 percent and 5 to 9 percent but I think his federal funds range is a bit too timid. History tells us that in a 5/22/79 -32- recession it's very difficult to get monetary aggregates to grow unless we push interest rates down. So I think the funds range ought to be 9-112 to 10 percent with a move to 9-314. M R .  PARTEE. Of course, Frank. if the aggregates come in really low--if they come in minus, say--we'd have to take another look.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Mr. Morris is expressing his disagreement with Mr. Partee's suggestion for the federal funds range, but there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee's response indicates agreement and a willingness to reassess if the aggregates come in lower than expected.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 209.
 MS. TEETERS. Do we have another month coming up like April, where we don't know what the seasonals are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is expressing confusion and frustration about not knowing what the "seasonals" are for the upcoming month.


Passage number 210.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Every month is that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Every month is that way" does not express any disagreement or contention. Instead, it suggests a consistent pattern or similarity between all months.


Passage number 211.
 MR. AXILROD. The next month that's like that [typically] has been July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about the typical weather pattern in July.


Passage number 212.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 213.
 MR. ROOS. I would prefer alternative B with a wider federal funds range of 9-314 to 10-112 percent. And in order to help the unreliable aggregates become a mite more reliable, I'd go with an aggregates directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 214.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Mark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. It is a simple expression of gratitude from Mark.


Passage number 215.
 MR. WILLES. I have a preference for "B" as it stands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker simply expresses their preference for option "B" without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Willis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple acknowledgement or agreement without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 217.
 MR. WINN. I support Steve's recommendation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker explicitly states that they support Steve's recommendation, indicating agreement rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. John Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, as there is no passage provided to analyze.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 219.
 MR. BALLES. I've wrestled with Steve's compromise because I have great respect for his recommendations. When everything is said and done, I do like a couple of things he recommended. I like the money market directive and the widening of the ranges. But to be true to my own convictions with respect to M1, I really have to be in favor of a 1 to 5 percent range and on M2 5 to 10 percent. The lower number of 5 percent is with a view to not driving [M21 further below our long-range target. On the federal funds range, my preference would be 9-112 to 10-112 percent with an immediate move to 10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: Mr. Balles disagrees with Steve's compromise on the recommended ranges for M1 and M2. He expresses his own conviction for a 1 to 5 percent range for M1 and a 5 to 10 percent range for M2. This shows that there is a disagreement on the appropriate ranges for these monetary measures.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's another one of those months. Looking at fed funds, six voting members have indicated a preference for leaving the fed funds rate at 10-114 percent. Of those, four want to have the range at 10 to 10-112. Two members want to move the rate immediately down to 10 percent and one wants to move it immediately up to 10-1/2 percent. Those who want to move down to 10 percent also want a range of 9-112 to 10-112 percent. And Governor Wallich wants to move the range up to 10-114 to 10-314 percent. As far as [preferences on] the ranges go, there's a mix. [For Ml] zero is the bottom on five of them. There are ones and minus ones. I don't know if we can synthesize this or not. It looks easier to do the fed funds range than the aggregates ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage mentions different preferences for the fed funds rate and its range among the voting members, ranging from leaving it at 10-114 percent to moving it down to 10 percent or up to 10-1/2 percent. Additionally, there is a mix of preferences when it comes to the ranges and some uncertainty about whether it can be synthesized or not.


Passage number 221.
 5/22/19 -33- MR. COLDWELL. I suspect you could do it by testing Committee sentiment on the boundaries. Take the boundaries on the top and bottom: 10 versus 9-3/4 percent; 0 versus 1 percent; and 5 versus 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a method to test Committee sentiment on different boundaries. There is no indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 222.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, nobody suggested 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage doesn't contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states that nobody suggested 6 percent.


Passage number 223.
 MR. WALLICH. I thought Bob Mayo came out with 0 to 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 224.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Mayo, according to my list, had 0 to 5 percent. Did I get that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation or verification of the information they have, specifically regarding Bob Mayo and his percentage.


Passage number 225.
 MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think [most] were for 0 or 1 percent on the bottom and 4 or 5 percent on the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker simply states their belief about the distribution of percentages, without any conflicting opinion being mentioned.


Passage number 226.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, 4-1/2 to 5 percent. Let's try to specify [the ranges] for a moment. People have different [preferences but] let's still try 0 to 5 percent. That seems to be the most predominant one. The next most predominant one seems to be 4 to 8-1/2 or 9 percent [for M21. On the fed funds range, the midpoint seems to be predominantly 10-1/4 percent. And one could make a case that if we combine those who want lower with those who want higher [limitsl, we might maintain the 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent range and have an asymmetrical midpoint. I'm not sure that fits anybody's definition but we might try that in terms of a tentative look.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 227.
 MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, may I make one suggestion. If it's a question of the publicity of [a change from] 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent, as I believe both President Mayo and Governor Teeters mentioned, you could marry that with the 10 to 10-1/2 percent by simply indicating that there might be a telephone conference if the rate got down to 10 percent--before a move to 9-3/4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a suggestion made by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 228.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 229.
 In other words, we could leave the 9-3/4 percent [lower limit] and merely say that we'd have a call if it got down- - MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is only describing a possible action without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 230.
 That way you wouldn't have-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. We'd have an understanding to that effect. Well, it looks as if we'll probably have a telephone conversation anyway. With that caveat, let's see who would buy that: Aggregates ranges of 0 to 5 and 4 to 9 percent, and 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 for the funds rate, with the 10-1/4 percent rate maintained for the time being and a conference call if it gets to 10 percent and is going down. what would be the sentiment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 231.
 MR. ALTMA". Do you want a show of hands or do you want me to call the roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 232.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Why don't you just call the others; don't call me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that the speaker would prefer not to be called and suggests calling someone else instead.


Passage number 233.
 MR. ALTMA". Vice Chairman Volcker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the title and name of the person, Mr. Altma, and mentioning Vice Chairman Volcker.


Passage number 234.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess this is within my limits of tolerance. If we go down to 9-3/4 percent on the funds 5/22/79 -34- rate, we ought to go to 8-1/2 percent on M2. That would make me a little happier but you're right about the understanding on the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker seems to be agreeing with the other person's understanding about the funds rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 235.
 MR. ALTMA". President Balles. PRESIDENT BALLES. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the use of the titles "Mr. Altma" and "President Balles," which suggests that they are addressing each other in a formal or confrontational manner.


Passage number 236.
 MR. ALTMANN. President Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It only mentions Mr. Altmann addressing President Black without providing any context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 237.
 MR. BLACK. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The word "Yes" in this context is simply an affirmative response to a question or statement. It does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 238.
 MR. ALTMANN. Governor Coldwell. M R .  COLDWELL. I agree with Paul. I prefer 8-1/2 percent [on M2] but the rest of it is acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Altman and Mr. Coldwell express agreement and preference for the same percentage, stating that the rest of it is acceptable.


Passage number 239.
 MR. ALTMANN. President Kimbrel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further information. The passage only mentions Mr. Altmann talking to President Kimbrel, but there is no indication of any conflicting or contradictory opinions or statements.


Passage number 240.
 MR. KIMBREL. I could buy it, but I would prefer the 8-1/2 percent also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Kimbrel's preference for the 8-1/2 percent.


Passage number 241.
 MR. ALTMA". President Mayo M R .  MAYO. I also would prefer the 8-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply includes a conversation between Mr. Altma and President Mayo without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 242.
 MR. ALTMA". Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states the name "MR. ALTMA" and mentions Governor Partee without providing any context or information about their relationship or any disagreement between them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 243.
 MR. PARTEE. I can't support it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The word "can't" suggests that the speaker, Mr. Partee, does not agree with or approve of something, hence indicating contention.


Passage number 244.
 MR. ALTMA". Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply mentions "Mr. Altma" and "Governor Teeters" without any indication of disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 245.
 MS. TEETERS. I can support it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement indicated in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their ability to support an argument or position.


Passage number 246.
 MR. ALTMA". Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. It simply mentions the name of Mr. Altma and then changes topic to Governor Wallich.


Passage number 247.
 MR. WALLICH. NO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states "NO" in response to an unknown question.


Passage number 248.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do the same thing with 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply instructs the reader to perform the same action with the given percentage.


Passage number 249.
 MR. ALTMA".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions the name "Mr. Altma" without providing any context or information that could imply disagreement or debate.


Passage number 250.
 Vice Chairman Volcker President Balles President Black Governor Coldwell President Kimbrel President Mayo Governor Partee Governor Teeters Governor Wallich Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes No CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, John, to make it acceptable to you what changes would need to be made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage lists a series of names, and there is no indication of any contention or disagreement among these individuals. The question at the end of the passage is unrelated to the names listed and does not introduce any disagreement either.


Passage number 251.
 MR. BALLES. Some that are not acceptable to the clear majority. I have felt for several months now, and have so 5/22/79 -35- recommended, that we should be edging down on the funds rate. And I think this time I've got to stick to my guns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, expresses his personal opinion about edging down on the funds rate and mentions his determination to stick to his viewpoint. There is no indication of opposition or conflicting views expressed.


Passage number 252.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Chuck what change would you need to be satisfied.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for clarification or input from Chuck.


Passage number 253.
 MR. PARTEE. I could accept it a l l  if we had a monetary aggregates directive. [in a position similar to that of] John Balles, I suppose. You want to tighten and he wants to go lower and you can't change your philosophical position I suppose. funds rate, to 10-3/8 percent, but I don't see anybody who is much inclined to go that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply highlighting different perspectives on monetary policy.


Passage number 254.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right, we'll test that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker will proceed with testing something.


Passage number 255.
 Henry, you're MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply addressing someone named Henry as "Mr. Wallich."


Passage number 256.
 I could compromise on a small increase in the CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, let's just see what the vote would be if it were an aggregates directive instead, with 0 to 5, 4 to 8-1/2, and 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing the possibility of compromise and exploring different scenarios for a vote.


Passage number 257.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would the aggregates directive be consistent or inconsistent with the Axilrod caveat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any information about the content or nature of the aggregates directive or the Axilrod caveat, so it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement between them.


Passage number 258.
 MR. PARTEE. Oh, no it can't be consistent with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Oh, no it can't be consistent with that" does not show any disagreement, but rather a rejection or contradiction of a previous idea or assumption.


Passage number 259.
 MR. MAYO. No. then it's a money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is straightforward without any contradictory or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 260.
 MR. WINN. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot answer this question as key information is missing.


Passage number 261.
] CHAIRMAN MILLER. We'd have to get rid of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage alone. The sentence suggests a need for removal or elimination without specifying any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 262.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine as the passage is not provided.


Passage number 263.
 He said we wouldn't go below 10 percent-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Without consulting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating what someone else said without expressing their own opinion or contradicting the statement.


Passage number 264.
 MR. PARTEE. With a monetary aggregates directive, if the aggregates are weak, we're going to go below 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply describes a hypothetical situation without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 265.
 MR. AXILROD. The caveat was "without consulting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by Mr. Axilrod is merely stating a caveat or condition without expressing any disagreement with it.


Passage number 266.
' MS. TEETERS. But if we go to a [monetary aggregates] directive, Steve's scenario would change. How would it change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply posing a hypothetical scenario and asking how it would alter the situation.


Passage number 267.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes. we would move the funds rate up or down well before the aggregates got to the outer limits of the ranges. We'd move more promptly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a hypothetical scenario without any opposing opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 268.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. If the aggregates are strong, we would tighten sooner; and if they are weak, we would ease sooner without consulting until the funds rate gets to 10 percent and then we'd consult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement provides a conditional statement, indicating that the timing of tightening or easing monetary policy depends on the strength or weakness of the aggregates. It also mentions that consultation would be necessary once the funds rate reaches 10 percent. However, there is no conflicting or opposing viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 269.
 MR. WALLICH. But these [aggregates] are very unreliable now. I don't know why we should expose ourselves to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Wallich expresses his opinion that the aggregates mentioned are unreliable, but there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement. The statement is more of a personal observation or question rather than a direct argument against someone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 270.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "CHAIRMAN MILLER" simply identifies the person but does not provide any information or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 271.
 Well, that's just the sentiment-- 5/22/79 - 3 6 -  MR. PARTEE. I don't know why you say they're so unreliable. They haven't been unreliable at all except for one month--April. They've been very reliably weak every month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a statement and a response without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 272.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. If you want to tighten, that's not reliable .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It is an opinion or recommendation.


Passage number 273.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it's quite as good, but I can go along with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that they don't think something is as good but still agree to go along with it, indicating a willingness to compromise or accept the situation.


Passage number 274.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 275.
 MR. BALLES. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only contains a statement by Mr. Balles without any contradicting opinions or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 276.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Still "no." Bob Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement with no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 277.
 MR. BLACK. I cannot [agree to it], Mr. Chairman, if I interpret it correctly that this would mean we would raise the federal funds rate if M1 started coming in at 3-112 percent. That would be a tightening. If we had a money market directive on the top and an aggregates directive on the bottom, I could live with it a lot better. I would not want to tighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Black, disagrees with the idea of raising the federal funds rate if M1 started coming in at 3-112 percent. He believes that it would be a tightening and would prefer a different approach with a money market directive on the top and an aggregates directive on the bottom.


Passage number 278.
 If we tighten [with growth in M11 at 3-1/2 percent, we don't even approach-- MR. PARTEE. All we would do is move the funds rate 118 point at 3-112 percent [on M11. That's right at the borderline isn't it, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are discussing the effects of tightening and growth in M11, and they seem to be agreeing on the potential outcome.


Passage number 279.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes. The usual zone of indifference has been that or sometimes a little larger, depending on the uncertainty we feel about the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the usual zone of indifference and uncertainty regarding aggregates.


Passage number 280.
 MR. PARTEE. And M2 would [have to] be up there, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 281.
 MR. BLACK. At 6-114 percent, the way I figure it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Black, presenting his calculation or interpretation of something.


Passage number 282.
 MR. COLDWELL. About a 4 point zone of indifference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing information about a "4 point zone of indifference" without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 283.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "CHAIRMAN MILLER" only provides information about someone's title or position, and it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 284.
 Anyway, Bob, your sentiment would be-- MR. BLACK. I would vote against that, Mr. Chairman. As I interpret an aggregates directive, this is much tighter on the top side and it's easy on the down side. I'm more concerned about the weakness in the economy and I wouldn't want to tighten that soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. 

Explanation: The passage shows disagreement as Mr. Black states that he would vote against Bob's sentiment, expressing a different opinion on the matter. Mr. Black argues that the aggregates directive is tighter on the top side and easy on the down side, and expresses concerns about the weakness in the economy, indicating a disagreement with Bob's viewpoint on when to tighten the economy.


Passage number 285.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage because there is no conflicting or opposing position presented.


Passage number 286.
 MR. COLDWELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states that Mr. Coldwell responded with "yes." There is no further context or information provided to indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 287.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "Bones" is a simple noun and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 288.
 MR. KIMBREL. I really don't like it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states the personal opinion of Mr. Kimbrel, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 289.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. We're losing ground, Chuck. We gained your vote and lost three. Stop the count: let's forget it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that they are losing ground and mentions that they gained one vote but lost three. They suggest stopping the count and forgetting about it, implying a desire to avoid further loss.


Passage number 290.
 MR. PARTEE. I thought it was clever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses his personal opinion that he found something clever. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 291.
 5/22/19 -31- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Not clever enough. Have you another suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks if there is another suggestion since the previous suggestion was not considered clever enough.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 292.
 MR. PARTEE. No, I don't. I'd rather cut the funds rate to 10 percent right now, so I feel unhappy if I'm not permitted to do that. I would rather [vote against] the directive if that is not called for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses disagreement or contention by stating that he would rather vote against the directive if his preferred action of cutting the funds rate to 10 percent is not followed.


Passage number 293.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, we have a majority, I gather, of six to three. I wish we could narrow that spread. Is there anybody here from the State Department who knows how to put Israel and Egypt together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses a desire for narrowing the spread of the majority and asks if there is anyone from the State Department who can help with the situation.


Passage number 294.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only states the position or title of Vice Chairman Volcker, without providing any information or context that could suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 295.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Couldn't we promise Henry that at the We're not doing very well. proper time we will tighten and promise Chuck that at the appropriate time we will ease. M R .  MAYO. That's good. Let's leave it there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individuals are discussing a potential solution and come to an agreement by saying "That's good. Let's leave it there."


Passage number 296.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. And get the vote on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "And get the vote on that" does not express any disagreement or opposition, but rather suggests a desire for the decision to be put to a vote.


Passage number 297.
 MR. MORRIS. How do we know when the appropriate time is, M r .  Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is simply asking a question and seeking information.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Leave it up to the Chairman. Well, I think we better conclude this so we can go to lunch. We now have before us a proposal, which we are going to vote on officially. Maybe somebody will be kind and at the last moment switch. The range for M1 would be 0 to 5 percent and the range for M2 would be 4 to 8-1/2 percent. The fed funds rate would initially be at 10-1/4 percent and would move in a range of 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent but not below 10 percent without consultation. And the movement within the range would be based upon a money market directive. I shall vote for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 299.
 MR. AL"N. Vice Chairman Volcker President Balles President Black Governor Coldwell President Kimbrel President Mayo Governor Partee Governor Teeters Governor Wallich Yes NO Yes Yes Yes Yes NO Yes I wish I could but I can't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 300.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Put down a maybe. Thank you very much, I think. I suppose we will be calling up for a new directive in the interim period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses uncertainty and a need for further guidance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 301.
 MR. PARTEE. Especially with a I-week interval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement in the passage. The speaker says "especially with a I-week interval," implying that there is disagreement or contention regarding the effectiveness or feasibility of something within a one-week timeframe.


Passage number 302.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, I'm sure we will be. Now we'll move to consideration of the Manager's recommendations with respect to foreign currency operations. I'm very sorry that we have no swaps to renew this month, Alan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of polite and positive statements.


Passage number 303.
 5/22/19 -38- MR. HOLMES. That's exactly what I was going to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply indicates agreement between two individuals.


Passage number 304.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, I'm sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. It appears to be a straightforward statement of apology, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 305.
 MR. HOLMES. It is rather nice to be out of swap debt for the first time in almost ten years--the first time going back to the pre- 71 period [unintelligible] Swiss franc debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that it is nice to be out of swap debt for the first time in almost ten years.


Passage number 306.
 MR. MAYO. You're not going to retire on that note.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not involve any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the person being addressed will not retire on a certain note or reason.


Passage number 307.
 MR. HOLMES. No, I don't think that will be possible. It might be worthwhile, M r .  Chairman, to say a few words about our market operations on behalf of the Treasury as well as the Federal Reserve. As you know, earlier this year we were sharing with the Treasury any purchases of Deutschmarks that we made in the market, typically on a 50/50 basis, although different proportions were used at different times. After the Treasury was able to repay its remaining swap debt to the Bundesbank in late March, all March purchases, as noted, were for System account and were used to repay swap debt. After April 27 when that [swap] debt was finally repaid, all purchases have been to cover the Treasury's Carter bond indebtedness. A total of 5-1/2 billion Deutschmarks were involved in that and the Treasury had spent 1.2 billion of that amount in intervention earlier this year. The Treasury has already covered a billion of that amount. That means they only have about 210 million Deutschmarks to go. Once that has been accomplished, I think there would be a real possibility of the System once again sharing with the Treasury any Deutschmark purchases. That's all I have, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about market operations and the Treasury's involvement.


Passage number 308.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Any comments or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply inviting readers to provide comments or ask questions.


Passage number 309.
 MR. PARTEE. What do you mean by once again sharing Deutschmark purchases. We have shared them in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Party requesting clarification about the term "once again sharing Deutschmark purchases."


Passage number 310.
 MR. HOLMES. Oh, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement or question made by someone else.


Passage number 311.
 MR. PARTEE. Deutschmark purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no mention of contention or disagreement. It is a statement by someone named Mr. Partee about Deutschmark purchases.


Passage number 312.
 MR. HOLMES. Yes. All year, up until the time the Treasury got out of debt, we were sharing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about the Treasury getting out of debt.


Passage number 313.
 MR. PARTEE. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 314.
 MS. TEETERS. Does that mean that we'll be accumulating D-mark balances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or question about the accumulation of D-mark balances.


Passage number 315.
 MR. HOLMES. That would mean we would be accumulating. The amount, of course, would depend on what the Committee decides.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a potential outcome that is dependent on the decision of a committee.


Passage number 316.
 MR. WALLICH. Alan, could you recapitulate quickly how much the Treasury accumulated over what period of time so that one can get an idea of how fast this accumulation occurred.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a request for clarification and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 317.
 MR. HOLMES. The accumulation comes very fast on some days and then it just disappears. So I think one can't really take an average that's meaningful here. But the billion Deutschmarks have been accumulated since April 21, including purchases on April 27.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of factual information regarding the accumulation of a billion Deutschmarks since April 21, including purchases on April 27.


Passage number 318.
 5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -39- MR. WALLICH. Is there some flexibility, if we should be [approaching1 our limits on that accumulation, of pushing more of the intervention on the Bundesbank. My impression is that they have been reaching for it anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply discussing the possibility of pushing more intervention on the Bundesbank if there is a need for it.


Passage number 319.
 MR. HOLMES. I don't think there is any problem in pushing the Bundesbank to sell dollars. They are quite happy to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Holmes, expresses his belief that there is no problem in pushing the Bundesbank to sell dollars, and he states that the Bundesbank is willing to do so. His statement does not suggest any disagreement or opposition.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
 MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the actual passage provided, it is not possible to determine the specific details of the contention or disagreement.


Passage number 321.
 Until they reach a liquidity constraint problem which-- MR. HOLMES. Which is [some distance] away yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be determined by the lack of conflicting viewpoints or opposing statements among the mentioned individuals.


Passage number 322.
 MR. WALLICH. We could find ourselves accumulating in a couple of weeks an amount that we have debated about over a month on whether we should or should not. I just would like us to be aware of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely pointing out the potential consequence of a decision that has been debated for a month.


Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, we have [agenda item] number 9 coming right up for debate again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that agenda item number 9 will be up for debate again.


Passage number 324.
 MR. PARTEE. It could easily amount to a couple hundred million dollars a week, couldn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely asking for confirmation or agreement with their statement.


Passage number 325.
 MR. WALLICH. Easily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 326.
 It could be that in a day CHAIRMAN MILLER. The alternate choice is to have a strong dollar and, therefore, cut our inflationary pressures in this country. That would be rather unfortunate because it would show that we're interested in fighting inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting two possible choices without expressing a clear preference or disagreement between them.


Passage number 327.
 MR. WALLICH. That's our only hope now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that "That's our only hope now" without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 328.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, shall we move to item 9 .  We have [on the agenda] a discussion of the System's holdings of foreign currency balances. We have a memo, which I assume has been circulated to everyone. It's a very short memo. Steve and Alan will you [introduce the subject].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple discussion about moving on to the next item on the agenda and acknowledging the presence of a memo that has been circulated. There is no indication of any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 329.
 MR. AXILROD. M r .  Chairman, the Committee had a discussion of three memos [on this issue] at the last meeting. Following that discussion, the Committee asked us to present a specific proposal. This memo, briefly put, is our specific proposal. I have nothing further to add. Mr. Holmes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing an update on a previous discussion and stating that they have nothing further to add.


Passage number 330.
 MR. HOLMES. Mr. Chairman, I might just say a word about our current understanding with the Germans on the accumulation of Deutschmarks. At the very beginning the Germans At the May BIS meeting, however, Chairman Miller and Dr. Emminger agreed that it 5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -40- I understand, too, that Under Secretary Solomon reached an agreement with the German finance ministry just last week for the United States That’s for the United States, either the Treasury or the Federal Reserve. I’m not sure that all these agreements are engraved in stone and there seems to be some uncertainty as to who agreed to what. But I believe that is the position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and clarifying their understanding of agreements made with the Germans. They mention some uncertainty about the specifics of the agreements but do not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 331.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. There’s no misunderstanding on the 4.1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a numerical value, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 332.
 MR. HOLMES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Additional context is needed.


Passage number 333.
 The 2 billion I think-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. The 2 billion is news to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker was unaware of the information about the 2 billion.


Passage number 334.
 MR. HOLMES. It’s news to the Bundesbank, too. So I think that is left to be discussed. But in general the Germans are agreeable to the United States--the Treasury or the Fed--building up a certain amount of balances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that it is news to the Bundesbank, indicating a lack of knowledge, but goes on to say that in general, the Germans are agreeable to the United States building up balances. This does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 335.
 MR. WALLICH. Are there similar agreements with the Japanese.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply introduces the topic of agreements with the Japanese without providing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 336.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, we’re going to come to that in a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will address a specific topic later.


Passage number 337.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided in the question. Please provide the passage in order to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 338.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, Chuck, there are policy issues. And there is also a question of buying [marks] without any place to invest them, which isn‘t very attractive. So we need a little cooperation because having the Treasury holding sterile balances of marks is not attractive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement regarding policy issues and the unattractiveness of the Treasury holding sterile balances of marks without any place to invest them.


Passage number 339.
 MR. HOLMES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 340.
 Now we have reinvestment facilities for-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. They can deny [us the use of] these investment facilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement suggests contention or disagreement, as the speaker is indicating that there is a possibility of being denied the use of reinvestment facilities.


Passage number 341.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could invest in the Euro market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement or suggestion, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 342.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, but that creates all kinds of [complications]. We‘ve already agreed not to [do] that, so it’s more complicated. There is no problem on the 4.1 billion, which just brings the Treasury back to where it was on November 1. The policy memo presented sets forth the recommendation of our task group that we authorize the Federal Reserve System to hold up to $2 billion in foreign currencies concentrated in the principal currencies of DM, yen, and Swiss francs, with no more than $1 billion in any one currency and only relatively modest holdings of any other currencies that might be useful in transactions. Now, as for the Germans, as far as I know we have no understanding or commitment to accumulate balances at the moment for the Federal Reserve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "Yes, but that creates all kinds of complications" suggests disagreement or opposition to a previously mentioned idea. Additionally, the mention of already agreeing "not to do that" implies a difference of opinion or conflicting views.


Passage number 343.
 MR. HOLMES. I think the Bundesbank has said that they have no problems if it’s a small amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Holmes, regarding the Bundesbank's stance on a small amount, is made without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 344.
 5/22/79 -41- CHAIRMAN MILLER. But we haven't crossed that bridge in terms of [understandings with1 us. The Japanese government, both their ministry of finance and their central bank, have been urging that we go into joint intervention with them to show a force in the marketplace. The Treasury has been urging this upon us. We have been consulting with the Japanese as to whether a package could be put together that would be directed toward strengthening the yen, which seems to have depreciated too much and may result in aggravating surplus problems again later this year or next year. We originally had consulted to see what could be in such a package. They have taken some initiatives on their own to give guidance on capital outflows. They also have taken some liberalizing steps at the same time. That may [produce] countervailing forces but at least their consultations with their banking system now would begin to [set a] program schedule [relating to1 some of these outflows [that will] take a little pressure off. They still desire that we announce a program of joint intervention with them--a program designed to counter the excessive depreciation of the yen and assure an orderly market. The scale of such an intervention would be governed by [our decisions regarding the recommendations in] this memo. [Under this proposal] the most we could accumulate in yen would be $1 billion, which means that the most that we could accumulate beyond what we now have is about $813 million. The Treasury is prepared to intervene to the tune of $200 million in aggregate. It would seem to me that if we were interested in doing this, it would have a desirable market effect. Then we should limit our intervention to 10 percent of the aggregate. So if we were doing $1.2 billion, there would be $12 billion of total intervention before we did $1.2 billion, and the Japanese would do all the rest. We would not be running each account in that ratio but we'd be balancing out week to week to make sure that that relative ratio was maintained. Alan or Gretchen, do you have any views on how effective this would be in the market or whether it would be desirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the possibility of joint intervention with Japan to strengthen the yen in the marketplace.


Passage number 345.
 MR. HOLMES. I think the idea of the joint intervention probably would be impressive to the market. I start with that. As far as the operational side is concerned, if we can really work out a flexible system where we keep to the right proportions but not day by day, I think we can do it. But, Gretchen, you may have more operational problems with this than I'm suggesting. There are operational problems, but I think they're manageable. We were able to do that before with the Japanese when we were intervening on the other side--when we were acquiring yen we had joint intervention--and I think it can be done. CHAIRMAXT MILLER. Gretchen, any particular comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Holmes expresses his support for the idea of joint intervention and suggests that operational problems can be managed. He then acknowledges that Gretchen may have more operational problems to consider but does not argue against her potential concerns. Chairmaxt Miller, on the other hand, simply asks for Gretchen's input without showing any disagreement with the previous statements.


Passage number 346.
 MS. GREENE. I just wanted to say that on a day-by-day basis we are going to need operating flexibility because these formulae are very difficult to maintain in an ongoing operation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Greene is simply stating a fact or opinion about the need for operating flexibility due to the difficulty of maintaining certain formulae in an ongoing operation.


Passage number 347.
 MR. WALLICH. Also with respect to the Treasury's share there would need to be flexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 348.
 MS. GREENE. Yes, Henry, I'm afraid we do need that. We've come into a tremendous amount of paperwork problems, particularly when the proportions are so tight as 10 percent and 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Ms. Greene expresses that they do need the paperwork, indicating a potential disagreement or contention between her and Henry.


Passage number 349.
 5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -42- MR. WALLICH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a combination of numbers and the mention of Mr. Wallich. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 350.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Now, there are two questions before the Committee. I’m told by our Secretary that on the first one what we need is an understanding that the policy set forth in this memo is acceptable. We have not before had formal votes and Mr. Altmann’s recommendation is that we not have a formal vote but have an understanding that we will abide by this policy. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that there are two questions before the Committee and explaining what the Secretary and Mr. Altmann recommend regarding the first question.


Passage number 351.
 MR. ALTMA”. That’s correct. We’ve had informal understandings about limits within the overall $8 billion open position allowable under the Foreign Currency Authorization. this is a policy decision we would follow if the Committee agrees.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing an agreement or understanding about limits within a policy decision, so there does not seem to be any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 352.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. We have an authorization for $8 billion; The second issue is whether we should enter into an understanding with the Bank of Japan on this joint program and announce that we would be operating for our own account--the Treasury and the Fed--in coordination with the Japanese. We wouldn‘t put the percent in such an announcement; we’d merely say we will operate together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It is primarily discussing decisions and considerations regarding a joint program with the Bank of Japan, without any conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 353.
 MR. PARTEE. Can’t we separate these two issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking if it is possible to separate two issues.


Passage number 354.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Surely. As I said, we’re going to have two issues-- M R .  PARTEE. Well, my point is perhaps a little different from what you’re thinking. I might be prepared to undertake a joint operation with the Japanese. how much open position we can have in currencies, absent the special arrangements such as that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a straightforward exchange of ideas and statements.


Passage number 355.
 But that‘s separate from the question of CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the question of CHAIRMAN MILLER is separate from something else.


Passage number 356.
 Sure, we can decide not to have the-- MR. PARTEE. We could stay with the $500 million [limit] on one [currency] and then have an additional $1 billion approved in a special arrangement. I just want to indicate that that’s the way I probably would come out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply offering their perspective or opinion on how they would approach the situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 357.
 I didn‘t want to-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "I didn't want to" suggests that there is a disagreement or opposition to something, though the specific subject or context is not provided.


Passage number 358.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I’m not sure it is going to help chuck, but it may help me. I have no problems with the first understanding, but I want to make explicit what seems to me implicit here. And that is that the balances we acquire we don’t acquire for the sake of acquiring balances but mostly as the by-product of what we want to do in intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the effectiveness of something for someone else (chuck), but acknowledges that it may benefit themselves. The speaker then clarifies their understanding and states that the balances they acquire are not obtained for the purpose of acquiring them, but rather as a result of their intervention.


Passage number 359.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. That‘s the only reason to acquire them-- to counter the appreciatiation and work on both sides of the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states the reason to acquire something is to counter the appreciation and work on both sides of the market.


Passage number 360.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever [side] it happens to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Whatever it happens to be" suggests a versatile or neutral stance, without taking a specific side or expressing disagreement.


Passage number 361.
 MS. TEETERS. May I ask a question. Does the 10 percent refer to total United States participation--Treasury and Federal Reserve--or is it 10 percent for [each].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question being asked by Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 362.
 5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -43- MR. HOLMES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a sequence of numerical values and a name, but there is no indication of any conflicting opinions or conflicting views among the mentioned entities.


Passage number 363.
 As I understand it-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Both. U.S. intervention would be a maximum of $1.2 billion. If the Committee wants to do a billion dollars, the Treasury is merely indicating [a willingness to do $200 million]. Why does the Treasury want to go in for such a small amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 364.
 Is it because they already have a large-- MR. AXILROD. They have large amounts of yen already.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply provides a possible reason for a situation without any conflicting views presented.


Passage number 365.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. They got them through the sale of SDRs and through the IMF drawings. So it isn't that they're declining to hold yen balances; they really are showing good faith. They already have yen balances and that's why they would do a smaller amount at this point. Phil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The explanation provided simply clarifies the reason behind the smaller amount of yen balances being held.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 366.
 MR. COLDWELL. M r .  Chairman, I'm agreeable to the Committee approach [outlinedl in this memo. I would be much less happy with the Japanese approach because I'm not at all convinced that the Japanese yen is undervalued and I'm not at all sure I want to jump into a joint intervention for the purpose of improving the Japanese yen position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is disagreement in the passage because Mr. Coldwell expresses his disagreement with the Japanese approach and states that he is not convinced that the Japanese yen is undervalued.


Passage number 367.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, why don't we separate the issues. First let's see what the sentiment of the Committee is regarding the recommendation on the agenda. I think the best thing is just to get a vote on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any form of disagreement or contention. It is a suggestion to separate the issues and determine the sentiment of the committee before proceeding with a vote.


Passage number 368.
 MR. ALTMA". A vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the given passage.


Passage number 369.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I mean a count on whether we agree on the policy, not a vote. holdings] and with these limits [on individual currencies].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying the type of count they are referring to, which is not a vote but a count on whether they agree on the policy.


Passage number 370.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 371.
 This is on going to $2 billion [on outright CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck, if you want to Suggest a modification You may.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating the ongoing progress of reaching $2 billion.


Passage number 372.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, my preference would be $500 million. I think there's a great deal of exposure involved here. I believe the dollar may be considerably undervalued and that there could be a very considerable appreciation of the dollar over the next year, and I wouldn't like to see us lose this much money. I also have a feeling that the shoe ought to be pretty binding on the other side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their preference for $500 million and providing reasoning for their opinion, but there is no one else present in the passage to disagree or challenge their viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 373.
 That is, when a currency is declining as sharply as ours did last year, it ought to be up to the country involved-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. I'm laughing because all during the year up until November 1 we said it was up to the foreigners to straighten out the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.


Passage number 374.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, that's right. It finally went so far that I agreed to it. I think a country has its reservation points. And it seems to me that it ought to be the concern of the country as to what that reservation point [is when its currency is] on the decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and there is no opposing view present.


Passage number 375.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck, I didn't mean you had that atttitude; I meant that as a nation we were taking that attitude.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker clarifies their statement to avoid any misunderstandings or potential conflict.


Passage number 376.
 5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -44- MR. PARTEE. Well, I had that attitude, too. I was very much opposed to it until [the dollar's weakness] went so far that I knew it was oversold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a change in their attitude toward a certain topic based on a shift in circumstances.


Passage number 377.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let's run down [the list] and ask the members if they are for the policy and if so, if they have a preference for the $1 billion or the $500 million limit per currency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply proposing a course of action and asking for the members' opinions and preferences.


Passage number 378.
 MR. KIMBREL. [I would agree] with the memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Kimbrel, agrees with the memo being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 379.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. The maximum is $2 billion in any case, but the question is whether you want a maximum of $1 billion per currency or $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The author is presenting two options and questioning whether the reader wants a maximum of $1 billion per currency or $500 million. This suggests a disagreement or differing opinions about the appropriate maximum amount to choose.


Passage number 380.
 MR. PARTEE. I meant I wanted the $ 5 0 0  million in the aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Partee expressing his intention to have $500 million in the aggregate.


Passage number 381.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. In the aggregate. Oh, I misunderstood you. well, then we'll have to ask again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a dialogue where one person misunderstood the speaker, and they suggest asking the question again.


Passage number 382.
 MR. AXILROD. That's what we have now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of agreement.


Passage number 383.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, we already have that. In other words, you would not want to expand it to $2 billion. Then the question is: Do you like the proposal in the memo. Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that they already have something mentioned in the discussion and expresses their opinion about the potential expansion of it. The question that follows seeks the listener's opinion about the proposal in the memo.


Passage number 384.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it is reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: to conclude that there is contention or disagreement in this passage based on the given information only.


Passage number 385.
 MR. AL"N. President Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I can't analyze a passage without any context. Could you please provide the full passage you would like me to analyze?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 386.
 MR. BALLES. I share Chuck's view. I have real reservations about going up to $2 billion, based on a very skeptical attitude regarding decisions on what constitutes excessive movements one way or another vis-a-vis what the market is saying. I'd keep it where it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Balles and Chuck have reservations about increasing the amount to $2 billion, indicating a disagreement with the suggestion of raising it.


Passage number 387.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 388.
 MR. ALTMA". President Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only provides some information about Mr. Altma and President Black without any conflicting opinions or statements.


Passage number 389.
 MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'd rather cut it in half. I worry about the Constitutional issues on this since the executive branch of the government clearly has the responsibility in the foreign area. And I worry about the point that Chuck raised about criticism we would get from taking any losses on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. Mr. Black is expressing his concerns and potential issues regarding the budget cut proposal but does not directly oppose or argue against it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 390.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. May I come back with an argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "May I come back with an argument" suggests that the speaker wants to present a counterpoint or different perspective, indicating a possible disagreement or contention.


Passage number 391.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, it's not necessary. The Treasury is with us on this; we're working with the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement indicates a consensus or agreement between the speaker and the Treasury.


Passage number 392.
 MR. ALTMA". Governor Coldwell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage only mentions the name of Mr. Altma and Governor Coldwell. There is no indication of contention or disagreement between the two individuals.


Passage number 393.
 MR. COLDWELL. I'd be willing to go with the billion dollars. And I guess I could be talked into the half billion dollar limit on individual currencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker, Mr. Coldwell, expresses their willingness to go with a billion dollars and be talked into a lower limit on individual currencies. There is no indication of opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 394.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. In other words, you are going with the Black proposal. Anybody for the White proposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no content or disagreement in the passage, as it simply presents two options without expressing any preference or disagreement towards either proposal.


Passage number 395.
 5/22/19 -45- MR. ALTMA". President Kimbrel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only mentions the name "Mr. Altma" and President Kimbrel without indicating any conflict or disagreement between them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 396.
 MR. KIMBREL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the response of "Yes" given by Mr. Kimbrel, suggesting that there is a divergence of opinions or conflicting viewpoints present in the conversation.


Passage number 397.
 MR. ALTMA". President Mayo. M R .  MAYO. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The conversation is simply between Mr. Altma and President Mayo.


Passage number 398.
 MR. ALTMA". Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without additional information. The given text only includes the names "Mr. Altma" and "Governor Partee," and does not provide any context or details about their interaction or the subject being discussed.


Passage number 399.
 MR. PARTEE. No, I would remain with $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 400.
 MR. ALTMA". Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement between Mr. Altman and Governor Teeters.


Passage number 401.
 MS. TEETERS. I would go with this proposal. M R .  ALTMANN. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters expresses agreement with a proposal and Mr. Altmann does not provide any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 402.
 MR. WALLICH. I would remind you that we didn't flinch when were short $6 billion but here suddenly, when we're gong to be long, $500 million gives us pause. I go with the [proposal in the1 memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Wallich's opinion on the matter.


Passage number 403.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. We have 5 votes in favor and there are 10 members. That makes it very neat, doesn't it. They're not really votes but sentiments. I have a swing "vote" but I really don't think this sort of policy ought to be followed unless we're fairly uniform. Could we all agree on doing $1 billion with a $500 million limit at least to keep this [going] and then we can review it from time to time. I don't think this is the sort of policy we ought to pursue on a split [opinion]. Does everybody agree to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is disagreement in the passage. One person suggests implementing a policy with a $1 billion budget and a $500 million limit, while another person expresses doubt and states that they believe the policy should only be pursued if there is uniform agreement. The passage suggests conflicting opinions on the proposed policy.


Passage number 404.
 MR. BALLES. That's a $1 billion total limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It simply states a figure without any indication of dispute or disagreement.


Passage number 405.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, for the total limit and $500 million per currency, except that which is approved outside of this. [Hearing no objection] let's turn now to Japan and take that as a discrete item. Apart from the authority we just granted, would it be your sentiment to enter into the program with Japan. Go down the list again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is providing information and seeking agreement before moving on to the next item.


Passage number 406.
 MR. ALTMA". Vice Chairman Volcker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 407.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I would like to give that authority but we [now] have the limit so small.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Yes, I would like to give that authority" indicates a desire or willingness to grant authority. However, the phrase "we [now] have the limit so small" suggests a limitation or restriction that conflicts with the desire to give authority. This contradiction between the willingness and the imposed limit creates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 408.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. This would be a separate understanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in the statement. It simply states that there would be a separate understanding.


Passage number 409.
 MR. MAYO. This is separate from the $1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 410.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. This would mean [only] as to Japanese yen. we would go to $1 billion and be outside the authority, but no other yen would be held. We wouldn't add the $1 billion here and the $500 million and have [$1.5 billion]. This would be the sole authority for the yen. policy just adopted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply describing a decision or policy that has been adopted regarding the handling of Japanese yen.


Passage number 411.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions the position of Vice Chairman Volcker and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 412.
 We are making an exception to the 5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -46- CHAIRMAN MILLER. This would be for yen [only]; and no yen would be held under the other policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The use of the phrase "This would be for yen [only]" suggests that there is an exception being made specifically for yen, which implies that there is a different policy for other currencies. This implies that there is disagreement or contention regarding the treatment of yen compared to other currencies.


Passage number 413.
 MR. PARTEE. I think that's a good way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement or approval.


Passage number 414.
 MR. AXILROD. This would also be an exception to the total.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage doesn't mention any disagreement or contention. It only presents a statement from Mr. Axilrod without any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 415.
 MR. ALTMA". The current balances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage only mentions the name "MR. ALTMA" and the current balances without providing any information or context that would imply contention or disagreement.


Passage number 416.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Including the present balances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints. It simply states that the present balances are being included.


Passage number 417.
 MR. AXILROD. It would also be an exception to the total. That is, if the Manager had a billion dollars in yen he could still have $500 million in DM.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a hypothetical scenario and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 418.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. The first policy we just approved would no longer include yen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement simply states that the first policy that was approved would no longer include yen. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 419.
 We'll pull yen out of that and approve a specific-- MR. BALLES. What are the amounts involved for Japan, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking information about the amounts involved for Japan.


Passage number 420.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. A maximum of $1 billion of balances [held by] the Federal Reserve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states the maximum amount of balances held by the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 421.
 MR. HOLMES. Of which we have roughly $200 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the amount of money, without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 422.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's $187 million, or about $200 million now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents a fact about the value of $187 million in current terms. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 423.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no passage given to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 424.
 So $800 million more-- MR. HOLMES. It's $800 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a statement without any conflicting opinions or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 425.
 MR. PARTEE. And a couple of hundred million for the Treasury, so it's about $1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "so" implies a contrast or disagreement between the amount mentioned ($200 million) and the previous amount discussed ($1).


Passage number 426.
2 billion CHAIRMAN MILLER. In the program we described.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the number "2 billion" in reference to a program that has been described.


Passage number 427.
 Paul VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: While the passage mentions Paul, it does not provide any information that would indicate contention or disagreement. Therefore, the answer is no.


Passage number 428.
 MR. ALTMANN. President Balles. PRESIDENT BALLES. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both individuals address each other respectfully, suggesting a conversation or exchange of information rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 429.
 MR. ALTMA". President Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the given passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 430.
 MR. BLACK. I'd rather not go this far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply expressing his preference.


Passage number 431.
 MR. ALTMANN. Governor Coldwell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Altman and Governor Coldwell without any indication of disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 432.
 MR. COLDWELL. NO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that Mr. Coldwell said something, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 433.
 MR. ALTMA". President Kimbrel. PRESIDENT KIMBREL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply shows two individuals addressing each other formally.


Passage number 434.
 MR. ALTMA". President Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the name "Mr. Altma" and "President Mayo" without providing any context or information about a disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 435.
 5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -41- MR. MAYO. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The passage consists of a series of numbers and the speaker's simple affirmation of "Yes" in response to something that is not provided in the given text.


Passage number 436.
 MR. ALTMA".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only provides a truncated name, "MR. ALTMA". Without further context or information, it is not possible to determine any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 437.
 Governor Partee MR. PARTEE. This would be in concert with the Japanese. They would be in, doing 10 times what we're doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply proposing a collaboration with the Japanese and suggesting that they would be doing more than what is currently being done.


Passage number 438.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Ten times what this nation is doing--a combination of the Treasury [and the Federal Reserve]. M R .  COLDWELL. That's your biggest exposure, Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a combination of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve as the biggest exposure, without any contention or disagreement being expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 439.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, I know. On the other hand they've had quite a decline in their currency. So, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is disagreement between the speakers. While one person acknowledges the decline in currency, the other person seems to hold a different view or perspective.


Passage number 440.
 MR. ALTMA". Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information or context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 441.
 MS. TEETERS. I have one question. Does this give us any idea at what level we're going to support the yen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents a question and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 442.
 Are we going down to the two hundred-- MR. HOLMES. That I don't know. But certainly the Japanese feel that the yen has depreciated far too much. It's back toward the 2 0 0  level. Whether 200 is the [right] level I think one has to judge from what happens in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Holmes is providing information and expressing uncertainty about the future value of the yen. There is no explicit disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 443.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy, I don't think we can peg it. In the present market conditions I think it would be desirable to get it in the 200 to 2 1 0  area. But that's subject to [conditions] changing. I wouldn't hold to that if we felt there were a really massive change because there is no use fighting it if it's really massive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and consideration about the desirable price range for something in the current market conditions. They also acknowledge that this opinion may change if there is a significant or massive change in conditions.


Passage number 444.
 MS. TEETERS. I'm a little concerned that the Japanese seem to be pegging it. They sort of put out a target and I don't want to be dragged in unless we're really sure we want to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern and seeking certainty before getting involved in a certain situation, indicating a cautious approach rather than disagreement.


Passage number 445.
 MR. HOLMES. Well, although the Prime Minister said "go back to 200," they found they couldn't do it. And they spent billions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the action taken by the Prime Minister and the result of that action.


Passage number 446.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. They're accumulating massive profits now because they've sold their products on the 200 basis. If they don't get it down again, we're going to see price cutting in yen and we're going to have another flood of Japanese imports. that problem all over again with surpluses. We're going to have That's the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments. It provides a statement about the accumulation of profits and a potential consequence if certain conditions are not met. There is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 447.
 MR. HOLMES. That's the basic underlying problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a statement or observation made by Mr. Holmes.


Passage number 448.
 MS. TEETERS. I would approve then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements. It simply states that the speaker (Ms. Teeters) would approve of something, without mentioning any potential disagreement or contention.


Passage number 449.
 MR. ALTMA". Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since the passage only contains the names "Mr. Altma" and "Governor Wallich" without any additional information or context, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 450.
 MR. WALLICH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the given passage, there is indication of contention or disagreement through the response of "yes." However, without further context, it is not clear who is disagreeing or what the disagreement is about.


