Passage number 1.
Meeting of Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 4-5, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington, D. C., starting on Monday, February 4, 1980, at 4:50 p.m.and continuing on Tuesday, February 5, 1980, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. BallesMr. BlackMr. ColdwellMr. KimbrelMr. MayoMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, Timlen, and Winn,Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Baughman and Willes, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Petersen, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Axilrod, EconomistMr. Holmes, Adviser for Market OperationsMessrs. Brandt, R. Davis, Ettin, Henry, Keir,Keran, Kichline, Scheld, and Truman,Associate Economists2/4-5/80Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMessrs. Kalchbrenner and Prell, Associate Directors,Division of Research and Statistics, Board ofGovernorsMr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section,Division of Research and Statistics, Board ofGovernorsMs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMr. Smoot, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of PhiladelphiaMessrs. Balbach, Corrigan, J. Davis, T. Davis, andEisenmenger, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of St. Louis, New York, Cleveland,Kansas City, and Boston, respectivelyMessrs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides a list of individuals present at a meeting, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement between them.


Passage number 2.
 Broaddus, Danforth, Mullineaux, and Sandberg,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Minneapolis, Philadelphia, and New York, respectively-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofFebruary 4-5, 1980February 4, 1980--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will call the non-meeting to order. Weare not in a meeting at this point anyway; we may be in a meetinglater. I would just remind all of you that I sent out a memorandum onthe idea of possibly changing the [FOMC] meeting dates. It probablywould amount to having fewer meetings on the theory that with thecurrent operating procedure, I sense--maybe nobody else senses--that ameeting after only four weeks doesn't give us much evidence on whichto change anything. With lagged reserve accounting and with a lag inthe numbers, we're hardly in the period that we were discussing beforethe next meeting comes along. So there may be some logic in doing ita bit differently. This is partly based on the idea, after looking itover--and I think we all agree--that we need a little longerperspective. It seems to me better to get the longer perspective bysticking to calendar quarters rather than just always looking threemonths ahead on some kind of moving average basis. If we take that asan assumption, logically we should meet somewhere around the beginningof a quarter and look at that quarter. We can review it sometimeduring the quarter and also look ahead to the next quarter. Then whenwe get to the end of the quarter, we will be looking ahead at the nextquarter. There seems to be a certain logical progression in thatmethod of looking at it as opposed to meeting more frequently when thebasic decision was whether or not to change the federal funds rate.But I will return to the subject at the end of the meeting and then[we will decide]. There's nothing magic about any particular time tochange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 3.
MS. TEETERS. Well, there is some magic in it. I looked atyour [proposed] schedule and I thought that we probably should meet atthe very end of the quarter to plan for the next quarter. Then Irealized that we have constraints on two [meeting dates]. One isbecause of the budget and the [President's] economic report [and] theHumphrey-Hawkins testimony; so we have to wait until January to dothat one. Then we have a similar constraint in July when we have towait for the midyear review of the budget before we can do very much.I finally came around to your schedule on two of the quarters anyway.So, we might as well change the whole schedule into a similar pattern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about scheduling and constraints.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I had nothing invested in any of theparticular dates or when we would change, if we change. But I do havethe feeling that every four weeks is a little frequent if we areoperating in this particular mode. I wouldn't feel that way if wewere operating more on money market oriented criteria.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses a personal opinion about the frequency of change, but there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 5.
MR. ROOS. Could [we meet] on the original dates in thosemonths instead of moving--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a simple request for a meeting date change.


Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a little hard. But look at thedates carefully. As I say, I had nothing invested in the particulardates that were put on that proposal, particularly when we get near[the usual] dates, if there are problems in changing them. Forinstance, for that proposed April 1, which looks logical except forApril Fool's day, March 25 is almost equally logical. And we couldbasically have the same pattern by meeting on March 18th, because I2/4-5/80understand [that date is on] everybody's schedule now, although thatwould leave a longer lapse before the next meeting. But there'snothing sacrosanct about any of those particular dates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the possibility of changing dates for a proposal but states that they have no personal investment in the specific dates and suggests alternative options.


Passage number 7.
MR. ROOS. Is there supposed to be a response.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roos is simply asking a question, and it is not implying any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 8.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, you can wait until later; it can waituntil after the meeting tomorrow. I just wanted to remind you to haveit in mind so that if you have any strong feelings they could beadequately verbalized tomorrow.The first thing on our agenda today is lagged reserveaccounting. Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that something can wait until later and reminding the listener to have it in mind for discussion during a meeting tomorrow. The mention of lagged reserve accounting does not indicate any contention or disagreement either.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 9.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, lagged reserve accounting, as thePresidents and Board Members know, has been a subject of considerablecontention in the System since it was adopted in 1968.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions that lagged reserve accounting has been a subject of considerable contention in the System since it was adopted in 1968.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to get an issue pretty soonfor which we just can't pull out the old memoranda.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that a new issue will arise that cannot be resolved by referring to previous memoranda.


Passage number 11.
MR. AXILROD. That's what I was getting to. There has beenconsiderable contention since 1968 when it was adopted. And I mustsay from an internal perspective there was contention between 1966 and1968, when it was being studied for adoption under a rather differentinstitutional environment and different operating procedures than wenow have. Various staff groups have studied this since 1973. I amafraid you are not quite getting independent results since I think Iwas Chairman of three of those groups. And they all three unanimouslyconcluded that there is very little to be said for lagged reserveaccounting from a monetary policy point of view if the Committee isoperating on a reserves target. One can't make a case that it is theleast bit of help and one can make a case that it is harmful. Therehave been divergences among the staff even in that context of it notbeing helpful. The question is: How harmful in fact is it. Somewould contend more strongly than others that it's harmful over thelonger run. Others would contend that it doesn't matter over thelonger run: That with or without lagged reserve accounting we canperk along on a reserve target and manage to hit our objectives. Ithink that's a legitimate source of dispute because the long run iscompounded of a number of short runs. And in a very simple-mindedsense in any 1-week period there is no defined relationship betweenthe multiplier on deposits and reserves in that week. That is,reserves this week can bear any relationship to deposits because allone has to do is worry about two weeks from now. So we rely almostentirely, therefore, on banks' responses to interest rates to controldeposits. When you cut through it all, fundamentally that is nodifferent from relying on a fluctuating federal funds rate target.So, I personally would tend to take the view that lagged reserveaccounting can make it virtually impossible to hit our targets in theshort run and probably is of some importance in making it difficult tohit our targets in the long run. Thus, I think it is really quiteinconsistent with the present operating procedures. Now, I don't meanto say that there aren't other things that are equally difficult. Thediscount window is a problem and our own graduated reserve requirementstructure is a problem. But in the latter regard, some of Mr.Lindsey's research would suggest that lagged reserve accounting2/4-5/80accounts for bigger divergences in the multiplier from predictionsthan does the graduated reserve requirement structure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily the speaker expressing their own perspective and opinions on the topic of lagged reserve accounting.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From Mr. Who's research.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more context.


Passage number 13.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Lindsey, on my right. So I would say thatwhile doing away with lagged reserve requirements is not going tosolve all our problems in hitting the aggregates, it at least lookslike a step in the right direction. In view of this cogent staffanalysis, one might be curious as to the reason no action has beentaken to date. I assume there have been two reasons. One was thatwith the federal funds rate operating target, which has been theprincipal System operating target for years, or even with a netborrowed reserves operating target, lagged reserve requirements areessentially an irrelevancy, like almost any reserve requirement is anirrelevancy. With a funds rate target, the Committee is simply tryingto aim at that interest rate which will cause all the adjustments bybanks and the public, whether or not there are reserve requirements,that will bring about the proper money supply. So in that sense it'sirrelevant. The other issue was membership. The lagged reserverequirement is viewed as a benefit of membership. To test that viewwe did run a survey during one of these staff analyses and, except forthose at the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank, all of the directors ofReserve Banks who represented member banks said lagged reserveaccounting was desirable. In St. Louis, the directors said it wasundesirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their opinion about the topic and explaining the reasons for the lack of action. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 14.
MR. ROOS. When was that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question regarding the timing of an event.


Passage number 15.
MR. AXILROD. That was in 1976.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating a fact without any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 16.
MR. ROOS. That was before the good days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any evident contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a time period without expressing differing opinions or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 17.
MR. SCHULTZ. That sort of follows the pattern for mosteverything, doesn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement. Mr. Schultz is making an observation and suggesting a pattern that is generally true for most things.


Passage number 18.
MR. AXILROD. The staff has no other way of assessing laggedreserve requirements as a membership benefit. One's instinct would bethat it is minor relative to the real burden, which is the reserverequirement itself. In sum, Mr. Chairman, the staff does believe thatit is probably appropriate now to move toward contemporaneous reserveaccounting if the Committee is going to continue with a reservetargeting procedure. In that context, we did offer three alternativesin the memorandum. One is moving from a two-week lag to a one-weeklag, which would presumably speed up the response of the bankingsystem a bit. The second is making reserve requirementscontemporaneous for Reserve City banks and leaving a lag for the other5,000 banks. And the third is an essentially contemporaneous schemefor all banks. Without going through all the reasons that aredetailed in the memo, Mr. Chairman, we did conclude that we see verylittle advantage to any move now except the move to contemporaneousaccounting for all banks. That is, if the Board did not feel disposedto move toward contemporaneous accounting now, for whatever reasons,the staff would not suggest taking either of the other twoalternatives. We believe that their advantages do not outweigh thedisadvantages that might be entailed in terms of messed-up reporting,failure to quell the public debate, and certain problems of the2/4-5/80multiplier that the mix system brings about. Those are all thecomments I have, unless Mr. Lindsey would wish to add something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement from the staff expressing their belief that it is appropriate to move toward contemporaneous reserve accounting. There is no opposing viewpoint presented or mentioned.


Passage number 19.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have not left a lot of doubt asto where you stand, Mr. Axilrod. Is there any dissenting opinionamong the staff on the importance of this matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement among the staff.


Passage number 20.
MR. LINDSEY. I might say that, if anything, my views aremore extreme than Steve's.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only states that Mr. Lindsey's views may be more extreme than Steve's, without providing any context or evidence of disagreement.


Passage number 21.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the articles and academic papers and soforth that have been written on this subject, do they bring anythingto light or make any argument that you have not made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 22.
MR. LINDSEY. No, in preparing these memoranda for the Board,we thoroughly reviewed the literature starting from the early '70s on.My own view, which isn't particularly humble, is that the quality ofthe analysis presented here is much superior to the academic work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the opinion of Mr. Lindsey on the quality of the analysis presented.


Passage number 23.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would expect that. Well, it's justthat the conclusion comes through a little more strongly than I readit in that memorandum itself. I had a feeling that you saw somedisadvantages in the degree of certainty with which the Desk wasoperating. Maybe Mr. Sternlight would like to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 24.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, I'd like to add a word or two. I feelmuch less convinced than Mr. Axilrod that there would be significantbenefits from a switch to contemporaneous accounting. I can see thetheoretical case that he makes. I'd be among those who feel that inthe longer run even that theoretical case makes very little, if any,difference. I can see some impediments to the Desk's operations undera contemporaneous system in that we don't know required reserves inthe week we're operating in. Perhaps more significant than that, whensome deviation in required reserves stems from a factor other than thebehavior of the monetary aggregates--for example, a bulge in interbankdeposits or something of that nature that essentially we would want toaccommodate rather than resist as part of our reserve targeting--Ithink contemporaneous accounting could send us off in a perversedirection. So, I came out feeling that there is not all that muchadvantage to it. And having the minus on the membership side--I don'tknow how strongly to evaluate it, but I am told that it still doeshave some significance--just made me pretty dubious about thedesirability of a change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight disagrees with Mr. Axilrod's belief that there would be significant benefits from a switch to contemporaneous accounting. He lists several reasons why he feels that the theoretical case for such a switch makes very little difference and expresses his doubts about the desirability of making a change.


Passage number 25.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Holmes, you were there before andafter. Do you have any comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question asking for Mr. Holmes's comments about being present before and after a certain event. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 26.
MR. HOLMES. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I can recall back in thegreat debate over whether we should have lagged reserve accounting,all sorts of claims were made that it was going to help the Desktremendously and that the Wednesday [settlement date] would be astable day in the funds market. We at the Desk never believed that.But, if it does make a difference for bank relations and on thatground alone it is useful to the banks, then we see no harm in thelagged reserve accounting. I feel very much as Peter does that itdoesn't make all that much difference. It seems to me that the Systemhas introduced enough other changes recently in statistics and inprocedures that I see no urgent need, certainly, to go ahead with a2/4-5/80move back to contemporaneous reserve accounting. Along with Peter, Idoubt if it really makes that much difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Holmes, agrees with Peter and expresses doubt that lagged reserve accounting makes a significant difference.


Passage number 27.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're not going to make a decisionthis afternoon, but anybody who would like to comment on this subjectshould comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that a decision will not be made at the moment and inviting anyone to share their thoughts on the subject.


Passage number 28.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I have long felt that if we'regoing to have a reserve operating base, sooner or later we are goingto have to move to contemporaneous reserves. As one example, let'ssay that later on this year we get into a period where the moneysupply is not growing or is contracting. That would mean that inorder to hit our target of total reserves, the Desk would have to pushin very large amounts of excess reserves at the expense of a prettysharp reduction in the funds rate. That might look a little funny ifwe're willing to do it, but it is one of the consequences stemmingfrom lagged reserves. It is very awkward to control reserves with alagged system. On the other hand, this is a very awkward time for usto make a change. As far as I am concerned, it's only a matter oftiming--of when we do it. I don't think this is an optimum time,first because of the membership bill. I wouldn't want to throwanything on the fire that could in any way interfere with that bill.I'd want to hold off until it has been decided one way or the other.Second, all of our computer systems people in the whole FederalReserve System are [working] flat out. We have the system automationprogram and we have the work going forward in connection with thepricing of Federal Reserve services. At least in the Boston Bank, wedon't have any capacity to do the work on [a shift from laggedreserves]. And I think that is probably true around the System.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and concerns about the timing and practicality of implementing contemporaneous reserves.


Passage number 29.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How big a job is this for us internally asopposed to for a bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply questioning the scale of a job for both internal resources and a bank.


Passage number 30.
MR. TIMLEN. Depending on the alternative--the memo had threealternatives--some of our people said four to six months forprogramming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it simply states a range of time suggested by some of their people for programming.


Passage number 31.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am assuming going all the way to what iscalled contemporaneous reserves, which isn't quite contemporaneous;it's a one-day lag.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is providing clarification and explanation.


Passage number 32.
MR. MORRIS. I was told it would take us 90 days to implementit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply relaying information or a previous understanding.


Passage number 33.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Boy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 34.
MR. BALLES. I'd strongly support what Frank has said. Onthe substance of the argument, I certainly join Steve; that's exactlywhere I come out. Like Frank, I would also stress that it would bevery risky in my opinion even to raise this outside the Fed until weget a membership bill passed because there will be some adverse memberbank relations in a transition. Secondly, I'd stress that both thebanks and the Reserve Banks need a long lead time on this, longer thanSteve thinks based on the impression I have from the staff memo. Iwould think six months would be an absolute minimum. When you thinkof banks in the West with statewide systems and 1,000 branches and soforth, it gets to be a very, very complicated system of reporting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with Frank and Steve's points and adding their own perspective.


Passage number 35.
2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 36.
 You say it will take a long time becausethey will--MR. BALLES. Well, both for the banks and for us for thereason that Frank said. Our data processing people within the ReserveBanks have been knocked flat by the tremendous number of changes inthe current reporting series, by the cranking up of IBA, and by themarginal reserve requirements. We have the possibility of amembership bill on the horizon, which will bring us a lot moreinstitutions to deal with. On top of that, all at the same time, ifwe try to plug in a very detailed, cumbersome, time consuming,expensive reprogramming effort and try to do it too quickly, I thinkwe'll rue the day we did it. I'll tell you this: (1) I would hopethat a decision would be made to move to contemporaneous reserverequirements; (2) I wouldn't even raise the issue unless we get amembership bill; and (3) then at that point, I'd make sure that plentyof study is given to lead time needs of both the banks and the ReserveBanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining the various reasons why it would take a long time to make the changes mentioned.


Passage number 37.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I appreciate your caution about raising[this issue], but I did this morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges and appreciates the caution expressed by the other person but states that they have already taken the action being discussed.


Passage number 38.
MR. BALLES. Oh, you did. Now he tells me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles simply states that someone told him something.


Passage number 39.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think your caution is well taken and Idid it with some hesitancy. Mr. Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges someone's caution and admits to having some hesitancy in their actions.


Passage number 40.
MR. MAYO. Well, most of my speech has already been given.But I would say of the three alternatives Steve presented, I certainlywould agree with the staff, or the reserve requirements policy group,that a return to contemporaneous reserve accounting would be thepreferred solution. I think it is better than lagged reserves. But Itoo feel, though I probably can't say it as eloquently as John justdid, that it very definitely ties into the membership bill, and Iwould postpone it if only for that reason. I also feel, even though Iam known around this table as a pragmatist or eclectic or something--no comment Mr. Roos--that there are two other ways that have not beenthoroughly presented and discussed by the Axilrod Committee but shouldbe. They have been subjected to a lot of good academic thought.Maybe they are cockeyed, but I can't see the holes in them myself yet,and I think they're worthy of discussion. One of them is Bill Poole'spaper, Frank, on what amounts to a 100 percent marginal reserverequirement on the most recent changes since the last determination.The other is the idea of some sort of reverse lag where, as we alllearned in our elementary money and banking text books, the FederalReserve or the Central Bank sets the reserves. That isn't as silly asit may sound. We are not saying to a bank that it can't accept anymore deposits because its reserves have already been set. That can behandled by the way it works through the accounting system. But itseems to me that both of those ideas have enough merit that they atleast ought to be kicked around a little more by the SRAC and bySteve's group. So, while I agree that the major reason for delayingthe implementation of this relates to the membership issue and thetiming, I would suggest that we have a little more work to do in termsof analyzing these two ideas, just as examples. And if we want toblow holes in them, let's do it. But some of us, at least, areintrigued by these two ideas and the possibility that, if they work,2/4-5/80they will bring us closer, though obviously not completely, to a chaindrive rather than a belt drive, if I may use that [analogy].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 41.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have you looked at those, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is simply asking Mr. Axilrod if he has looked at something, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 42.
MR. AXILROD. We have in the past looked at those and severalother gimmicks that have been advanced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker has examined certain things in the past.


Passage number 43.
MR. SCHULTZ. And he will now deliver an unbiased opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 44.
MR. AXILROD. We'll be glad to consider them further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod states that they will be glad to consider suggestions further, suggesting an openness to discussion and collaboration.


Passage number 45.
MR. MAYO. There are good gimmicks and bad gimmicks. We dealonly in good gimmicks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It merely states that there are good and bad gimmicks, and the speaker claims to only deal with good gimmicks.


Passage number 46.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context to determine any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 47.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, like Bob, my speech has beenpretty well given. I'll start with a conclusion: I think it would bea mistake to make a change right now. There are several reasons. Inaddition to the ones that have been given, I think the magnitude ofthe problem has not been demonstrated to be great enough to justifythe cost of a change at this time. We knew when we made the changeyears ago to lagged reserve accounting that it would have the effectit is having. But at that point we judged that the membershipbenefits overrode the negative effects it would have on the linkagebetween the policy target and achieving the target. It seems to methat the balance today is even stronger in the direction of membershipthan it was at the time we made the change. And my recollection isthat the views we received from the Manager of the System Account thenwere the same as have been expressed today. The Desk did not see itas presenting an insurmountable operating problem. As to thesuggestion that it's irrelevant if we're operating with a federalfunds target, I find that persuasive. But it does seem to me thatit's inappropriate to throw into the same box the net borrowed reservetarget. That seems to me a different animal than the federal fundstarget. And the suggestion that we have to achieve the monetaryaggregate target through interest rate effects is a part of anyoperating procedure. The people who borrow from banks and the bankofficials who are handling banks' investment decisions are operatingin response to interest rates. And it's through the interface of thebanks and their customers that the asset side of their balance sheetis affected, and then the liability side seems to me to flow fromthat. So we cannot escape working through the interest rates in themarket to achieve influence on the monetary aggregates. I thinkthat's true whether we try to work through some reserve aggregate or afederal funds target or a net borrowed reserve target. It comes downto our ability, whatever the target, [to determine] the linkagebetween [our objectives] and the aggregate we attempt to affect. Butin the final analysis [the key is] our willingness to let our effortsinfluence interest rates in the market.Along with Bob's reference to a couple of items and gimmicksin the literature, I was expecting to see at least some passingreference--to use the vernacular on the table--to a "gimmick" that waskicked around fairly extensively a number of years ago: namely,grouping banks into about five groups and having their reservesettlement dates come up on a different day of the week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and providing reasons to support it.


Passage number 48.
2/4-5/80MR. AXILROD. We have studies of that also, PresidentBaughman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement or response to a question or topic mentioned before without indicating any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 49.
 We will be glad to--MR. BAUGHMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It states that "We will be glad to," which indicates a willingness or agreement to do something.


Passage number 50.
 Well, I don't know whether [those in] theprofession--MR. MAYO. These are professional gimmicks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their uncertainty and lack of knowledge rather than expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 51.
MR. BAUGHMAN. On the willingness to let that [academic] feudquiet down: Was it a matter of your persuading them or simply thatthey felt we turned off our hearing aids.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker (presumably Mr. Baughman) is referring to a previous situation without expressing any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 52.
MR. AXILROD. As far as Professor Friedman is concerned, Ithink it was the latter. He was the chief proponent of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Professor Friedman was the chief proponent of something without providing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 53.
MR. BAUGHMAN. It seems to me that we should anticipate thatthat will likely surface again. So, my view, Mr. Chairman, is that weshould not change at the present time. I agree with the conclusionthat our present mode of operation would work a little better if wewere on a concurrent basis. But I think the cost of going there wouldbe excessive now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's view that they should not change their current mode of operation because the cost of doing so would be excessive.


Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided. Please provide the passage for analysis.


Passage number 55.
MR. ROOS. Just to set the record straight, I have a changeof position since the advent of the age of enlightenment in St. Louis.We're strongly in support of contemporaneous reserve accounting. Iwould subscribe to John Balles' concern about moving before theoperational changes have been considered and made and [so forth]. Intalking to our bank relations people, I got the impression that asmany banks dislike this lagged reserve arrangement as favor it.Anyway, let the record show that whatever happened in 1976 does notreflect our present position. We support it.SPEAKER(.). Yes, in June of 1976.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a change in position and providing clarification on their current stance.


Passage number 56.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 57.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, in deciding whether lagged reservesare good or bad for policy, I think we have to decide whether thelikely errors in hitting the money supply stem from a lack ofresponsiveness to changes in the volume of reserves or whether theystem from unexpected changes in the appetite of the market for moneyof the type that Frank Morris assumed. If it's the first, then onecan make a case that we get a little quicker response under laggedreserve requirements than under the other in the sense that if weinject a given volume of reserves, required reserves don't riseimmediately, so the banks feel a little easier and they kick this offa little faster. In the case of unexpected deviations stemming from ashift in the demand for money, then we do have an automatic brakingthat comes about under contemporaneous reserve requirements that tendsto stop this unexpected change in the demand for money. I think it'sthis latter type that's really the most troublesome for us under ourpresent mode of operation. So that does give a slight edge tocontemporaneous accounting under the present procedures. But I don'tthink we ought to overemphasize that. I come out very close to whereAlan Holmes and Peter Sternlight did. At most, I would think thedelay would be two weeks. And if you accept any of the points that2/4-5/80Irving Auerbach was raising in his debate with Bill Poole in theAmerican Banker, then you may conclude that it may take longer thanmost people assume for these multiple contractions or expansions inbank credit to take place. In the kind of environment in which we aretrying to bring about a steady rate of expansion in money, and givenall these other slippages in the monetary multiplier, it's hard for meto see that it makes a great deal of difference under presentprocedures. But I do think that it is good for us, if we can, toquiet this criticism that has been stemming from the monetarists. Ihave two reasons: (1) It would divert their efforts toward trying tohelp us achieve a monetary target and they would stop assuming thatit's as easy to hit as most of them have assumed; and (2) it wouldremove any excuse that we have for not hitting the targets. And bothof those [results] would be rather salutary, I think.As far as the other side of the coin is concerned, bankrelations, a lot of the academic commentators assume that it's easierfor a bank to adjust under contemporaneous reserve requirementsbecause it does not involve as large a change in excess reserves. Butthey are not talking to the bankers I've talked to. I think most ofthe Reserve Banks now provide each of their banks with a dailystatement on reserves, which shows their required reserves asdetermined from deposits two weeks earlier. They subtract from thatany vault cash they held two weeks earlier, either add to that orsubtract from it the amount of carryover from the previous week, andthen show how much the banks must hold in their reserve balances forthe remainder of the reserve period. In fact, we even show that on adaily average basis. So far as the small banker is concerned, all hehas to worry about is looking at that statement that comes every day,early in the day--it never misses its schedule except when the carrierdoesn't run, which is very seldom--and he knows exactly the reserveshe has to hold on a daily average basis for the balance of thatreserve period. And if he misses it a little, he has the 2 percentcarryover. Most of them, if they watch it very closely, can getpretty darn close to zero excess reserves. But I wouldn't favor theadoption of alternative one--moving to a one-week lag--which I thinkis the best of those Steve outlined, for the reason that John Ballesand Frank Morris and many of the rest of you have stated. It would bea major problem [of implementation]. But as we move ahead, we mightthink about how we could go to contemporaneous reserve accounting andyet solve this bank relations problem. The problem doesn't stementirely from not having all the banks as members. I don't think we'dwant to burden the banks unduly even if they were all [members].So, what appeals to me most would be a month-long period ofcontemporaneous reserve accounting. I think that would havepractically all of the advantages of the [weekly contemporaneousaccounting period]. It would involve less rate volatility becausebanks would have more opportunity to engage in interest arbitragewithin the reserve period. It would also give more time for thisadjustment to the changes in the demand for money--that multiplecontraction or expansion that some of the commentators seem to thinkoccurs almost instantaneously. It would reduce the work of theFederal Reserve and the work of the commercial banks a great deal ifwe didn't have to put this out on a weekly basis. It would reduce theemphasis on the weekly figures that now cause us so much problems.And if we eliminated the carryover in the process--and I think we2/4-5/80probably could get away with eliminating that if we went to a month-long period--it would eliminate a form of slippage. But there aresome disadvantages to a month-long period without the carryover interms of unexpected reserve movements toward the end of the period.And this would not be simply the last day in the case of many banksthat don't know their required reserves until five or six days later.But if we did have an unexpected movement toward the end of theperiod, it would have an effect on only 1/28th to 1/31st of the wholeperiod because of the month-long period as compared with an effect of1/7th as we now have with a seven-day period. We also could notprovide as much help to the banks through giving them statements oftheir required reserves, and that removes one of the inducements forthem to report more promptly to us. Certainly that is important tous. Finally, with a long period of time, in a sense one could arguethat the banks wouldn't have to come to grips with a change in reserveavailability quite as promptly, and we might have some slippage there.But on balance, if we combined these two, that might conceivably bethe best of the two worlds. But I would urge that we not move to thatat this time for reasons others have already stressed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

The disagreement arises from the debate over whether lagged reserve requirements or contemporaneous reserve requirements are more effective for monetary policy. Mr. Black argues that lagged reserves provide a quicker response to changes in the volume of reserves, while contemporaneous reserves have an automatic braking effect on unexpected changes in the demand for money. He leans towards contemporaneous reserve accounting but acknowledges that it may not make a significant difference under present procedures. He also suggests a month-long period of contemporaneous reserve accounting as a potential solution, which may have advantages but also some disadvantages. Others in the passage have expressed similar perspectives and concerns.


Passage number 58.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 59.
MR. WALLICH. Well, those were very thoughtful observationsby Bob Black. I just would like to make two points on those before Ibriefly say what I meant to. I am not sure that we'll satisfy themonetarists by this change. I think their reasoning is that they wantto minimize Desk operations. They believe that with contemporaneousaccounting all the adjustment can take place through a change indeposits and none of the reserve needs have to be met by Deskoperations. You pointed out that these adjustments of levels ofdeposits don't take place instantaneously. We need a very largechange for each dollar of reserves, something like a $10 change indemand deposits and a $20 change in time deposits. These changes arereally so large that they can't take place quickly; any reservedeficiency or surplus must still be met very predominantly from Deskoperations. My other reaction is that the one-month procedure soundslike an ingenious possibility and well worth studying, but one can seethe danger of slippage if we expanded this [time period]. Suppose wemade it not one month but one year. One can see that that wouldn't beworkable. So somewhere between a day and a year there is an optimumin terms of less disturbance but also less loss of effectiveness.As far as moving to a contemporaneous basis right away isconcerned, I think the gain we have in terms of the monetarists'analysis wouldn't be very great. The staff memorandum convinces methat the gain in terms of speed might be very considerable. Theeffects of any reserve shortage begin two weeks earlier unless we wantto assume that somehow a reserve shortage or surplus casts its shadowahead and the banks move into very short-term assets as soon as theysee their deposits moving in one direction or another. But that isn'tvery likely because all they see is their own deposits moving; theydon't see the aggregate moving necessarily. So, there does seem to bea significant advantage in terms of speed of adjustment and I thinkthat is important because even though we say that it really doesn'tmatter over a quarter or so whether we deviate from our target, it isalways very hard to get back on track. It doesn't matter if wedeviate if we indeed get back on track. Nothing happens to the real-10-2/4-5/80sector. But getting back on track may be very painful because theforces that pushed us off may still be operative.I have one question on something that I'd like to understandbetter. I have the impression that under the present procedure, thefunds rate still serves as a guide to reserve needs. Peter seemed tosay that if we move to contemporaneous, we would lose that. Atpresent, a movement in the funds rate is an unambiguous indicationthat reserves are either too large or too small and it is clear thatthe Desk must take action unless it wants to have the reserveimbalance met by borrowing or repayment. If we have contemporaneous,then a move in the funds rate may mean indeed that market factors haveproduced a deficiency or excess of reserves. But it also may meanthat the aggregates are moving in a particular direction, creating areserve surplus or deficiency. If the latter is the case, we may notwant to counteract that; we may want to let the change in the fundsrate do its job. Say a decline in deposits leads to a decline in thefunds rate. We would want the decline in the funds rate to help pushdeposits back up. So there seems to be a possibility of using thefunds rate as a guide to operations under lagged [accounting] and lessof a possibility to do that under contemporaneous. Since I amtroubled, frankly, by the use of the funds rate as a guide tooperations because it exposes us to the appearance of still being on afunds rate target, I wonder whether this wouldn't protect us againstthat suspicion that we're trying to control the funds rate rather thannonborrowed reserves and the aggregates. And I wonder whether theDesk wouldn't be able to judge what it needs to do--determine the needto add reserves or the absence of a need--without this indicationcoming from the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and questioning the effectiveness of moving to a contemporaneous basis for reserve management. They also raise concerns about the potential loss of using the funds rate as a guide and question whether it would protect against suspicion of trying to control the funds rate.


Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 61.
MR. WINN. Well, I have the feeling that the honeymoon of ourexperiment is about over. Consequently, I get a little more itchy tofiddle with the machinery rather than to let it stand. I am convincedthat the acceptance of the Federal Reserve making this [procedure]work is going to be more important than for membership and a wholehost of issues. I would not back off because of the effect it mayhave on the membership legislation at this time. This is moreimportant than the membership issue. I am convinced that while thereare programming problems involved, we can get it done faster than weassume if we change our priorities a bit. I would give up on some ofthe other things we are doing, I think, and put this in place. I amnot sure how much time [it would take] but the biggest problem isgetting the Banks to rearrange their priorities in order to mesh withit. I would pick up on some of the other comments about theimportance of saying that this [procedure] works. I am concerned thatthe slippages are going to show up much more. There is a lack ofconfidence in the market now about what we are doing and either [weneed to do] that or look at the discount rate again, or perhaps both,very promptly or I think we are going to be in trouble.I would like to raise one question. With [the development]of the managed liabilities and RPs and other things, are we seeing achange in the adjustment process now that will [become morepronounced] if we start to tighten. Are we seeing that [adjustmentnot] formally showing up in the deposit base but in some of theseitems. I get lost in all the accounting as to how that flushes out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal thoughts, concerns, and priorities regarding the Federal Reserve and the implementation of a certain procedure.


Passage number 62.
-11-2/4-5/80MR. AXILROD. We have often expected that when the Systemtightens, there will be an increase in managed liabilities that holdsdown demand deposits. For example, there would be an increase inissuance of CDs and RPs and all that. That didn't turn out to be truein the fourth quarter when there seemed to be a sharp reduction inbank credit demands. But for unchanged credit demands, so to speak, Iwould expect that to be an element in the adjustment process. Itwould be an aspect of the tightening--issuing [such] things andputting upward pressure on interest rates in so doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 63.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why do you think we are running out ofhoneymoon time or however you expressed it, Willis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for the listener's opinion or thoughts without expressing any opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 64.
MR. WINN. Paul, I hear more doubts being raised in moreareas than I ever thought possible. Their suspicion is that we are[not] on a money target [unintelligible] very much a funds target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker indicates that there is disagreement or contention by mentioning that doubts and suspicions are being raised in various areas. This implies that there is disagreement about whether they are on a money target or a funds target.


Passage number 65.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't see it in the money supplyfigures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is stating a fact without any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions that the disagreement or contention does not exist in the money supply figures.


Passage number 66.
MR. WINN. Well, we are confusing it by all these differentmoney supply figures we are surfacing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and expressing confusion about the different money supply figures that are being discussed.


Passage number 67.
MR. PARTEE. We haven't done that yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply states that a task has not yet been completed, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 68.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states the title or position of Chairman Volcker without providing any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 69.
 And they don't know--MR. WINN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 70.
 People are looking, Paul, at the reserve baseuntil we get--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how far the ingenuity of ourstaff goes, but we will get off bounds on one definition. We changedthe definition in the seasonal adjustment factor--fixed it upperfectly, I would say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a topic and acknowledging the capabilities of the staff in finding a solution to a problem.


Passage number 71.
MR. COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the name "Mr. Coldwell" without providing any context or further details to suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 72.
 If we shift from lagged reserve accounting tocontemporaneous and confuse that issue--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement describing a potential confusion that may arise when shifting from lagged reserve accounting to contemporaneous. The mention of Governor Partee does not suggest any disagreement or contention, but rather serves to attribute the statement to a specific individual.


Passage number 73.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I speak somewhat tentatively on thissubject which I have observed raging around here for many years. Itis somewhat religious in character. By the way, St Louis, I think hasalways been on the side of the angels, Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his opinion and does not indicate any disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 74.
 They might have had alittle falling off or--MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a neutral statement suggesting a possibility or speculation about a past situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 75.
 Steve tells me we were the only people--MR. PARTEE. I would say you were always in favor ofcontemporaneous accounting and I would say that Bob Black has alwaysbeen against it because he saw the public relations cost or the bankrelations cost. The latter was a major factor involved, I thought, inthe Board's accepting the lagged way in the first place. I amimpressed by Henry's argument. I do think the speed of adjustment issomething that is going to plague us because I personally believe thatsooner or later, but perhaps not right now, Willis, we're either goingto get a big surge or we're going to get a big collapse in theaggregates and then we are not going to be able to do anything about-12-2/4-5/80it because of the lags with which the demand schedule can be affected.And two weeks is a meaningful amount of time in shortening thatprocess, if indeed it does shorten the process. I don't know that itnecessarily would because, after all, the Desk knows that the moneysupply has surged or has fallen out of bed before the reserves have tobe put up to support the higher amount or the lower amount; andpresumably if they don't follow a strictly mechanical formula, theycan begin to make adjustments for it early on in their strategy. Soeven that can be overcome.My biggest problem is that I would lean towardcontemporaneous accounting except that I think the structure is muchtoo complicated to use it. Reported deposits are extremelycomplicated; there is quite a variety of deposits with different kindsof reserves against them. And it seems to me all of that is much moredifficult [to manage] on a contemporaneous basis; it would not be adisadvantage otherwise if we had a very simple structure. Now, italso happens that the membership bills all propose a very much simplerstructure of reserves than we now have. And it seems to me that if[the structure were simpler], that would also tend in some sense, Bob,to do away with the bank relations problem because it is no longer anoptional matter as to whether to follow the specified procedures. Itseems to me that a very much simpler structure and the change in thewhole reserve apparatus that would be associated with a new bill,which probably wouldn't take effect for six months or something likethat, might be a time for introducing a change. But I would tie it tothose kinds of developments; I wouldn't do it now.By the way, I do believe the point made by Frank and othershas some value: With our current way of processing the daily reportof deposits and the programming that exists we probably don't have thecapacity to make the change without risking a collapse of thestructure. That has begun to bother me. So, I wouldn't do anythingnow; but the introduction of a new simplified system on differentterms and conditions might be an occasion for going to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Steve is in favor of contemporaneous accounting, while Bob Black is against it.


Passage number 76.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 77.
MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I have heard at least sixeconomists at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York opine on the matterof reverting to contemporaneous reserves. Not one of them thinksthere is any major advantage in such a change, so I will be disposedto follow that professional judgment in my Bank. I must say that JohnBalles has given most of my points in terms of the bank relations[effects of] such a change and I would like to stress the importanceof that. It is lead time, not only at the Reserve Banks but at thecommercial banks as well. I would say, too, that I don't think thatFirst VPs are in a position to start changing their priorities in thecomputer support area. We have a number of very key projects goingforward in that area to bring up our new FRCS 80 communicationsnetwork. We are entering the area of resource sharing. And to changeour priorities to accommodate something that is not held out as havinga major advantage is to me very poor planning. I would also say thatwe have had so many changes in the area of reserves--and those changesinvolve a cost to our member banks--that this would just add to thedifficulties of shaping things in an orderly way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in the passage because Mr. Timlen disagrees with the idea of reverting to contemporaneous reserves and argues against it by stating that none of the economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York see any major advantage in such a change. He also disagrees with changing priorities in the computer support area and argues that it would be poor planning. Additionally, he mentions that the numerous changes in reserves already have a cost to member banks and reverting to contemporaneous reserves would add to the difficulties of shaping things orderly.


Passage number 78.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 79.
-13-2/4-5/80MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I also tread tentatively in an arealike this. In general, I am persuaded by Mr. Axilrod's theoreticalarguments that contemporaneous reserve accounting has advantages inthe short run when applied to a reserve targeting approach to monetarycontrol. Mostly though, I am impressed by what Mr. Sternlight and Mr.Holmes had to say, which is that it probably won't make a great dealof difference in how the Desk operates. I just have one question thatI'd like to ask Mr. Axilrod, if I may. I assume you are familiar withIrving Auerbach's arguments in favor of lagged reserve accounting. Itake it that this is essentially an argument that the effects of anyshifts in money demand won't be very quickly felt in markets and thatthe argument is based on the actual behavior of commercial banks intheir lending and in their portfolio management. I wonder what youwould say in response to Mr. Auerbach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions being persuaded by Mr. Axilrod's arguments and being impressed by what Mr. Sternlight and Mr. Holmes had to say. The question asked to Mr. Axilrod seems to be for clarification rather than challenging his viewpoint.


Passage number 80.
MR. AXILROD. Well, Governor Rice, Irv has a much morecomplicated mind, I think, than I do. Also, the evidence with regardto bank response has been developed over a number of years when theSystem has been running a different kind of policy that is veryaccommodative to bank needs. If at today's interest rates the bankneeded reserves, the System supplied it. So every banker worth hissalt knew that he could rely on the federal funds market within plusor minus 1/4 percentage point to make his adjustments. In that kindof environment, adjustments do tend to be made quite slowly. That maybe the best kind of environment; I am not questioning that. But Ithink that's the basis for the empirical evidence. Without laggedreserve accounting you introduce the possibility of controlling totalreserves. Now, you may or may not want to control them literally, butyou introduce that possibility whereas with lagged reserve accountingthat's much more difficult to do. If you can control total reserves,offsetting borrowing as it occurs, then it follows that the banks aresimply not going to be able to put out the deposits and that inconsequence interest rates are going to move sharply up or sharplydown as banks are forced to make those adjustments. If the Committeewants to move toward the kind of world where it is more certain ofcontrolling total reserves in the short run, or indeed in the longrun, then I think abandonment of lagged reserve accounting would makeit more practicable to do so. Now, if bank adjustments take a longtime, then it might require a lot more interest rate variation in theshort run to overcome that kind of inertia. However, I would feelreasonably confident that after some transition period the process ofbank adjustments would be much shorter. Of course, in that processbanks would begin holding more excess reserves so we'd have thatproblem to worry about. I know this is somewhat general, but that'show I would respond to the kinds of comments that Irv makes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a response to a comment made by someone named Irv, and the speaker is providing their own perspective and explanation.


Passage number 81.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends in considerable part upon whatwe do with the discount window issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the outcome depends on what actions are taken regarding the discount window issue. There is no indication of conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 82.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. I am sure, even if we leave the windowopen and don't close it, total reserves leaves you the possibility ofchasing it. You may not ever catch it, but it leaves you thepossibility of chasing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their certainty about the possibility of chasing something, even if it may be difficult to actually catch it.


Passage number 83.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence only mentions the title "Governor Coldwell" without providing any context or information to suggest any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 84.
MR. COLDWELL. I have only two comments, Mr. Chairman.First, I would agree with the Account Manager that this is likely to-14-2/4-5/80have [only] minor advantages. But secondly, I would caution theCommittee that this is another interruption in the overall picture of[the policy] the Committee is trying to follow. If we add that on topof our redefined aggregates as well as possible daylight overdraftsand additions from the membership bill, we're likely to complicate thefigures [further] and they are going to be difficult for people tofollow, even our very good staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell agrees with the Account Manager that the proposal has only minor advantages, but he cautions the Committee about the potential complications it may cause.


Passage number 85.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't contemplate that possibility.President Willes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the speaker's inability to contemplate a certain possibility.


Passage number 86.
MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I found Henry'scomments and Chuck's comments particularly useful. So I would like to[be recorded as agreeing with] whatever you wrote down for them. Iwould add one thought, which goes back to the comment that Bob Mayomade. I am not much for gimmicks, either. But if there's a bankrelations problem, as many think there is, it just might be possiblethat the kind of proposal Bill Poole made can be structured in such away that we don't give much away but present it to the banks as thoughwe are giving them something when we are taking away lagged reserves.His kind of penalty scheme, for example, in terms of the carryoverwould make it possible to say that we are going to take away laggedreserves but we are going to give banks some flexibility they don'thave now. And yet if we structure that penalty in the right way, infact, we're not going to give away much in terms of sloppiness in thereserve figures. Looked at in that way--unless, as Chuck says, we getthe whole thing solved with the bill--it might be useful to consider agimmick like that simply as a bank relations vehicle. It may be ameans to get the advantages and not have the negative bank relationsimpact that some of us, at least, are concerned about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 87.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess everybody has talked who wants totalk. Is there anybody else who urgently wants to talk. Mr. Kimbrel.When I put the adverb in front of it, you're in trouble.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the statement "When I put the adverb in front of it, you're in trouble," which suggests that there may be a disagreement or issue regarding the placement or use of adverbs.


Passage number 88.
MR. KIMBREL. I have a personal bias toward contemporaneousreserves. And if we were operating so that we could accomplish it, Iwould certainly opt for that. But I suppose our real thrust [shouldbe] Desk efficiency in discharging our directives, and those at theDesk don't seem to be too enthusiastic about contemporaneous reserves.I accept that against the environment of the costs of programming sucha change at the Reserve Banks and commercial banks. And, Mr.Chairman, right at the moment any change in our relationships with ourmember banks, even this, is not exactly very well timed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Kimbrel is expressing his personal bias towards contemporaneous reserves, but acknowledges that the Desk, which refers to the employees responsible for implementing policies and directives, is not enthusiastic about it. He also mentions the potential cost and timing issues associated with such a change. However, there is no clear disagreement or contention among the parties involved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 89.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, those cautions seem to be ratherunanimously felt. I must say the other side of it is--I don't knowhow important it is substantively--that when we work with a two-weeklag in the context of what we're trying to do now, one has a greatsense of artificiality. We are working to affect a reserve figurethat we always know we cannot affect because it always depends uponsomething that happened two weeks earlier. It leaves me at least witha very uncomfortable feeling over a period of time. But I think ithas been useful to get all these considerations on the table. I don'tknow whether we have to look carefully at the reverse lag situationand so forth or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses discomfort and a sense of artificiality in working with a two-week lag in their current context. This disagreement is indicated by phrases such as "I don't know how important it is substantively" and "I don't know whether we have to look carefully at the reverse lag situation and so forth or not."


Passage number 90.
-15-2/4-5/80MR. AXILROD. Well, we can. It depends how promptly theBoard would want to take this up. But Mr. Lindsey has already doneconsiderable work in that area, so we would be in a position todevelop something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the possibility of developing something based on Mr. Lindsey's work.


Passage number 91.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are in a position to talk prettyquickly about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase states that someone is able to talk quickly about a particular topic, without indicating any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 92.
 I don't know where we'll come out, but--MR. PARTEE. Paul, if we are going to be doing additionalstudies on this, I have always been very taken by the notion of doingaway with Saturday and Sunday, which is another gimmick.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions a potential idea or suggestion ("the notion of doing away with Saturday and Sunday"), but it is unclear how others in the conversation respond to it.


Passage number 93.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's coming up anyway, isn't it.SPEAKER(.). You mean for Federal Reserve purposes only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation or clarification about something that is going to happen in the future, specifically pertaining to Federal Reserve purposes.


Passage number 94.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, excuse me, for Federal Reserve purposesonly, because of all the inefficiency of flows back and forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges the existence of inefficiencies in flows back and forth for Federal Reserve purposes.


Passage number 95.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the relevance of that comment isthat one thing leads to another. And there is this question ofwhether to make a whole bunch of changes at one time or to keep makingchanges, as I think we have been doing, that upset people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It discusses the relevance of a comment and presents a question about whether to make a lot of changes at once or continue making changes that upset people. However, there is no explicit disagreement or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 96.
MR. AXILROD. A memo on that very subject, on the effect of amove from 7 to 5 days, has been prepared for the Board. We didn'twant to send it forward right at this time because of the confusionwith the memo prepared for this meeting, but we do have a staffrecommendation on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, mentions that a memo on the subject has been prepared for the Board and explains the reason for not sending it forward at that time. The passage does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At the very least, obviously, there are alot of arguments to delay for a while. I think we ought to get allthese things on the table; maybe we won't want to delay them all. Wecan look at the membership issue in a month or two and see where thatstands, but we ought to have at least a preliminary feeling of how wewould want to go, depending upon the resolution of that issue. Let'shope it gets resolved one way or the other. Well, I don't think thereis anything more to add on this unless the Desk people want to sayanything in conclusion. Well, it has been useful [to see] how uniformmany of the views are about the theoretical desirability and thepractical difficulties in this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing various options and suggesting that they should be considered before making a decision. They express a desire for resolution but do not express any opposition to any specific points.


Passage number 98.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I would just like to add onefootnote to this. From my perspective, it is not merely theoreticaldesirability and practical difficulty but, as you commented, theartificiality of playing with these numbers. That is driven home tome almost every week, so I feel some practical impact of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by one individual expressing their perspective on the subject.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're going to have a presentationon the international scene. I think a variety of questions havearisen on this which may or may not be of any immediate relevance towhat we [do].MESSRS. TRUMAN, SHAFER, and HENRY. [Statements--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It is simply relaying information about a presentation on the international scene and acknowledging that there may be questions that arise which may or may not be immediately relevant.


Passage number 100.
]-16-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's proceed to a formal meeting and hearfrom Mr. Pardee about the international [scene] in the last month nowthat we've heard about it for the next two years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statements or opinions that could lead to contention or disagreement. It simply suggests proceeding to a formal meeting to hear from Mr. Pardee about the international scene.


Passage number 101.
MR. PARDEE. Every time somebody mentions the internationalvalue of the dollar, I don't know where I am. I feel like the zookeeper who is worrying about lions and tigers and bears and is toldthat the animal kingdom is improving or not improving during thecourse of the day. I am working in a different world than the onewe've just come from, though I have great sympathy with many of thethings that were said. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Pardee, is expressing confusion and a sense of being in a different world when the international value of the dollar is mentioned. It is a personal statement about his own feelings and perspective, rather than a disagreement with someone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 102.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions for the zoo keeper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is an opportunity to ask questions to the zoo keeper.


Passage number 103.
MR. BAUGHMAN. I move slowly now so I didn't really capturewhat you said in that very last statement. If the Bundesbank sellsdollars and takes in marks presumably, you say we may share in thosemarks. What are you telling us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and understanding.


Passage number 104.
MR. PARDEE. We have a bit of a dilemma. It would be rathernice to see the dollar rise at this stage, after all the pressuresthat the dollar has been under for these many months. And on thatbasis, it's awkward for us to see the Bundesbank go into the exchangemarket and sell dollars and thereby keep the dollar from rising as itmight otherwise. At the same time, we have $2.6 billion worth of swapdebt remaining and I am going to have to ask for a second renewal on agood chunk of that swap debt. And the U.S. Treasury has a verysubstantial short position in that it used a lot of the resources ofthe earlier Carter notes in the intervention last fall. So, we have arather great need for marks. We have to balance off our wish to seethe dollar rise a little to reinstill a bit of confidence in themarket in the dollar against this need for mark resources.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a dilemma and describing the need for both the dollar to rise and for mark resources. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflict among the parties involved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 105.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Are you telling us that the procedure has apossibility of lightening our mark debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention about whether the mentioned procedure has the possibility of lightening their mark debt.


Passage number 106.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When the Germans sell dollars and buymarks, they give some of them to us sometimes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a straightforward fact without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 107.
MR. PARDEE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 108.
MR. PARTEE. They give them to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that "they" give "them" to "us."


Passage number 109.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They sell them to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not explicitly state any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact that "they sell them to us." However, without further context, it is difficult to determine if there is any underlying disagreement or contention involved.


Passage number 110.
MR. PARTEE. For dollars. How do they get an advantage outof that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is asking a question about how someone could benefit from obtaining dollars.


Passage number 111.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because we're repaying the swap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a fact about repaying a swap without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 112.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Are you projecting a reduction in our markdebt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is asking if there will be a reduction in their markdebt, indicating a possible disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 113.
MR. PARDEE. I am if the dollar remains where it is [or]continues to rise. There is still a rather substantial calendar ofmark-denominated issues coming into the international markets, whichwill be converted at the Bundesbank. And this rediversification--there's no term for it and the politics only goes one way--this flow-17-2/4-5/80of funds back into the dollar provides us with opportunities. TheBundesbank had one offer put to them this morning on which it decidedit didn't like the exchange rate. We would see quite a bit of that aswell: People coming back to the dollar, selling large chunks of markson the exchange market, and either the Bundesbank or ourselves takingthose [marks] off the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply discusses the potential impact of the dollar's value and the flow of funds back into the dollar. It does not present opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 114.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Our decision as to whether to use any marks weacquire for the purpose of repaying debt will hinge not on the factthat we've got some marks but rather on what is happening in theexchange rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the decision on whether to use acquired marks to repay debt will depend on exchange rates.


Passage number 115.
MR. PARDEE. Well, there is a certain urgency as far as ourrepayment of debt is concerned. And whenever the dollar is strongenough to take it, we open doors and windows. We have not gone intothe exchange market as an open buyer of marks. That's one point I wasmaking in my [report]. But to the extent that someone comes along andoffers marks to us, we will take them and use them to repay debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the urgency to repay debt and the willingness to accept marks to do so.


Passage number 116.
MS. TEETERS. Why is there a certain urgency of repayment.Are those bonds coming due.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 117.
MR. PARDEE. We've had swap drawings outstanding since lastJune and we're going into the second renewal on a number of these.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is just a statement of fact about swap drawings outstanding since last June.


Passage number 118.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a recommendation to make in thatconnection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "You have a recommendation to make in that connection" suggests that the individual is being asked or is given the opportunity to provide a recommendation, but it does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 119.
MR. PARDEE. I don't have the numbers, but between now andthe end of February we have a rather substantial list of swapdrawings, totalling about $1.8 billion, coming up for second renewal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 120.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions sincethe last meeting. Do we have a motion to that effect. Withoutobjection they are so ratified. And you are asking for permission torenew $1.8 billion of swap debt maturing between now and the nextmeeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the need to ratify the transactions and asking for a motion to do so. There is no indication of any opposing opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 121.
MR. PARDEE. By the end of February.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only states that something will happen by the end of February without indicating any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 122.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When are we going to meet next--March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 123.
MR. PARDEE. Not until March 28th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a response to a question without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 124.
MR. PARTEE. The drawing has been outstanding for six months,Scott.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 125.
MR. PARDEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The word "yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the actual content of the passage, it is difficult to determine the exact nature of the disagreement.


Passage number 126.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This goes beyond any feasible next meetingdate I am sure. Do I have a motion. I do and I have an enthusiasticsecond. Have we any objections. If not, are there any otherquestions or comments on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking if there are any objections or further questions or comments.


Passage number 127.
MR. COLDWELL. Your pressure for urgency of repayment ismerely the annual date coming up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the pressure for urgency of repayment being linked to an annual date. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 128.
-18-2/4-5/80MR. PARDEE. It's not merely the annual date; I think I havea responsibility to the Committee to keep these things short term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It discusses the responsibility of the author to keep certain things short-term.


Passage number 129.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He always feels under pressure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the phrase "He always feels under pressure." This statement simply describes the person's constant sense of pressure without any conflicting views or opposing perspectives presented.


Passage number 130.
 I don'tknow--MR. COLDWELL. I understand that, but I thought you wereconveying a sense of real urgency and that maybe we ought to takefurther steps than what we're now taking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not display any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 131.
MR. PARDEE. Oh, no, I am not trying to go in that direction,as far as the policy is concerned. But in terms of my ownresponsibilities I feel that I have an urgency to clear this up. Now,there is a tradeoff--we have to choose--because we're covering thisdebt at a rather substantial loss to the Federal Reserve. And if wewaited three months or six months, the exchange value of the dollarmight be such that we could repay at a profit. On the other hand,experience has shown that to be a 50-50 [probability]; we might bepaying it off at a substantially greater loss. I would rather get itoff the books while we have the opportunity and free up our resourcesfor later problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the tradeoff and potential risks involved in clearing up a debt. They acknowledge that there are different potential outcomes and express their own preference for addressing the issue promptly.


Passage number 132.
MR. COLDWELL. I was just testing the degree of urgencyyou're putting on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they were testing the urgency being put on a certain matter.


Passage number 133.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only his normal pressure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions "his normal pressure" without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 134.
MR. WALLICH. Nothing as drastic as going into the marketand buying some D-marks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is no need for drastic action like buying D-marks in the market.


Passage number 135.
MR. COLDWELL. And nothing as drastic as the Bundesbanktelling you that we have to get out [of debt].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or suggestion made by the Bundesbank.


Passage number 136.
MR. PARDEE. Well, we're having daily conversations with themon their pace of selling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there are daily conversations between the speaker and the other party regarding their pace of selling.


Passage number 137.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I forgot to ask for approval of theminutes of the last meeting. Without objection, they are approved.How long is your presentation, Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between the speakers. The first speaker acknowledges forgetting to ask for approval of the minutes, and the second speaker responds that they are approved without objection. The third question about the length of Mr. Kichline's presentation does not introduce any disagreement either.


Passage number 138.
MR. KICHLINE. Probably about 20 minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states how long something might take without any sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 139.
MS. TEETERS. But then the questions will take it beyondthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any questions or statements that represent contention or disagreement.


Passage number 140.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have time for questions. Thereis no ground swell for wanting to hear that presentation tonight. Inthat case, maybe we'll dispose of Mr. Sternlight. He's always very[brief].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a lack of time for questions and states that there is no desire or support for the presentation. However, the mention of disposing of Mr. Sternlight seems unrelated to any disagreement or contention in this specific passage.


Passage number 141.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think I'll take that long, Mr.Chairman. Shall I go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for permission to proceed with their statement.


Passage number 142.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The question does not specify a particular passage, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement without a specific context.


Passage number 143.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It consists of a statement made by Mr. Sternlight.


Passage number 144.
]-19-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before I forget, maybe we can go ahead andratify your transactions. Without objection they are ratified. Ithink we'll do no more than hear whatever comments or questions youhave to Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests ratifying the transactions and if there are no objections, they will be ratified. They also express that they are open to hearing any comments or questions.


Passage number 145.
MR. WALLICH. Could you expand a little on what you perceiveas market expectations about future inflation. I see that Treasurybill futures, for instance, have changed by a very substantial amount,something close to 100 basis points over a month or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply asking for further clarification or elaboration on market expectations about future inflation.


Passage number 146.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I hadn't focused on a particular quantity,Governor Wallich. It's just that "expectations of inflation" seems tobe the most commonly cited factor for this very marked rise in thelonger end of the market, with the longer bonds up about 100 basispoints over the past month. And there is the budget message; eventhough it perhaps more frankly acknowledged inflation than some pastAdministration messages, there is still the feeling that if theAdministration is saying it's that bad, it's going to be even worse.I guess this is the kind of thing that greets one at times like this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of personal opinion and observation by Mr. Sternlight. There is no explicit contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 147.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You mentioned that some people thought thenew money supply figures would look higher. Why should they have thatidea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking information about the reasons why some people might have thought that the new money supply figures would look higher.


Passage number 148.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I suppose just fear of the unknown, really.We're coming out with something new, and it's partly that. It'spartly perhaps a misconception that since these new series are likelyto include some elements that have been growing rapidly the aggregateswill tend to show more rapid growth. That's the feeling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement conveying the speaker's thoughts and feelings about a new product or series.


Passage number 149.
 If there issome account taken of the checkable deposits and money market funds--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The reason I asked is that they don't haveany sense of this revised seasonal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a specific topic but does not express any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 150.
MR. STERNLIGHT. No, but they have expressed skepticism aboutthe recent seasonal. Certainly I have heard the comment that the slowgrowth in the past few months may have partly reflected an inadequateseasonal adjustment for that period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the comment made about the slow growth in the past few months possibly being attributed to inadequate seasonal adjustment.


Passage number 151.
MR. BLACK. Peter along those same lines, all the newdefinitions in January would show greater growth rates than we had forthose same measures in September to December whereas all the old onesshow less in January. What is the market going to say to that. Thisis very closely related to what you were saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a continuation of a discussion or conversation.


Passage number 152.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think they might feel that some oftheir skepticism was well placed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is expressing his thoughts about how others might feel about their skepticism. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 153.
MR. BLACK. That's what I am afraid of, really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black expresses his fear, but there is no conflicting opinion or argument presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a press conference scheduled forThursday, I think, to attempt to explain these new figures, and thatquestion is sure to arise. I don't look forward with a great sense ofanticipation to trying to explain either the substantial actualcomplications or the fact that the numbers look higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker mentions their reluctance and lack of anticipation in trying to explain both the substantial actual complications and the fact that the numbers look higher. This suggests that there may be disagreement or discord regarding the figures being discussed.


Passage number 155.
MR. PARTEE. We do have the revised seasonal, Paul. That'san annual event to revise the seasonal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they have the revised seasonal, without any indication of opposition or conflicting views.


Passage number 156.
-20-2/4-5/80 -21-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it doesn't have to go higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear argument or disagreement present in the passage. It simply states a numerical calculation and mentions that it does not need to go higher.


Passage number 157.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it happens to have done what the marketexpected it to do. That is, it raised the seasonal factors for thewinter quarters and dropped them for the summer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the effect of something on the market's expectations.


Passage number 158.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have lots of problems. This M2 numberis more like the old M3 number, but since it's called M2 and is higherthan the [old] M2, we've got a problem. Any other questions orcomments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining a situation and inviting further questions or comments.


Passage number 159.
MR. BLACK. Stress the long run. Go back to the [previous]six months and it will look a little better as you explain it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that by considering the previous six months, the situation might appear somewhat better when explained in the context of the long run.


Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will adjourn until tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states that the meeting will be adjourned until the following day at a specific time. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 161.
[Meeting recessed]2/4-5/80February 5, 1980--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We got through our agenda down to item 4anyway, yesterday. I suggest that we begin with the staff report onthe economic situation and then perhaps take a little more time, if wewant to, on the discussion of the economic situation and implicationsfor the longer-term ranges in the light of the fact that this is themeeting at which we have to set them for a year ahead. Mr. Altmanntells me he would appreciate, for purposes of writing the minutesanyway, a fuller discussion of your views than we have had at somerecent meetings. But more important substantively is the fact thatthis is the annual meeting where we have to consider and rationalizewhat we do in terms of the longer-range outlook. In that connection,I don't know whether all of you noticed that the President exercisedhis prerogative to relocate, I guess is the right word, the Humphrey-Hawkins objectives. In the original Act they were 4 percentunemployment and a 3 percent rate of price increase in 1983, and hemoved back the unemployment objective 2 or 3 years and the priceobjective--what, 5 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a plan for the meeting and informing the participants about the changes made to the Humphrey-Hawkins objectives. There is no indication of conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 162.
MR. PARTEE. I think it's 1986 [for the unemploymentobjective] and 1988 [for the price objective].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the opinions of Mr. Partee regarding the unemployment and price objectives.


Passage number 163.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it was 3 years and 5 years. It isthe first time that particular prerogative has been exercised, andmaybe it will make everyone feel more relaxed regarding how onereconciles what we do with the dictates of that Act. I mentioned lasttime that it might be useful--I will not insist upon this--to quantifyyour feelings about the outlook. I'd say the best way to do it interms of the real GNP would be on a fourth quarter-to-fourth quarterbasis. In terms of prices, the consumer price index is the easiestone to think about. And I suppose the unemployment rate would be thetraditional one. If you want to give some sense of your figures, youcan do it with any appropriate qualification that you think isdesirable: That you feel reasonably confident about it or immenselyuncertain about it or anything in between, because I think that ispart of the flavor within which we must operate. [We need] to takeaccount of the uncertainties in setting our own policy. Given wherewe're starting, I hope to have a great revolution and perhaps have thecoffee break a little earlier, more toward the breakfast hour thantoward lunch, after we finish the discussion of the economic outlook.With that, you may begin, Mr. Kichline.MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, and TRUMAN. [Statements--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different ways to quantify and measure certain factors, but there is no argument or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 164.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm a little confused by this last chart.This shows a rising rate of inflation through most of the first halfof 1981, or the first quarter anyway. I thought your projectionearlier showed a declining rate of price increase over that period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply reflects a state of confusion and seeking clarification.


Passage number 165.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, this is the GNP implicit deflator; on afixed weight basis it goes down. As you know, the GNP implicitdeflator subtracts out the energy prices coming from abroad and, infact, gives us a lower number than is being experienced domestically.So the implicit deflator at this time would be an understatement ofthe impact of inflation in this early 1980 period. The fixed weightdeflator is around 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information about the GNP implicit deflator and its impact on measuring inflation.


Passage number 166.
-22-2/4-5/80MR. PARTEE. How do you reach those confidence ratios. Idon't really understand the process by which you get a 70 percentconfidence interval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The person is simply expressing their lack of understanding and seeking clarification on how confidence ratios are reached.


Passage number 167.
MR. KICHLINE. We use the errors from the quarterly model inthe equations, which are determined from past history. We run a largenumber of simulations; in fact this is based upon 400 experiments withthe model. And when looking at that, we determine it with a 70percent confidence interval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a methodology for determining errors and confidence intervals using simulations and historical data.


Passage number 168.
MR. PARTEE. How many were above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement among individuals. It simply mentions a person named Mr. Partee and asks how many were above something, without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 169.
MR. KICHLINE. How many of those were above and how manybelow. In effect, using this very large number of simulations, themodel would say that 70 percent from the past fall within that bound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the results of a model and the percentage of past simulations that fell within a certain bound.


Passage number 170.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'd like to comment--I'm probably the onlysimple-minded person on the Committee--that I found your presentationto be the best I've seen. It was presented in a form that I foundvery easy to understand and I liked it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing appreciation and admiration for the presentation they have just witnessed.


Passage number 171.
MR. KICHLINE. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite response showing gratitude.


Passage number 172.
MR. COLDWELL. Could I ask a question, Mr. Chairman. TheChairman [of the Congressional Committee] has asked us to talk aboutpossibilities regarding real GNP, the CPI, and unemployment. As Iunderstand your presentation, your real GNP forecast for 1980 would bedown 2.2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating information about a presentation and a forecast.


Passage number 173.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, wait a minute. That's for the yearas a whole, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification or confirmation regarding the time frame being referenced.


Passage number 174.
MR. KICHLINE. That's fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a statement without any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply provides a piece of information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 175.
MR. COLDWELL. Isn't that what you're asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Coldwell is potentially questioning or challenging something being asked.


Passage number 176.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the passage itself, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 177.
MR. COLDWELL. And you have the unemployment rate at 7-3/4percent at the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple presentation of a specific statistic without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 178.
MR. KICHLINE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply agrees with a statement by using the phrase "That's right."


Passage number 179.
MR. COLDWELL. What's your CPI. That is what he asked.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for information about the CPI.


Passage number 180.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, you'd want to add a line on that tablefor the staff forecast for 1980, QIV to QIV. The staff has a forecastof 11.4 percent for the increase in the CPI. And for 1981 the staffforecast for the CPI is 8.6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 181.
 Just for comparison--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the fourth quarter of 1980 you havewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information for comparison purposes, and there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 182.
MR. KICHLINE. No, for the percentage change from the fourthquarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter of 1980 we have 11.4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about the percentage change.


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the rate of consumer priceincrease in the fourth quarter of 1980.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question stating a specific time period and asking for a specific rate of increase.


Passage number 184.
-23-2/4-5/80MR. KICHLINE. 9.2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not deal with any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the name "MR. KICHLINE" followed by the numerical value "9.2 percent".


Passage number 185.
MR. COLDWELL. But the change over the year is 11.4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a percentage without any contradictory statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 186.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, we have a forecast of around 15-1/2percent in the first quarter of this year with a combination of energy[prices] and high mortgage rates driving it up. It drops to 11-3/4percent [in the second quarter] and then to 9-1/4 percent in thesecond half of this year, which measured fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter gives you around 11-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting information about forecasted percentages, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 187.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand. What was it in thefourth quarter of last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement expressing confusion and asking for clarification. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 188.
MR. KICHLINE. 13.0 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "13.0 percent" is purely a numerical value and does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 189.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it's going to be 9.2 percent in thefourth quarter of 1980, according to this projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is presenting a projection or prediction for the fourth quarter of 1980. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 190.
MR. KICHLINE. That's right.SPEAKER(.). Give or take a percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline is confirming an unspecified statement, and the speaker responds with a neutral and non-committal remark.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is this change of 11 percent thatyou're talking about.SPEAKER(.). Fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification regarding the change of 11 percent that was mentioned.


Passage number 192.
MR. KICHLINE. You take the level of the index in the fourthquarter of 1979 and calculate the percentage change in the level tothe fourth quarter 1980. Early in 1980 we have very rapid increasesin the CPI and they slow later on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about the calculation of the percentage change in the level of the index between two quarters.


Passage number 193.
MR. MAYO. Why don't you give us the quarterly figures. Itmay help us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express contention or disagreement. Mr. Mayo is simply suggesting that providing quarterly figures may be helpful.


Passage number 194.
MR. SCHULTZ. And year-over-year is different from fourthquarter-to-fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply explains that "year-over-year" is different from "fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter."


Passage number 195.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, if you want to look at some of thesenumbers: The fourth quarter of 1979 is 13.0 percent; the firstquarter of 1980 is 15.6; the second quarter is 11.7; the third quarteris 9.2; and the fourth quarter is 9.2. Measured fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter, that is an increase of 11.4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting a series of numbers without expressing any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 196.
MR. SCHULTZ. What do you have year-over-year, for 1980 over1979.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks for a comparison between two years.


Passage number 197.
MR. KICHLINE. I think we have that on a different table. Ifnot, someone may have a calculator and we can--. It's 12.8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline is simply providing information about the percentage, without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 198.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just have to decide what figure I wanthere. I think I want the fourth quarter rate of change, your 9.2percent figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 199.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think that's right. The rate ofinflation as measured by the CPI is reduced by the end of the year to9-1/4 percent. The Administration has more than that, doesn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement by MR. PARTEE, expressing agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 200.
-24-2/4-5/80MR. KICHLINE. I have a December-to-December calculation forthe Administration. They didn't calculate it quarterly; I have thedetails, [so I can] calculate it. It's roughly comparable. Forfourth quarter-to-fourth quarter it's 10.4 percent in 1980, whichcompares to our 11.4 percent. And for 1981 we're both at the samelevel, 8.6 percent from the fourth quarter to the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents data and comparisons without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 201.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The figures we are looking for, then, arethe [counterparts] of your minus 2.2 percent--that's the fourthquarter-to-fourth quarter change in real GNP--the level ofunemployment in the fourth quarter, and the rate of change in theconsumer price index during the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states the figures that the author is looking for.


Passage number 202.
MR. PARTEE. You want the CPI in our [forecasts] rather thanthe implicit deflator.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 203.
MR. MAYO. It happens to be the same; it's 9.2 percent forthe fixed weight price index, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 204.
MR. PARTEE. It does happen to be the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement that could indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about something being the same.


Passage number 205.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can you tell me what the consensus is ofprivate forecasts at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for information about private forecasts, without stating any specific disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 206.
MR. KICHLINE. The consensus of price forecasts or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "consensus of price forecasts" suggests that there are multiple price forecasts, indicating potential disagreement or differing opinions among experts.


Passage number 207.
MR. SCHULTZ. For everything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a single quote from Mr. Schultz without any other conflicting statements.


Passage number 208.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, for these three items or someapproximations thereof.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply discussing three specific items or approximations of them.


Passage number 209.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I don't have a consensus. I can giveyou some numbers based on a couple of the econometric model forecasts.I might just say that a great deal of difficulty is associated withthis sort of exercise in that both the monetary and fiscal assumptionsdiffer. And in many cases one doesn't know what the energy priceassumptions are. Most outside forecasters that I am aware of nowinclude in their control projections some sort of tax cut as well as aconsiderably more expansive monetary policy if specified, or if notspecified, implicitly so. Most of them have a recession, I would say,that is two or three quarters in length beginning now. They havemaintenance of very high prices and a much sharper recovery inactivity late this year or in 1981. The Wharton model is somethinglike that, for example, and they do have a tax cut. And they assumeM1 growth of 6-1/2 percent compared to our 5 percent. In comparison,the bill rates in that sort of forecast by the fourth quarter of thisyear are below 10 percent, compared to 11 percent in the Board staff'sforecast. So, a good deal of the difference probably relates toalternative policy assumptions. DRI is the most confusing of all. Ithas an increase in nominal GNP from the fourth quarter of 1979 to mid-1981 that averages 10 percent at an annual rate and has the bill rategoing down 3-1/2 percentage points. All of that is achieved with a4-1/2 percent M1 growth, which is magic compared to anything in thepostwar period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Kichline is providing information about different econometric models and their forecasts. He is not expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 210.
MS. TEETERS. Do you have the interest rate assumptions inthe Administration's forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for information about the interest rate assumptions in the Administration's forecast.


Passage number 211.
-25-2/4-5/80MR. KICHLINE. Yes, I do. Do you want a fourth-quarter levelor--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 212.
MS. TEETERS. Fourth-quarter level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 213.
MR. KICHLINE. The level in the fourth quarter of 1980 is 9.6percent on the 3-month bill rate; in the fourth quarter of 1981, it's8.8 percent. The staff forecast has a bill rate of 11 percent in Q41980 and 11-1/2 percent in Q4 1981. There is no explicit moneyassumption that goes with the Administration's forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating different interest rates for different quarters and mentioning the staff forecast without any explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 214.
MR. COLDWELL. But if you calculated it, what would it be.They must have some [implicit assumption]. Is it higher than yours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question seeking clarification about an assumption made by the person being addressed.


Passage number 215.
MR. PARTEE. It would have to be higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Partee, presents a statement without any conflicting or opposing views being expressed.


Passage number 216.
MR. COLDWELL. It has to be higher than yours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement indicated in this passage. It simply states that "It has to be higher than yours," without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 217.
MR. AXILROD. We are very pleased that they have not put thatin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker simply states that they are pleased about something.


Passage number 218.
MR. MAYO. Me, too, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses agreement between Mr. Mayo and Steve.


Passage number 219.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They may be using a different equation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any differing opinions or conflicting viewpoints. It simply states that someone may be utilizing a different equation, which is not a source of contention or disagreement in itself.


Passage number 220.
MR. MORRIS. Let sleeping dogs lie, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. "Let sleeping dogs lie" is a common expression that means not to disturb a situation or issue that could cause trouble. In this context, Mr. Morris is simply expressing his agreement or acquiescence.


Passage number 221.
MR. SCHULTZ. Eggert is very cheap. Why don't you go aheadand buy it so you can have it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement suggesting that the speaker, Mr. Schultz, believes Eggert to be inexpensive and suggests buying it.


Passage number 222.
MR. KICHLINE. We do buy it; I don't look at it. Well, Ican't say I don't look at it. It's a rundown of 30 or 35 forecasts.Unfortunately, they come out with different time periods and nolisting of the policy assumptions, so it's very difficult to compareone to another. It's helpful if one just wants to scan what privateforecasters are thinking, but we've had difficulty trying to relateour forecast to others unless we have the detail of the monetarypolicy [assumptions], for example. But we do receive that and do lookat it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kichline, is simply explaining the limitations and challenges of using the forecast reports they receive.


Passage number 223.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me add one more item on the list thatI asked you to comment on and that is the fiscal policy[unintelligible]. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply adding another item to the list for the other person to comment on.


Passage number 224.
MR. ROOS. Jim, maybe you've answered this. I am a littlelost. On the GNP implicit price deflator, where your projections showan increase into 1981, did you put any weight on monetary policy. Inorder words if, as we have announced, we are going to reduce graduallythe rate of money growth, do you still anticipate this upward movementin the deflator, or was that not put in your--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and asking if monetary policy was considered in the projections.


Passage number 225.
MR. KICHLINE. No, that plays a very important role. But wehave inflation coming down in 1981; it's not going up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Kichline is making a statement about inflation coming down in 1981 and states it as a fact.


Passage number 226.
MR. ROOS. But you show it going up [initially]; it's sort ofa roller coaster.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply describing a visual representation of data.


Passage number 227.
-26-2/4-5/80MR. KICHLINE. Well, as I say, in part the deflator is astatistical artifact when import prices are rising very rapidly. I dobelieve that there's little that can be done to change the course ofprice developments within the next three or four months. In fact,already just about half of the first quarter is over, so in our viewwe're locked into a very adverse price performance in the first halfof this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's belief about price developments and the limited options for changing them.


Passage number 228.
MR. ROOS. Do you see that prevailing through the secondquarter of 1981. In other words, you don't see any relief even thoughwe're doing what we are doing here in gradually reducing the rate of[monetary growth].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is asking for clarification and confirmation regarding the speaker's perspective on the future.


Passage number 229.
MR. KICHLINE. As I say, part of that is attributable to theperformance of import prices in influencing this calculation. It isour view that prices do improve. If you take a look at an alternativemeasure of prices, in the section that Jerry Zeisel was referring to--go back one section [in the handout] right before the yellow sheet--there is a chart that plots the gross domestic business product, whichis a fixed weight price index. There some of the problems fromshifting weights are at least taken out, and you can see that we dohave a decline beginning in the second half of this year, stretchinginto and throughout 1981.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their view on the performance of import prices and providing evidence to support their statement.


Passage number 230.
MR. ROOS. But if we hang in there, which we are determinedto do, and keep firm control over and gradually reduce the growth rateof whatever Ms we are controlling, don't all these other things fallinto line. Or do you still have to run 400 equations to see what--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that by remaining determined and having control over reducing the growth rate, other things will fall into line. There is no indication of opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 231.
MR. KICHLINE. What falls into line. I only wanted to tellyou that while we give you point forecasts, we're quite aware thatthere's a wide range of error associated with any forecast. We triedto look at past history to suggest how big that range is, and it'ssizable. We have no difficulty with your point that monetary policyover time does have an influence on the economy and on prices. Infact, the answer is: Yes, we agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It clearly states that "we have no difficulty with your point" and "the answer is: Yes, we agree."


Passage number 232.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it ends abruptly before any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments are presented.


Passage number 233.
MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like Governor Schultz,I found this a particularly interesting presentation, but I think fora slightly different reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Willes is expressing agreement and appreciation for the presentation, although he mentions having a slightly different reason for finding it interesting.


Passage number 234.
MR. BLACK. You mean you're not simple-minded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement by Mr. Black asking for clarification.


Passage number 235.
MR. WILLES. Without touching that line with a 10-foot pole,I want simply to refer to the very last chart. I think the staff hasdone us a great service in presenting that because with all theconversation about whether the increase in the CPI is going to be 9.2percent or whatever, if you look at that band [depicting the range oferror], that's an incredibly large band. We talk about the CPI in thefourth quarter and it could be plus or minus some very large numbers.While it's useful to go through these exercises to see where we comeout, I think we really don't pay as much attention as we should to theenormous uncertainty that attaches to these forecasts. We've had somepeople doing some work at our place--and I don't understand thetechnical details so I won't take you through it--but let me just giveyou an example of the kinds of problems one runs into in making-27-2/4-5/80quantitative forecasts. If you think of watching a wagon on a TVscreen or a movie screen, you'll notice that the wagon is goingforward and it looks like the wheels are going backwards. The reasonfor that, of course, is that as the wheel goes forward in the firstframe the spoke is up in the center and then it goes forward and it'sthe second frame before it gets all the way back up to the top againand so on around. So, even though the wheel is moving forward, whenyou take pictures, it looks as if it's moving backwards.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and sharing information about the uncertainty and challenges associated with making quantitative forecasts.


Passage number 236.
MR. PARTEE. It depends on the speed of the projector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "It depends on the speed of the projector" is not a point of contention or disagreement. It is a conditional statement that implies the outcome may vary based on a certain factor.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 237.
MR. WILLES. You're exactly right. It depends on the speedof the projector and the speed with which the wheel is moving. Now,let's suppose that decisions are made in continuous time and you takeeconometric snapshots on a monthly or quarterly basis. It could be amatter of pot luck that the speed of the decisionmaking framework andthe speed of the projector are the same. If they're not, you canactually take a picture that gives you just the opposite view ofwhat's going on. We happen to think that in many cases that's exactlywhat happens. We have all these nice pictures that are actuallygiving us pictures exactly the opposite, in terms of policyimplications, of what is going on in the "real world" and how it'sfunctioning. I simply say that to indicate that I think we need to beparticularly [cautious] at this time, given not only the uncertaintiesin the world but the uncertainties about the tools that we're workingwith, about what we think we can even say in terms of the time pathfor the economy over the next eight quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement or contention about the accuracy and reliability of the econometric snapshots and the speed of decision-making. The speaker suggests that the pictures provided by the snapshots may give the opposite view of what is actually happening in the "real world." This implies a disagreement or discrepancy in the understanding and interpretation of economic data.


Passage number 238.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have expressed yourself eloquently onthe wide band of uncertainty. Would you care to express a view on thecentral tendency as you see it. Or are you so uncertain that you haveno view on this policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply asks for the person's view on a particular topic.


Passage number 239.
MR. WILLES. If you press me to the wall, I will. I don'tthink I can say anything with any credibility, but I'll give younumbers anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is hesitant about their ability to provide credible information but agrees to provide numbers regardless.


Passage number 240.
 And if the numbers turn out to be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The provided passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is incomplete and does not provide enough context or information to make a determination.


Passage number 241.
 Well, I think it is not unimportant thatyou say there's a great degree of uncertainty and I would like to getthat--MR. WILLES. With that great big long caveat that I just gaveyou, the numbers that we have in terms of real GNP for 1980 are morepositive than the staff's. We think on balance that there's going tobe some very modest positive real growth during 1980 and we tie thatin with what we see happening with fiscal policy and slightly strongerbusiness investment. I don't quarrel at all with the staff's deflatornumber or their CPI number. If anything, though, given what I justsaid about defense spending and so on, those numbers might turn out tobe low rather than high. I also don't quarrel with their unemploymentnumbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and support for the staff's numbers and analysis.


Passage number 242.
MR. PARTEE. Even though you have positive output growth, youwould agree with that unemployment number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing agreement or alignment with the unemployment number, indicating that he agrees with it.


Passage number 243.
MR. WILLES. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 244.
-28-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have any particular feeling aboutfiscal policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The given passage is a numerical expression, which does not involve any contention or disagreement. The second sentence, "Do you have any particular feeling about fiscal policy," is a separate question not related to the numerical expression, so it also does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 245.
MR. WILLES. Yes, the deficit is understated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "the deficit is understated" is simply stating a fact without any opposing viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 246.
MS. TEETERS. By the staff or--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage is incomplete and does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 247.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is, without a discretionary taxdecrease it is understated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a fact or observation without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 248.
MR. WILLES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot treat as collective bargaining, and franchise as a monopoly business, and yet say that because a railroad is a monopoly business, therefore an attempt on the part of the employs to resist the power of one of its officers, who represents it, is unlawful, and constitutes a riotous assemblage; and it is no matter how great the oppression may be under which the men are made to suffer.


Passage number 249.
 But by how much, I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you wish to say whether you think a taxcut is a good idea or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents a question about someone's opinion on the topic of tax cuts.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 250.
MR. WILLES. I think a tax cut would be a disaster.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Willes, expresses his belief that a tax cut would be a disaster. This indicates a disagreement or contention with someone or something else that may favor a tax cut.


Passage number 251.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, that's a clear view. Mr. Timlen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the view is clear.


Passage number 252.
MR. TIMLEN. The one number I can read accurately from thiswhole list of numbers is our projection of unemployment in the fourthquarter of 1980, which is 7.3 percent. In New York we're probablygiving more weight to defense spending than the Board staff is giving,not only in terms of defense spending by the Federal government butcapital expenditures by the private sector in anticipation ofgovernment orders. In terms of real GNP, then, our picture for theyear, quarter by quarter, differs slightly in the timing and the depthof the possible recession. Our four quarters run a positive 1 percentfor the first quarter, a positive 0.5 percent in the second quarter,then two negative numbers in the third and fourth quarters of minus 1and minus 2 percent. On a full year average basis that comes out to[minus] 0.6 percent. Our deflator quarter by quarter ranges between8.5 and 8.9 percent, so for the year we have 8.5 to 9 percentinflation [as measured] by the deflator. Our CPI is somewhere around10-1/2 to 11 percent. One thing that I would throw out that you havenot asked for is that our people in New York think the saving ratewill continue to be quite low for the entire year of 1980; to wit,they have it averaging out at 2.9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their own projections and analysis, without criticizing or contradicting anyone else's views.


Passage number 253.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming on the saving rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking for the assumption made on the saving rate. It does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 254.
MR. KICHLINE. It drifts up and for the year 1980 averages4-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 255.
MR. TIMLEN. Yes, there's a big difference between the Boardstaff forecast and ours on the saving rate. On the federal fiscalsituation, for fiscal 1980 we are looking at a deficit close to $45billion; I'd say $40 to $45 billion. And for fiscal 1981, dependingupon a tax cut, we have $40 billion on the low side without a tax cutand $60 billion on the high side with a tax cut. I don't really havea good judgment on whether there will be a tax cut on not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Timlen is simply stating his own analysis and forecasts without directly challenging or contradicting anyone else's perspective.


Passage number 256.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you think there should be one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a question asking for the opinion of the reader. It does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 257.
MR. TIMLEN. Do I think there should be one. For a change, Iwould agree with Mark Willes. But some of the numbers are hard for meto estimate in terms of the full impact of defense spending, whetherout of the government or the private sector. In terms of the-29-2/4-5/80consumer, I just don't know how to read currently the effect of themild winter. I would have been rather concerned about the cost ofheating but I know our Buffalo branch is running considerably belowbudget in terms of heating that building. What the experience is inprivate homes, I just don't know. So the consumer may have a littleuptick there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge about certain topics, but there is no conflicting opinion or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I take it that you think there's a fairamount of uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply reflects the speaker's understanding of the other person's viewpoint.


Passage number 259.
MR. TIMLEN. I wouldn't put it in quite the same language asMark, but I am uncertain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Timlen is acknowledging some level of uncertainty, but it is not stated that he disagrees or has conflicting views with Mark.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot answer without additional context.


Passage number 261.
MR. COLDWELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, this is the last chance Iget to say this so I am going to say it. In fact this is my last FOMCmeeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Coldwell about it being his last meeting.


Passage number 262.
MR. MAYO. Why don't you stand up, Phil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Mayo is simply speaking to Phil and asking him to stand up.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 263.
MR. COLDWELL. No, I am not going to chance that. I agreethat there's a high degree of uncertainty, but our track record andour past performance clearly indicate that we've underestimated therate of inflation and I expect we will continue to do so. I thinkthere's going to be a rapid defense build-up, but impacting largelyupon expectations in the first part of this year. If that is thecase, we may see a moderation from what the staff was [projecting] inthe rate of decline in the first half. I think fiscal policy is goingto be easier than portrayed by the Administration's budget. Fiscalpolicy is likely to be stimulative instead of restraining and Isuspect we will probably underestimate the aggregate data that we areusing. As for the data you've requested we comment on, Mr. Chairman,I would put real GNP in a zero to plus 1/2 percent mode, the CPI atthe end of the year in the neighborhood of 14 percent, and theunemployment rate at about 7 percent. And I have already indicatedthat I think fiscal policy is going to be easier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell disagrees with the staff's projections and believes that inflation will be higher than expected, fiscal policy will be easier than portrayed, and the unemployment rate will be higher than projected.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 264.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So you're not in favor of a tax cut, Itake it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement or contention regarding the speaker's stance on a tax cut.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 265.
MR. COLDWELL. I am certainly not in favor of a personalincome tax cut. I think there is a case to be made to improve therate of business capital stimulation in the area of improving jobexpectations, but I would question whether this is the right time todo that. There's a fundamental fact of high inflation, which we needto continue to keep our eye on; unless that is damped, thepossibilities of a rising rate of inflation are very good. I justdon't find myself in agreement with the idea of gradualism in economicpolicy. It's a lovely theory but a practical monstrosity. Creditavailability in the economy is high in my view right now. And withexpectations of high inflation, the interest rate restraint isminimal. Banker attitudes reflect no feeling of quantitativerestraint; to the contrary, they are seeing business as usual. Iadmit the majority of the bannking profession seems to say that theonly thing that would satisfy them would be a major depression. But Istill think we have not obtained control over this and I suspect thatthe recent trends in the international financial side are going to-30-2/4-5/80create some dollar problems for us for the coming year. As youstruggle through these, I wish you well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Coldwell, expresses disagreement with the idea of a personal income tax cut and gradualism in economic policy. He also disagrees with the banking profession's attitude and expresses concern about the possibility of a rising rate of inflation and dollar problems in the coming year.


Passage number 266.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you. We're going to be left withyour decision for the rest of the year. Mr. Smoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing thanks and acknowledging that they will be abiding by the decision made by Mr. Smoot for the remainder of the year.


Passage number 267.
MR. SMOOT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had very little timeto prepare for this. Dave is not well and sends his best, however, toall of you. The last time I was down here I did have time to preparea great deal and I was very confused. Now I haven't had much time toprepare very well and I am still very confused. Nevertheless, wewould be somewhat less pessimistic than the Board staff's projections.To address your questions: On the real GNP, we see it negative forthe year, but maybe in the range of 1 to 1-1/2 percent negative. Onthe CPI, we'd say up 10 to 11 percent for the year, but if I read myown charts correctly we'd be closer to 10 percent in the fourthquarter. And on unemployment, consistent with our somewhat moreoptimistic view on the economy, we would be in the range of 7 to 7-1/2percent. On the tax cut, we have considered a tax cut in the secondhalf of the year in the range of $25 to $30 billion. I would agreewith Governor Coldwell that it ought to be carefully constructed tostimulate capital formation and to look at the social security tax.Other than that, I don't find our differences with the Board staff tobe that great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that they have had little time to prepare and expresses confusion, but they do not express any disagreement with the Board staff's projections.


Passage number 268.
 There are a lot of marginal things that just add up toa somewhat more--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand you, your forecast has atax cut in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 269.
MR. SMOOT. Yes, we would anticipate one. I would alsosubscribe to Mark's comments that differences of 1/2 or 1 percentagepoint at this time really appear to be somewhat meaningless.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with Mark's comments and supports the idea that small differences in percentages at this time are not significant.


Passage number 270.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it only includes the name "Mr. Guffey" and does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 271.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The staff's forecastis a bit more pessimistic than our forecast, and that largely centerson two differences. One is the saving rate, which the Board staff'sforecast suggests will increase over the coming year while we believeit will be either flat or at least at a low level, thus givingconsumers the ability to maintain in part their standard of livingeven in view of heavy inflation. Secondly, we believe defensespending will be somewhat greater than the staff is forecasting forthe year 1980 coming into the third and fourth quarters; it may be $2to $3 billion larger in each of those quarters than the staff hasprojected, thus giving stimulus to the economy. As a result, we wouldsee the real GNP at about flat, zero to maybe one percent on thepositive side, with unemployment someplace between 7 and 7-1/2percent. The CPI in our judgment, however, is going to continue at afairly rapid rate. Our judgment is that it will still be in the 11 to12 percent range in the fourth quarter. As to the fiscal side,obviously there will be much more expansion than the staff or theAdministration are forecasting. And as to a tax cut, I would agreewith whoever said it would be a tragedy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is simply presenting one forecast that is more pessimistic than another forecast.


Passage number 272.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 273.
-31-2/4-5/80MR. PARTEE. Well, I have been concerned about defensespending as a question mark in the outlook. I must say that the chartthe staff has provided us, showing an alternative with $10 billionmore defense spending this year and $20 billion more in 1981 and in1982 on top of the 6 percent real growth that's already in there fornonpersonnel costs, strikes me as a good liberal estimate of the extradefense spending that might occur or that is possible in the shortrun. And I would point out to you that it doesn't change the numbersall that much. I believe they did this with the model, so it includesorders effects and that kind of thing--that is, effects that occurbefore the actual defense spending. So, both that and the fact thatit seems to me to look a little less [tenuous] than it was a month agomake me feel that it isn't such a big possible plus in the economy inthe immediate future as it might have been. Also, the saving rate isjust very difficult [to forecast]. New York has a continuation of avery low saving rate throughout 1980 and one could argue that therehas been a permanent shift in the saving rate. I don't think so. Ithink it's going to come back up. I agree with the staff on that.There is no evidence of a permanent move from money to goods of thekind that would be indicated by that. So, I come down to anexpectation that real GNP will fall some this year, though probablyless than the staff has [in its forecast]--maybe 1 to 2 percent. Theemployment rate I am quite sure will rise significantly because I justdon't think it is possible that services and trade will continue toadd to the employment rolls without output, without a commensuratevalue added, much longer. So a 7-1/2 percent fourth-quarterunemployment rate is probably a reasonable forecast. I'd haveinflation a little higher than the staff has--at 9 to 10 percent, say,for the deflator and 10 to 12 percent for the CPI in the year ahead.As for fiscal policy, I think there will be a tax cut but probably notuntil next year. That's not as early as the alternative staffprojection has it, which is the middle of this year. It probably willoccur in early 1981, sometime in the spring, and it will improve 1981results a little from what the staff has projected. But I would pointout to you that I think an absolutely binding assumption on therecovery of the economy is the monetary assumption which, of course,we have the ability to control. Did I get everything on this [list].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. One example of contention is when MR. PARTEE disagrees with the staff's forecast of real GNP falling and instead predicts a smaller decrease of 1 to 2 percent. Another example is when MR. PARTEE disagrees with the staff's forecast of a tax cut occurring in the middle of the year and instead predicts it will happen in early 1981.


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. You wouldn't particularly push for atax cut earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a general observation or personal preference about tax cuts.


Passage number 275.
MR. PARTEE. No, I think we ought to wait. I think it willbe necessitated by a high and rising unemployment rate, and I figurethat will be obvious to everybody by early next year. So it's a nextyear venture rather than this year. When it occurs I agree with thecomments that have been made that we ought to do what we can to makeit stimulative for business investment if we have any effect. But Ido have to tell you that I think the full push will be to make it aconsumer tax cut when it occurs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. The speaker simply shares their opinion about the timing and nature of a potential tax cut.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it only mentions Governor Teeters without providing any context or information about any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 277.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I would like to go back to the last chartagain, as Mark did. You notice those tolerance lines, the top and thebottom, are fairly narrow over the next three quarters. So it seemsto me that we're looking basically at a fairly set outlook for thenext three quarters and possibly into the fourth quarter, and I don't-32-2/4-5/80want to throw away what is one of our major advantages. The Humphrey-Hawkins Act requires us to give our outlook for this year. We have afairly good idea where we're going this year and where we're going toend up, and our views do not differ a great deal as I hear what hasbeen said around the [table]. It's plus or minus a little here orthere, and that certainly falls within the tolerance limits of whatthe staff has projected. Secondly, the Humphrey-Hawkins Act says thatin the middle of the year we are to reassess what we are doing. Tolock ourselves into a policy at this point from now until 1981 is thebiggest mistake we could ever make. We have some idea where we aregoing for the next two quarters or we can come pretty close to it. Wehave a chance to reassess it in the middle of the year. And Icertainly don't want to vote for a policy at this time that is goingto result in T-bill rates of 11.7 or 12.2 percent in 1981. I wouldn'tquarrel a great deal with what the staff has projected. I would agreewithin one percentage point on almost any figure they gave us, thoughI'd probably expect a little higher unemployment rate than they'reprojecting and a little higher inflation rate, again depending on whathappens primarily in defense. But if you look at the full employmentsurplus in the fourth quarter and the first quarter of 1981, it jumps$30 billion. And it jumps another $20 billion between the first andfourth quarters of next year. We don't have to make a decision on[1981] at this point. We have two more major decision points betweennow and the beginning of next year, and I think we should utilize themto the fullest. [We need to] consider the fact that we may settle ona 4-1/2, 5, or 5-1/2 percent rate of money growth and it's not goingto have a great deal of influence over the next nine months. However,at midyear if we have unemployment rates of 7-1/2 or 8-1/2 percent, wemust be prepared to change our policy at that point. I don't want togo down the line item by item because I don't have a great quarrelwith [the forecast], but I do urge that we not give up theflexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the staff's projections and emphasizing the importance of maintaining flexibility in future policy decisions.


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. The passage only includes the name "Mr. Balles" without providing any further information or context.


Passage number 279.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I would like first to turn to page3 of this package of charts and ask a question to the staff and thenmake a comment. On the calculation of the high employment budget youshow for 1980 and 1981, Jim: These are your calculations, I assume,rather than the official figures set forth by the Administration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply an individual asking a question and making a comment.


Passage number 280.
MR. KICHLINE. They're our calculations but we use the sameprocedure, which has been revised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that their calculations have been revised but does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 281.
MR. BALLES. In other words, it's benchmarked at a 5.1percent unemployment rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement. The speaker is simply stating a fact that the unemployment rate is benchmarked at 5.1%.


Passage number 282.
MR. KICHLINE. Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges the correctness of the statement made.


Passage number 283.
MR. BALLES. All right, thank you. My comment is this:Within the last couple of years our Research Department has done quitea bit of work [on this subject]. In fact, we circulated a paper tothe rest of you, just to share this view, giving an alternativenoninflationary full employment rate, which we estimate to besomewhere between the high 5 percent [to] low 6 percent area, maybecentered on 6 percent. That's based on a lot of detail I won't gointo, but it [involves] all the factors going into the changes in thecomposition and behavior of the labor force. I asked our staff to-33-2/4-5/80make a computation of what the high employment surplus would be if oneassumed a 6 percent unemployment rate, and it produces some radicallydifferent figures. For 1980 the high employment budget surplus, [ascalculated] officially by the Administration, is said to be $4billion. But using the 6 percent unemployment rate figure, we come upwith a deficit of $20 billion. Furthermore, off-budget financing,which as I understand it is not included in this high employmentbudget surplus calculation, would add another $17 billion. So lookingat it in this alternative way, I can see the possibility of fiscalstimulus to the tune of $37 billion even on a so-called highemployment basis, defined as 6 percent in this calendar year. Andthat, by the same reasoning, translates into a surplus of $12 billionin 1981. The reason I went through this exercise was to get adifferent view, depending on one's assumptions, of whether we havereal fiscal stimulus or fiscal restraint or how fast we are movingfrom one to the other. It nets out for this year, certainly in myview, to a pretty sizable fiscal stimulus rather than the restraintofficially forecast. And I think that has a pretty broad bearing onappropriate monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A part of the question, if I may justinterrupt, is whatever the level, how much does it change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating that there is a question and someone is requesting to interrupt to ask a part of that question.


Passage number 285.
MR. PARTEE. You have an improvement, John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that John has made an improvement.


Passage number 286.
MR. BALLES. Yes. In my calculation, it changes from a $37billion stimulus on the high employment basis, which adds in off-budget financing of $17 billion and assumes a 6 percentnoninflationary full employment rate in fiscal 1980, to a $12 billionsurplus in fiscal 1981. Now that is quite a movement. But it startslate this calendar year and [continues] into 1981.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their calculations and explaining the change in stimulus and surplus numbers.


Passage number 287.
MR. SCHULTZ. What kind of assumption do you have on normalGNP growth. To put those figures together, you need some assumptionon normal growth too. Is 2-1/2 percent what you used. That's what Ithink the staff here is using as their assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply discusses an assumption about normal GNP growth, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 288.
MR. BALLES. I'd have to turn to Mike [Keran]. Do you have afigure readily at hand on what we assumed for normal growth of GNP. Iam not sure we assumed [something on] that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked for clarification.


Passage number 289.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, you have to make some assumption to comeup with the calculations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Schultz is stating a fact that assumptions need to be made in order to come up with the calculations. There is no hint of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 290.
MR. BALLES. Well, it falls out of the 6 percent unemploymentassumption--a certain growth in the labor force, a certain growth inproductivity, and that kind of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states different factors that contribute to the 6 percent unemployment assumption.


Passage number 291.
MR. PARTEE. But you have to have a normal growth that willkeep the unemployment rate at 6 percent. I don't know what Mike used,but I am sure he has a figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 292.
MR. BALLES. He may have a figure; I don't have it readily athand. We'll get it for you later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have the figure readily available but will provide it later.


Passage number 293.
MR. KERAN. It would be the same, [2-1/2] percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker seems to be stating a fact or opinion without any opposing viewpoint or debate.


Passage number 294.
MR. PARTEE. 2-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only includes a statement or question from Mr. Partee.


Passage number 295.
-34-2/4-5/80MR. BALLES. Turning to the other questions you raised, Mr.Chairman: Our staff forecast for the economy for this year is quitesimilar to the forecast of the Board's staff, showing a decline inreal GNP from the fourth quarter 1979 to the fourth quarter 1980 ofexactly the same amount, 2.1 percent. We have the CPI going up by11.1 percent from the fourth quarter to the fourth quarter. Sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the staff's forecast for the economy.


Passage number 296.
MR. SCHULTZ. That's fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter,though; that's not [the rate] in the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply clarifying the time frame being referred to.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 297.
MR. BALLES. No, that's from fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter. Our figures show in the fourth quarter of this year a rateof 9.7 percent. That is our staff view; I am not that optimistic.That is where our two staffs differ: The Board's staff sees acontinued rise in the inflation rate through part of this year; ourstaff has a more optimistic assumption that we're at or near the peakright now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, states that the Board's staff sees a continued rise in the inflation rate, while his own staff has a more optimistic assumption that the inflation rate is at or near the peak. This indicates a difference of opinion or contention between the two staffs.


Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The [Board's] staff shows a decline in theconsumer price index for this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a fact or finding from the Board's staff that there has been a decline in the consumer price index for the current year.


Passage number 299.
MR. COLDWELL. Yes, down to 9.2 percent [in the fourthquarter].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Coldwell is a statement of fact without any opposing views or disagreement presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 300.
MR. BALLES. Right, but I was thinking of their trend line onthe GNP deflator, which is going up for a while. Our unemploymentrate by the fourth quarter of this year is almost the same as theirs;ours is 7.6 and they're showing 7.7 percent. The difference in ourviews is that our staff is more optimistic with respect to a fairlystrong bounceback in calendar year 1981, which I hope is right, up togrowth of 4 percent plus, whereas the Board's staff is looking for1981 real growth of only 2.6 percent. I am giving the staff views ofour Bank. My own personal instincts are that we're probably going tohave more inflation and less decline in real output than the researchstaff at our Bank expects. That's based on pure hunch or instincts asto what is going on in the way of a semi-wartime economy here. And mypessimism on the inflation rate--my view being worse than either staffis forecasting--comes among other things from what has been going onin long-term bond markets in this past month, which I find extremelydiscouraging. People are putting their money where their mouth isreally in anticipation. To me that is a very dangerous signal of arejuvenation of inflationary expectations. And it is discouragingespecially in view of our demonstrated good track record since October6th in getting a genuine, observable, real deceleration in the moneysupply, which I had assumed would impact favorably on inflationexpectations and hence on long-term bond rates. Yet despite what wehave done, we have seen a move in the long-term bond yield, which Iview as a good index of inflation expectations, back up to a new high.So I'm very concerned that we adopt a posture that is a strong signalof continued deceleration of monetary growth because that is the onlytool we have to combat these recently renewed rising inflationexpectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles is expressing his disagreement with the views of the Board's staff and his own Bank's staff regarding the potential for economic growth and inflation. He believes that there will be more inflation and less decline in real output than what is being forecasted. He also disagrees with the Board's approach in combating rising inflation expectations.


Passage number 301.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not advocating a tax cut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that the person is not advocating for a tax cut without expressing any conflicting viewpoint or disagreement.


Passage number 302.
MR. BALLES. No, sir. I support your view 100 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses full support and agreement with the view being discussed.


Passage number 303.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 304.
-35-2/4-5/80MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the Greenbook revision resulted ina move from a V-shaped decline to a sort of saucer-shaped recession,which is probably in the right direction. Despite this, I think theunderlying foundations of the economy are quite weak. What strengthwe have had recently has come mainly from efforts on the part ofhouseholds and some others to beat inflation. Now, I am aware of theargument that the rising wealth of households stemming from suchthings as appreciation of the value of housing may produce a wealtheffect that will cause them to hold their expenditures at higherlevels. But I think that is really a pretty weak reed on which tohang the forecast. Sooner or later, this artificial prop to spendingthat stems from inflation is going to fall apart, and an inflationaryeconomy is not a healthy one. And if it does fall apart, then at thattime I would expect, if inflation is worse, that we would have agreater decline because of the attrition of real income and the highinterest rates that would discourage business investment. Also, Ithink we would have a clamor for wage and price controls. If, on theother hand, inflation is showing signs of abatement, then the effectsof this decline are going to be diminished. So I think Chuck'sobservation a while ago that a lot depends on what we do is a verysignificant point. That will affect the outcome to a great degree.And I think we're going to have a very difficult job in the monthsahead because, like John Balles, I feel we're going to have morestimulus from the fiscal side than most people seem to be assuming.But I do think we are dead serious about our stated intention to bringdown the rate of growth in the aggregates, and I think we'll standfirm. But since I won't be voting next year, I have a little lessconfidence in that than I otherwise would have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the potential effects of inflation on the economy but expresses concerns about its sustainability and the potential consequences. They also mention the importance of the actions taken by policymakers in determining the outcome. Additionally, the speaker mentions their own doubts about the effectiveness of the stated intentions to bring down the rate of growth in the aggregates. However, there is no explicit disagreement or argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 305.
MR. MAYO. You want to say that again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo is simply asking the person to repeat their statement.


Passage number 306.
MR. BLACK. To get down to the figures, I think the drop inGNP might be nearer 3 percent than the 2 percent the staff hasprojected. Since I expect us to do well in the policy area, I wouldput the fourth-quarter rate in the consumer price index a bit lower,at 9 percent. I would guess their unemployment rate is not very faroff; my guess would tend toward 8 percent. As I indicated, I thinkthe deficit is understated--the stimulative effects are understated--and I certainly would not favor a tax cut at this juncture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Black, expresses his own opinions and guesses regarding various economic figures, such as the drop in GNP, the fourth-quarter rate in the consumer price index, the unemployment rate, and the deficit. There is no clear disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 307.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kimbrel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any information or context regarding Mr. Kimbrel, therefore there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 308.
MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, our views are not significantlydifferent from those enunciated by the staff. To put numbers to them:For real GNP, we're looking at a minus 2 percent; for the unemploymentrate, we're in the neighborhood of 8 percent; and for the CPI, 11percent. We do feel, though, that the fiscal [package] may beconsiderably easier than the staff is now reflecting. We certainlywould not support a tax cut unless it were directed toward capitalinvestment. We wonder if defense spending may not be somewhat larger,particularly in the private sector anticipating [orders]. Finally,Mr. Chairman, we are growing somewhat concerned--and our concern wasnot lessened any by Mr. Sternlight's comments yesterday afternoon--that the market increasingly is believing that we are not slowingmoney growth to the extent it expected from our October decision.[Given] that and our track record in this upcoming period of the yearwhen with tax refunds we've been somewhat less than successful inanticipating what money growth would be--if indeed we miss that as-36-2/4-5/80much this year and we do have excessive money growth--I have tobelieve that inflationary expectations are going to be escalatingagain and may contribute more trouble than we need. So, I hope thatwe will be demonstrating pretty forcefully that we expect to restrain[money] growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their views and concerns, but there is no direct disagreement with the previous statements or views.


Passage number 309.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You said 11 percent on consumer prices.Is that year over year or during the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 310.
MR. KIMBREL. Fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the time frame being referred to.


Passage number 311.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have a fourth-quarter figureitself, just for comparability purposes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a straightforward question and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 312.
MR. KIMBREL. I guess 9 or 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kimbrel is providing an answer to a question, stating his estimate of 9 or 9-1/2 percent.


Passage number 313.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no information in the passage to indicate contention or disagreement. The name "Mr. Baughman" is simply mentioned, but there is no context or discussion provided to suggest any disagreement or dispute.


Passage number 314.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, a question [to the staff] first.Insofar as there may be a windfall profits tax, are you assuming thatthe revenues raised thereby will be placed back into the economy or isthat pretty much outside the projections here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked by Mr. Baughman to clarify a point about the allocation of revenues raised from a potential windfall profits tax.


Passage number 315.
MR. KICHLINE. No, it's included in the projections. Thewindfall profits tax--technically I think the words associated with itare "energy trust fund," but that's a misnomer if one believes thatthe revenues are segregated--is included in the budget figures. For1980 we have something like a net addition of nearly $5 billion torevenues. It's something like $7-1/4 to $7-1/2 billion in revenuesand $2-1/2 billion in expenditures, so it's around $5 billion netreceipts. And for 1981 it's around $10 billion net receipts. So,that is included in these figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply providing information about the inclusion of the windfall profits tax in the budget figures.


Passage number 316.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Thank you. I don't have a view significantlydifferent from the staff. I think the degree of uncertainty in theoutlook is not unusual at this point in time; it's probably less nowthan it was a couple of months ago. It seems to me that the cork isout of the defense expenditure bottle now and that that will probablygo along about as fast as orders can be placed and procurement can bestepped up. That leads me to think that insofar as we may deviatefrom the staff projection it is likely to be in the direction of astronger economy, less progress on the inflation front, and probably alittle less build-up in unemployment. But for our purposes here, I amperfectly satisfied to accept the staff projections. If I were toshade away from them, it would be in the direction I have indicated.In addition to the defense spending, I have a view similar to the NewYork Bank's view that consumers are still in the process of adjustingto inflation and that the saving rate is likely to stay very low untilthey do see some improvement on the inflation side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker's views align with the staff projections, with the only difference being a slight shading towards a stronger economy and less progress on the inflation front. This does not indicate a strong disagreement or contention.


Passage number 317.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 318.
MR. ROOS. I base my projections almost entirely on a rate ofbasic money growth, and the figures I will suggest are predicated on arate of growth of M-1A and M-1B of roughly 5 percent. If there is a 5percent basic money growth rate, I would see real GNP declining bymaybe 1 percentage point fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter. I wouldsee the GNP deflator, which is what we look at really, at about a 10-37-2/4-5/80percent rate during the fourth quarter of next year, or maybe 9-1/2percent--obviously, these percentages can vary by 1/2 point--and Iwould see an unemployment rate of roughly 7 percent. However, I feelvery strongly that what we do will have a very direct bearing on theoutcome of these figures, and if we were to set growth ranges for M-1Aand M-1B at 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and if growth came in at close to3-1/2 percent, that would have a significant weakening effect on thesethree figures that I suggested, as we see it. In other words, GNPwould be significantly lower and unemployment significantly higher.And if growth came in close to the top end of that band, at let's say6-1/2 percent, I think we'd see a much more serious acceleration inthe deflator, a significantly stronger GNP result, and a significantlylower unemployment rate. What I am driving at is that I think we havethe key to this in our hands and that all three of these factors willdepend on what we decide to do and how carefully and with whatdetermination we stick with whatever we decide to do. I wouldpersonally be very much opposed to a tax cut. I would perhaps be muchmore tolerant of a tax cut that was an across-the-board, consumer-directed tax cut if later in the year or next year the governmentdecided to give some tax relief directed to stimulating capitalformation. I think that might be desirable but I do not favor a taxcut, not that it makes much difference in that regard what I think.But in what we do, we can make a big difference on the money growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of a tax cut and suggests an alternative approach of tax relief directed towards stimulating capital formation.


Passage number 319.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as no conflicting or opposing opinions or ideas are presented. The passage simply starts with a mention of "Mr. Winn" without any further information or context.


Passage number 320.
MR. WINN. I think it's great that we get these scenarios outon the table. My only concern is that my camera may be in sync but itmay be out of focus. So the picture that comes out may be quitedistorted. But let's take several of these assumptions that we'vepassed over. First, the level of interest rates. I must confess thatwhen we talk about double digit interest rates, I get nervous. But Iremember that last year I got lectured by any number of people that ifwe passed the 10 percent rate, that was going to cut things off; and Iremember after October 6th how things just dried up completely. But Ithink we forget that it's real interest rates that people probablytake into consideration. And I have been amazed at the amount ofmoney coming out of the woodwork in the last two weeks of January andthe number of deals that are being formulated with respect toapartment houses, hotels, commercial buildings, and so forth. Theamount of money that is being committed in this area has stepped uptremendously after this hiatus. I think we see it in the bond market,John, in terms of their attitudes. Some of the current financing Ithink is being done to repay short-term debt. There's an awful lot oftalk going on with respect to financing, but that's not going to comeinto the investment picture until the last half of this year. Andthat being laced on top of defense expenditures, should they comealong, makes a little different scenario for this year's[performance].One other thing: In terms of your employment figures, haveyou put anything in there for a possible draft or increased militaryemployment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 321.
MR. KICHLINE. No, we have not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline simply states that they have not done something.


Passage number 322.
-38-2/4-5/80MR. WINN. If you do this, you get a different scenario.Again, this doesn't occur over night but it is another factor thatseems to me is down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a different scenario that they believe may happen in the future.


Passage number 323.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was "this".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context about what "this" is referring to, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 324.
MR. WINN. If you put a draft in the picture, then it changesthese employment figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply states that adding a draft into the picture would alter the employment figures.


Passage number 325.
MR. PARTEE. Probably in 1981.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of a probable time frame without any conflicting views or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 326.
MR. WINN. It's probably down the road; I don't say it isimmediate. But, again, as one [looks at] various scenarios with somedifferent inputs, there are different results, obviously. Whilehousing is down, I too am amazed at the amount of money that is evenshowing up for housing at the moment. So, as I look at the level ofrates, I go back to looking at availability; and I get nervous as towhat [level of] interest rates it will take to have a damping effecton some of these [sectors].In my scenario, I come out with a dip in the first half ofthis year because I think it's already under way. But I can see somerevival in the second half, so that I get a 1 percent decline for theyear but it's quite a different shape. The price [situation] reallyscares me. Go back and look at 1973 and 1974; maybe we're going tomultiply that distortion created by prices. And if the worldsituation changes, some of the pressure for relief could come nextyear--I think it's already under way for this year--and carry throughfor a while. But we may be [unintelligible] upswing continuingthrough part of 1981 and then real price distortion problems hittingus by the end of the year. I see price problems in the 15 percent[CPI] rate; that is going to give rise to increased wage demands andre-opening of contracts and all kinds of pressures and we don't knowhow that is going to factor through to the balance of the year. Andthat's not in your scenarios, in terms of the wage assumptions thatyou put in. One gets different price results with some of thesedifferent assumptions. So I am even more concerned about inflationdevelopments and what they mean not only for 1980 but perhaps for 1981and thereafter. And that has implications for the international sideand a whole host of things, which change the [scenario]. I think thepressure for a tax cut is going to come both with the election problemand the first half year results. That will further complicate theproblem and I would be opposed to it. This would be in my scenario,Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement and concern about inflation developments, wage assumptions, and the need for a tax cut. They also propose a different scenario and express uncertainty about how these factors will impact the economy.


Passage number 327.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you have an unemployment rate or aprice [forecast].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply asking a question about whether there was a forecast for either the unemployment rate or the price.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 328.
MR. WINN. I get an [average] unemployment rate from thefourth quarter to the fourth quarter of maybe 7 percent, but I thinkit will probably go higher before it comes down unless we get a draftand some other things that would change my numbers. I don't know whatis going to happen, but you get a different picture if you change yourassumptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker presents the possibility of the unemployment rate going higher before it comes down, while also suggesting that their assumptions can lead to a different picture. This implies that there is a contention or disagreement regarding the projected unemployment rate and the factors that can affect it.


Passage number 329.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're in the high uncertainty group.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the person being referred to is in the high uncertainty group.


Passage number 330.
MR. WINN. Very much so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Winn agrees or supports something strongly ("Very much so").


Passage number 331.
-39-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The given expression is a mathematical equation and does not involve any conflicting ideas or positions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 332.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, we ought to be recorded asgenerally supporting the Board staff's projection and its numbers.However, unlike most of the others, if the forecast is in error, Ithink it will be because the recession could be substantially moresevere than they are projecting. We had a miss in our forecast in thelast half of 1979 because consumer behavior was much stronger than wewere forecasting on the basis of income growth and so on. This hasled New York and Kansas City and perhaps some of the rest of you tolook upon a 3 percent saving rate as a norm for the future. I thinkit is also possible that when the unemployment rate starts rising theconsumer will turn defensive and we will see the saving rate risehigher than the Board staff has projected and a bigger recession willresult. Also, the housing sector could be weaker than the staff hasprojected. We don't really yet have a good fix on how the currenthousing rate structure is impacting demand. But the Board staff hasthe weakest quarter at 1.4 million starts. It seems to me that wecould see at least one quarter substantially below that. So, I thinkwe have a risk of a much sharper recession in 1980 than the Boardstaff is projecting. It's a risk, but I can't attach theprobabilities to it.As far as defense spending is concerned, we've talked to themajor defense contractors in the Boston area like Raytheon and others,and they say that for the kind of hardware the Defense Department istalking about most of the money will be going into long lead timeitems. And while we may get a big effect on expectations in 1980,they don't see a big effect on employment until 1981, even if theprogram were to get geared up fairly soon. So, it seems to me that wecould see a different pattern: a very sharp recession followed by atax cut, an increase in the defense budget, and a big jump in 1981.That's another hypothesis that hasn't been stated around this table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris disagrees with the Board staff's projection and believes that the recession could be more severe than they are projecting. He also disagrees with their projections on the saving rate and the housing sector, suggesting that these factors could contribute to a larger recession. Additionally, Mr. Morris presents a different hypothesis about the pattern of the recession, suggesting a sharp recession followed by a tax cut, an increase in the defense budget, and a big jump in 1981.


Passage number 333.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll get every hypothesis on the table.Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that every hypothesis will be considered.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 334.
MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that the odds have clearly movedin the direction of less recession and more inflation than they weresome time ago. I think the degree of uncertainty is very high becausethe saving rate is abnormal and, therefore, potentially unstable. Andif we move to higher rates of inflation, people could react veryunpredictably. But the thing that most impresses me about thebehavior of people is that in the last surge of inflation, in 1974,the saving rate went up--and it did so not only in this country butall over the world--while this time people have reacted differently.They pulled the saving rate down. That seems to be a message. Theyseem to be saying: "We're no longer so scared of losing our job thatwe're stopping our spending. We're now out to beat the game." Andthat suggests to me that we may be in a new ball game unless the moveto higher inflation rates throws a new scare into people.Well, I had anticipated a somewhat more severe recession thanthe staff, but recent events have taken me off that. I could see asmall dip in 1980 of maybe 1 percent, but [my forecast has] a verywide variance. I see inflation now at very high rates, with thedeflator at 12 percent for the year, that is year-to-year. And theCPI could be close to 15 percent. These [increases mean that] real-40-2/4-5/80interest rates are no longer positive. I know that some of us don'tbelieve that real interest rates mean very much. But we're only 19people and there are 220 million out there who believe differently orat least act as if they believe differently. So I share what PhilColdwell said on that score. I don't see quantitative monetaryrestraint being in effect--that is, availability restraint. And Idon't think that these interest rates, particularly when one considersthem after taxes, really bite. So we have to consider now that we arein a group of high inflation countries with Italy and the UnitedKingdom. Then comes a tier of moderate inflation countries and thencome the low inflation countries. We've moved very far. That is whyI don't really expect a tax cut this year. I think these forces willgive people pause unless there is a significant deterioration in theclimate. Eventually, I think there will be a tax cut simply becausewe are getting more fiscal drag than we can accommodate over time. Icertainly would oppose a tax cut, and I would lean toward firmmonetary restraint. I don't know [how] one can have that confidencein the nominal aggregates that M-1A and M-1B convey. All we know isthat these [measures] are extremely uncertain. I don't think the newdefinitions capture all that's going on, especially in the Euromarket.We capture only a small part of that. So I believe money is reallyexpanding faster than we think, and I would want to take that intoaccount in thinking that we can have 15 percent inflation. Onunemployment, I have no difference with the staff; 7-1/2 percent bythe end of 1980 seems a possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich states that he believes there may be less recession and more inflation than previously anticipated, while the staff's forecast predicts a more severe recession.


Passage number 335.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states only the name "Mr. Mayo" and does not provide any context or information that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 336.
MR. MAYO. First, to go back to the charts for just a minute:I greeted with some astonishment the chart on unit [labor] costindicators where output per hour, having deteriorated badly from thebeginning of 1976 to the present or the last available quarter,suddenly takes a new spurt of enthusiasm and becomes positive. Andyour unit labor cost, of course, shows just the opposite trend. Iwould like to believe this, but I am not sure what the staff has basedit on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Mayo, expresses astonishment and uncertainty about the data presented on the charts, but there is no direct disagreement or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 337.
MR. ZEISEL. Basically it is associated with our assumptionsor conclusions about more rational behavior by employers in regard totheir staffing. The deterioration in productivity is the other sideof the coin of this tremendous increase in employment relative to thelack of growth in output. We're anticipating that the pressures ofrising costs and the evident lack of strength in markets over the nextcouple of quarters will persuade employers that they are overstaffedand that, therefore, they will be laying off employees and trying tobring their costs better into line, which will show up in a somewhatimproved productivity performance. But as you will note, we havenegative productivity throughout 1980. It just isn't as bad as it wasin 1979.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing a hypothesis about future behavior by employers, and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 338.
MR. MAYO. In effect, you're suggesting that whatever laborhoarding has taken place to date really isn't going to continue. Andthat's one of the reasons your unemployment rate is moving up as muchas it is. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 339.
MR. ZEISEL. That is true, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement that was made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 340.
-41-2/4-5/80MR. MAYO. My other question on the charts relates to defensespending. Frank stole my headline on that by his mention of long leadtimes on defense contracts. I find the assumptions both in the budgetand in your table on real defense spending unreal. I don't think itis possible unless there is an awful lot of shelf items involved--morethan I can imagine--to add 6 percent to real defense spending in theremaining six months of the fiscal year. And that's all there is leftin this fiscal year. We have a history over the last 30 or 40 yearsof projecting increases in defense spending prematurely, and I thinkthis is happening again in the budget figures and in the staffforecast. Instead of being up 7 percent and up 8 percent or whateveris shown on this chart, I would say it's more likely to be up 2percent and up 12 percent. So, that would affect the attitude towardthese figures in 1980. On the other hand, I would support the totalthat you have in your staff forecast because I think it's more likelyto burst out on the nondefense side in light of other factors betweennow and the beginning of the new fiscal year. Now, that doesn't meanthere isn't an attitudinal and expectational response. But I think itstems mostly from the evaluation of the inflation and the real GNPoutlook a year ahead, rather than manifesting itself in defensespending in the fiscal year of 1980.Having said that, I won't repeat Mark's caveats, but in termsof point estimates I really don't have much quarrel with the staffforecast on real GNP. As for the probabilities, I would say theprobability is that there will be less growth--in other words a biggerdecline, net, than the [minus] two percent the staff has--maybe a[minus] 3 percent for the year. I am not quite as pessimistic asHenry, but I will take shelter under his umbrella on the price index.I don't think there is more than one chance in ten that we can getdown to 10 percent on either the CPI or the fixed weighted deflator bythe fourth quarter of this year. The chances are very good--I hate touse the word "good" that way--that it will still be above 10 percent.On unemployment, despite my question on the labor hoarding problem,the chances are unfortunately also very good that unemployment will beabove 8 percent because the inflation rate is so sticky and so builtinto consumer expectations that I think this is the way it's going tocrank out. No tax cut, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Mayo expresses disagreement and contention with the assumptions and projections regarding defense spending in the budget and staff forecast. He believes that the projected increase in defense spending is unrealistic and suggests alternative figures. Additionally, Mr. Mayo disagrees with the staff's point estimates for real GNP growth and expresses his own estimate. Therefore, there is contention and disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 341.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Rice but does not provide any information or context about their actions or statements that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 342.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, what I wanted to say was saidby Frank Morris. I have no reason to argue with the staff forecastwith respect to GNP, the unemployment rate, and the CPI. Given whatwe know today, these projections seem to me to be the most probableoutcome. But, I suppose like everybody else, I do have some worries;and one of them is the cumulative effect of the erosion of disposableincome on consumer expenditures. Consumers may well be prepared tospend less than has been projected in the forecast. And, of course,if that happens, there will be further consequences for the economy.Now, this may well be offset by the buildup in defense expenditurestoward the end of the year. So there is some uncertainty. But I doworry that the possible shortfall in consumer expenditures may wellmake the recession more severe than is projected. I also worry aboutthe cumulative effects of a restrictive monetary policy. If we aresuccessful in damping inflationary expectations, the reaction may wellbe stronger than we now see, and this may also operate to make therecession more severe. But these are just vague worries; I have no-42-2/4-5/80data to support them. And for the purpose of making suggestions as tomonetary policy, I am prepared to accept the staff's forecast. As fora tax cut, I would be opposed to a tax cut at the present time.However, depending on how things emerge in the future, a cancellationof the anticipated social security [tax increase] package could wellbe an appropriate measure. But that judgment would await futuredevelopments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Rice acknowledges the staff forecast and agrees with the projections. He expresses some worries and uncertainties but states that they are just vague worries and he has no data to support them. He also shares his opinion on monetary policy and taxes but does not argue with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 343.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 344.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, as everybody around here is aware, I havehad a high degree of uncertainty about what was going to happen. Ihave a little less right now, so far as my feelings about the nearterm are concerned. I see three areas of weakness. First, I thinkthe economy is a little weaker than the numbers will show in Januarybecause the weather in January was so remarkably good all over, and Ithink that had a considerable effect. I am seeing some areas ofrestraint that are secondary kinds of reactions to the October 6th[action]. In the area of consumer credit, more and more banks arecutting back on the availability of consumer credit and are increasingthe price and other factors. We're also seeing that with [creditextended by] retail establishments; Sears and Penneys and others haverecently made those kinds of announcements. So, I think we are seeingsome restraint that hasn't been there before and the pressure isincreasing in that area. I do not think that we have seen the low inhousing. I agree with Frank Morris that it's going to go lower; itcould go considerably lower. We saw that chart on the commitmentrate, and my understanding is that the situation may be even worsethan that chart looks. And that's bound to begin to spill over intohousing durables pretty quickly. It hasn't done that much yet. Asfar as autos are concerned, I don't see anything that is going tobring them back very fast. Things may have to get worse in that area,partly as a result of the [tighter] consumer credit and partly becausegasoline prices are going to continue to go up. We see that there ismore conservation than we really thought. People are more concernedabout [gasoline prices], and I think it's going to have a big effecton their purchases of automobiles. So, I don't look for any strengththere in the near term.On the other hand, longer term I see some areas of strengththat may be stronger than the staff assumptions. I disagree with BobMayo on the defense side. The reason I do is that we're looking atall of the news reports that say this involves sophisticated weaponsand there's a very long lead time. We are not looking at theoperations and maintenance side. My understanding is--I have justseen some recent figures--that the Pentagon is estimating that forammunition alone they need more than $20 billion. Now, ammunition issomething that can be produced pretty quickly. So I think we may seesome faster impact on the defense side. The other area is the taxside. It is an election year. I do not favor a tax cut this year; Iwould, I think, next year. But we may get it this year. If you lookat the staff's chart "fiscal alternative-tax cut" and see what apolitician would see--that with a cut in payroll taxes he can have thebest of both worlds, better growth in GNP and lower inflation, whichis what that chart shows--that's very attractive to a politician. AndI just think that we may get enough weakness in this first half tomake a tax cut much more likely this summer. So, my figures are alittle stronger than the staff's: GNP down 1 to 2 percent;-43-2/4-5/80unemployment 7 to 7-1/2 percent; and the CPI in the fourth quarter alittle worse than the staff's, at 10 to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen when Mr. Schultz disagrees with Bob Mayo on the defense side and also when he disagrees with the staff's assumptions on the tax side.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 345.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have missed one personal objectiveof speeding up the coffee hour appreciably. But since we're short of11 a.m., let me make a couple of observations. I do have the feelingin listening to some of the different economic forecasts and commentsthat our staff, which is sometimes accused of being Keynesian, feelsmore constrained by the money supply assumptions than more monetarist-oriented people. And that accounts for some of the differences inview. Assuming that we're all intelligent people around the table,[given the] differences in outlook that have been recited, I don't seehow anyone can come to any opinion other than that there is a greatdeal of uncertainty in this forecasting business.In terms of what we have accomplished or have notaccomplished in monetary policy in recent months, particularly asreflected in expectations as best one can judge them, we have toconclude that we've been [set] back very substantially and havesuffered a grievous blow from everything that has been going oninternationally--whether you're talking about oil prices, or Iran, orAfghanistan and concern about defense spending. There's nothing muchwe can do about that, but I think in some sense we're back to squareone or worse in terms of the public's concern about inflation. So Itend to agree with those who see a risk of an inflationary breakout,in modified terms, on the up side as a real danger. I also agree withEmmett Rice and a couple of others who said that we could get a longerreaction in the economy on the down side if that happened. I don'tknow what we can do about that. We can't deal with both situations atthe same time. In fact, I don't think we can deal with the risk of adownturn and ignore the inflationary side, because they're part of thesame parcel in some sense.I feel rather strongly that it would be a great mistake toput much money on any particular forecast at this point. I come backto what Mark Willes said at the beginning, and I think the saving ratequestion is a perfect illustration. I can hear persuasive argumentsaround this table as to why it is going to go up and I can hearpersuasive arguments as to why it is going to stay down; and I don'tknow of any criteria by which I can choose between those two choicesat the moment. In a direct statistical sense that will be the mostimportant influence on the economic outlook in the near term. Thereare a couple of other things that might be mentioned that haven't beentouched upon. We have some uncertainty about tax refunds in the nearterm, with some expectation that they may be very high relative topast experience--I am talking about [the time period] between now andApril or beyond--and what that will do to the near-term timing ofconsumer spending. What it will do to the near-term timing of thekind of forecast the staff has I think is an unknown. If one assumessome lag in defense spending but also assumes that the option of highdefense spending is going to come along [later], we could get apattern of big refunds for a while, in a sense artificially holdingthings up, followed by a defense impetus coming late in the year andtaking over after the refunds subside. It only adds to my feeling ofcaution about any forecast.So far as the bond market and the banking system and theavailability of credit are concerned, I'd just make two observations.-44-2/4-5/80I think the bond market people, who from the way they are behavingapparently are quite discouraged about the inflationary outlook, haveconcluded that money is freely available. I see one side of it. Butalso, in talking to some bankers, I think there is something to whatFred Schultz just said about a cumulative impact of restriction.That's beginning to be felt by some bankers, who have talked to me,anyway, not only in consumer lending but in mortgage lending and insmall business lending and other types of lending. I think it is truethat the last ones to feel that are probably the big companies thathave access to the bond market and to the banks, too. I don't thinkthe picture is all one way. There has been great confusion about--Iguess it was John Balles who said it--whether the money supply isgenuinely [or only] statistically under control. I think it isstatistically under control. I am not sure the market thinks it isgenuinely under control. And it comes down in part to some confusionover our own operations. I meant to mention earlier--and I don't knowwhether the presidents have seen it--that we put out an elaboratetechnical explanation of what we're doing, which Mr. Axilrod authored.It has gotten no attention in the press thus far, but it was anattempt in considerable part to meet the questions that have beenarising about why reserves are going up 10 percent or 12 percent or 8percent, depending upon which number you're looking at, while themoney supply is going up 3 or 4 percent. I don't know whether we willconvince anybody as that seeps into consciousness. But there has beengreat confusion engendered by the differences in growth rates amongall these measures, including right now the various reserve measuresgoing off in widely different directions. I will leave you with that.Let's have the coffee break and when we return get back onthese long-term and short-term targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The speaker expresses disagreement with the staff's views and assumptions about the money supply, as well as uncertainty about the economic outlook and the effectiveness of monetary policy. They also mention conflicting arguments about the saving rate and uncertainty about the timing of tax refunds and defense spending. Additionally, there is contention between the bond market and bankers regarding the availability of credit.


Passage number 346.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can start. Let me make acouple of preliminary remarks and just devote our attention to thelong-term ranges at this point. One preliminary remark is that,whatever we do, I am afraid that we inevitably are going to have quitea lot of confusion with the changes in definitions [of the monetaryaggregates] coming at the same time as [the setting of our] targets.We are going to have a press briefing, not to give the targets, but toexplain the changes in definitions and the changes in patterns. Wehave had to add to all our other complications the usual annualrevision in seasonal patterns. We can now go forward and talk aboutthe new numbers but we are talking about them against the backgroundof an increase of almost 5 percent in January, if we can switch ourminds now from 1-3/4 percent or whatever was projected before on thebasis of the old numbers. The new M-1A and M-1B are growing atsomething like 4-3/4 percent in January, as I recall, which is prettymuch on the target that we set for ourselves by the grace of arevision in seasonal adjustments. If policy fails, we can alwaysrevise the seasonal adjustment factors for a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing preliminary remarks and discussing changes in definitions and patterns related to monetary aggregates. They also mention revisions in seasonal patterns and the growth of M-1A and M-1B, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 347.
 [Laughter]MR. SCHULTZ. Well, we may have to consider it; it may bemore important than lagged reserve accounting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that a certain idea or concept may be important and should be taken into consideration.


Passage number 348.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do think this is going to be troublesometo explain, but we inevitably have to do it. Another complication,which we don't have to face right now, but it is inherent in this-45-2/4-5/80situation, is that basically the reason we have both M-1A and M-1B isto allow for growth in NOW accounts, and that [dichotomy] is atransitional device. The staff's judgment is that growth in M-1A andM-1B will not be any different this year if the law legalizing NOWaccounts doesn't pass. But the high probability is that that law willpass, presumably sometime during the spring, and that we will have tore-estimate M-1A and M-1B to allow for that; I presume we would wantto make a technical adjustment in the targets. I don't think we haveto worry about that now--maybe we can wait until midyear for ourregular revision anyway--but I just warn you that sometime during thespring, I suspect, if the law does pass, we think there will be asignificant difference between M-1A and M-1B and that some suitablechanges will have to made, if nothing else, consistent with what wedecide today.On the substance of the matter, if it is true that we face awide disparity of views in what the outlook might bring and a highdegree of uncertainty, I suspect we are on an approach--whatever othermerits or demerits there may be--that will provide us with some fail-safe protection. [By that I mean] that if the economy really goesdown hill, almost any figure within the range of what we have beentalking about should produce an easing in the outward externalities ofpolicy, but if the fears of a stronger economy and an inflationarysurge appear, the opposite ought to happen. And I presume that in avery crude way, anyway, either of those results would be appropriate.When we discussed this the last time, there was a consensus--and maybefor a variety of reasons it was not quite unanimous--or a stronglypredominant view to maintain a 3 percentage point range, and all thesealternatives are couched that way. The ranges in the Bluebook fullyencompass all that people were talking about last time, I think. Thedifferences in the ranges are not very wide, as you know, and nobodyis bound by what he or she said last time. To orient you a bit: Itwas not true for everybody but the predominance of views fell betweenthe alternative II and alternative III choices shown here; and therewas actually some plurality if not a majority for alternative III.But people were talking in a preliminary way and rather loosely. Myown feeling is that we probably [should] end up in that area, and Idon't have enormous feelings that a difference of 1/2 percentage pointis of great significance. When we are in that area, the strength ofmy views is not pronounced among [those alternatives]. But judgingfrom the discussion last time, we are predominantly in that area. Sowith that introduction, who would like to be more precise in statingtheir views about where we should be for the annual range in 1980.Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and giving their own opinion, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views among the other people mentioned.


Passage number 349.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, my feeling hasn't changed a lotsince our last meeting. It is true that the economic outlook haschanged somewhat from what most of us expected. In particular, thegovernment's demand on resources appears likely to be much greaterthan we earlier thought. But far from providing the reason forrelaxing or delaying this long-run task of ours of lowering the rateof growth in the aggregates, the inflationary dangers posed by thisfiscal stimulus suggest to me that the System needs to stick all themore firmly to the goal that it has often stated in the past. Themidpoints of alternative II look good to me. I was one of those whopreferred the narrower ranges last time. I would much prefer a 1percentage point range for M-1A and M-1B and a 2-point range for theother aggregates, M2 and M3, because of their interest volatility.-46-2/4-5/80Now, one can certainly argue that we need more flexibility since wemay be moving into a recession and we may be moving into moreinflation. I recognize the validity of that argument, but it seems tome that the narrower range would do a lot to enhance our credibility.Therefore, it would enhance a great deal the beneficial expectationaleffects that I think we'll get if we do in fact announce lower targetsthan what we have achieved in the past. I would be rather unhappy ifM-1A and M-1B, which are the two aggregates I consider most important,came out at the top of their alternative II ranges. So, my figureswould translate to 4-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent for M-1A, with a midpoint of5 percent, the same as in alternative II. My other ranges would be:M-lB, 5 to 6, with a midpoint of 5-1/2; M2, 6-1/2 to 8-1/2 with amidpoint of 7-1/2; M3, 7 to 9 with a midpoint of 8; and bank credit,6-1/2 to 8-1/2 with a midpoint of 7-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is discussing his own views and preferences regarding the ranges for the different aggregates, but there is no opposition or conflict being expressed.


Passage number 350.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say a word. You reminded meabout M2, M3, and bank credit. First of all, I'd just note that ifpeople feel strongly about the weight to be put on those numbers, theyought to say so. Secondly, in the normal course of events, given theway we are operating they may get a little less weight than they havein the past because we won't have those figures as up to date. So faras I am concerned, I take on faith the staff analyses of theconsistency of the particular ranges they put down for those numbersas compared to Ml. I don't know of any strong reason why they shouldbe different from what the staff put down, but I have a littleresidual suspicion that those are indeed more volatile numbers thanthe M1 numbers because quite a lot does depend upon the evolution ofinterest rates, and I don't know in which direction they will go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions about the weight and volatility of certain numbers, but there is no disagreement with anyone else mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 351.
MR. BLACK. Well, I have said most of what I felt along thatline. I would emphasize M-1B because it catches the transactionbalances better; M-1A has lost a lot of the transaction balances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and emphasizing the importance of M-1B over M-1A in terms of transaction balances.


Passage number 352.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions Governor Partee's name without providing any additional information or context. Therefore, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 353.
MR. PARTEE. Well, Mr. Chairman, last time I indicated somepreliminary specifications that would have been consistent withalternative II. I want to argue this morning for alternative I.That's a difficult thing to do and I have always found myselfunsuccessful in such arguments in the past. But let me try it oncemore. The staff projection for nominal GNP, fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter, is for a 7 percent increase. The direction of thinking as wewent around the table was to convert that to a somewhat higher nominalGNP increase because almost everyone thought inflation would be a bithigher than the staff has projected, and quite a few people thoughtthat the decline might be a bit shallower than the staff hasprojected. So I would say that the Committee view, as opposed to thestaff view, is that nominal GNP will increase at least 8 percent. AndI believe the Administration, Jim, has a 9 percent increase in nominalGNP fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter. In drawing these long-termranges, the relationship between money growth and the nominal GNP isof central importance because it really indicates the amount oftension there's likely to be in markets as the year goes on. And even7 percent [for nominal GNP growth] with a 5 percent midpoint on M-1Aand 5-1/2 percent on M-1B, which is alternative II, does imply anincrease in velocity of a couple of points. If, in fact, we thinknominal GNP [growth] is going to be a little higher than that--let'ssay 8 percent instead of 7 percent--it seems to me that as a matter of-47-2/4-5/80practicality and credibility in achieving the targets we set, we oughtto recognize that a bit in the specifications we pick. Going fromalternative II, which had been my former choice, to alternative I adds1/2 point to the midpoint. It makes the midpoint for M-1A 5-1/2percent and that for M-1B 6 percent, compared with, say, an 8 percentnominal GNP, and I think it does suggest a very considerable tensionon markets throughout the year. And it's [a target] that we might beable to achieve.I would point out one more thing: Every private forecastthat I have looked at, and I just reviewed them yesterday, suggests afederal funds rate at the end of this year of 10 percent or below.The only exception might be Salomon Brothers, but they don't specifythe funds rate in their projection. We are suggesting somethingaround 13 percent. The difference, I think, is in the impliedincrease in money in the private projections, which is stronger thanwe have. Now, if we go through a recession and hold the interest rateup throughout the recession--hold it pretty close to where it is now--start a recovery, say, a year hence or thereabouts with a rising trendof rates and high unemployment, we will have done really quite a lotto restrain the economy [through] monetary policy compared with anypast cycle that I can recall. And I think that also argues for beingjust a bit more liberal so that we'll have something we can achieve.I understand fully what Bob says about narrowing the ranges, and I doagree that there is quite a difference between, say, 4 percent and 7percent in M-1A, [which are the limits] in alternative I. But in theinterest of again being able to achieve growth this year within theranges we specify, which we managed to do for the first time in ourhistory in 1979, I think we need to hold the width of 3 points that wehave had but try to [achieve] the midpoint of the range. So, I wouldcome out with alternative I for the reasons that I have explained, andI would stay with the 3-point range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. PARTEE, is arguing for alternative I, while acknowledging that it is a difficult argument to make. He is presenting his perspective in opposition to the staff's view and suggesting that the Committee's view is different from the staff's. He also argues for being more liberal in order to achieve the specified targets.


Passage number 354.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. However, the passage seems to be incomplete as it only states "Mr. Balles" without any further context or information. Therefore, it is difficult to determine if there is any contention or disagreement without more details.


Passage number 355.
MR. BALLES. I agree with those who have argued, startingwith Governor Teeters and others, that in view of all the economicuncertainty, we do need a lot of flexibility as the year unfolds. Andfor reasons that Chuck has just reviewed, I would support the idea ofhaving a 3-point range. As I often do when we get to this time of theyear, I like to speak to the two faces of the ranges that we arediscussing here. The one face is the public reaction or theannouncement effects, for what they are worth. They may not be wortha lot, but I can't believe they have no effects at all. I admit, asTed Truman pointed out to us yesterday, that the public pays moreattention to what we do than to what we say we are going to do. Butreverting to my earlier deep concern about an apparent re-escalationof inflationary expectations over the last month--[manifested] invarious ways, especially in the rise of long-term bond yields to newhighs, as I pointed out--I think there is a lot to be said for pickingranges just in terms of public announcement effects that are bothbroad, because as I have already indicated we need the flexibility inview of the economic uncertainty that lies ahead, and that would tendto ensure that we do in fact get continued deceleration in monetarygrowth. Our record since October has, in fact, been very good onthat. But I am afraid that there's some skepticism among marketparticipants and others that we may not persist. One way of puttingthat skepticism to bed, or at least helping to diminish it, would be-48-2/4-5/80to have upper limits on our ranges which even if hit would stillinvolve slightly less monetary growth in 1980 than in 1979. For thatreason, I would support alternative II with respect to both M-1A andM-1B because even if we hit the upper end of 6-1/2 percent in the caseof M-1A, that would be less than the 6.8 percent growth of last year.And even if we hit the upper end of the alternative II range of 4 to 7percent for M-1B, growth would be less than the 8 percent growth wehad last year. And for the same reasons, I would choose thealternative III ranges for M2 and M3. The upper end of thealternative III range for M2 is 8-1/2 percent, below last year's 8.8percent actual. In the case of M3, the alternative III range of 6 to9 percent is below the 9-1/2 percent actual we had last year. So ifthere is any sense at all in what I am saying about the publicperception of the maximum [rates of growth] we specify, assuming thatunder our new operating procedures we didn't exceed the upper limitsof the ranges, those upper limits would involve at least a 1/2 pointdecline from the actual rates of monetary growth in 1979. As forwhether we should target all four of these, Mr. Chairman, I have gravedoubts. I think M-1A is still so influenced--or perhaps contaminated,to use a word my research staff is fond of using--by past and ongoinginstitutional changes that I personally would be prepared to drop itright now and put our faith in M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is expressing agreement with the idea of having a 3-point range and choosing alternative II for M-1A and M-1B. He also suggests choosing alternative III ranges for M2 and M3. He expresses doubts about targeting all four of these variables, but overall, there is no disagreement or contention in his statements.


Passage number 356.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's much differencebetween M-1A and M-1B, barring this legislative change; the differenceis a small number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a personal opinion about the similarity between M-1A and M-1B, stating that the difference is minimal, except for a legislative change.


Passage number 357.
MR. ROOS. I found more to the change [unintelligible]. Ithink there was some confusion last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roos is simply stating that he found more information about the change and clarifying that there was confusion in the previous conversation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 358.
 Wouldn't M-1B--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They both will. The problem is that if weget the law change, M-1B will rise both because it's taking [funds]out of M-1A and out of M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention regarding the potential rise of M-1B. The phrase "The problem is" implies that there is a disagreement about the consequences of changing the law. One side believes that M-1B will rise, while the other side might have a different viewpoint.


Passage number 359.
MR. AXILROD. Only because it's taking funds out of M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or opinion that taking funds out of M2 is happening.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 360.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it will only rise because it's takingfunds out of M2. M-1A will go down. [M-1B] will rise because it'staking out of M2; and M-1A will decline because [funds will be taken]out of that aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement suggests that M-1B will rise while M-1A will decline due to funds being taken out of M2. This implies a disagreement or conflict in the movement of these aggregates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 361.
MR. BALLES. Well, in short, I would like to make a pitch fortargeting M-1B and M2 as opposed to targeting M-1A and M-1B, [assuggested] in the draft directive language. Our own experience in thepast has led us to place somewhat more confidence, in terms of the olddefinitions, in M2 as a predictor of inflation and real GNP. Ofcourse, it remains to be seen whether that is going to hold for thenew M2. But based on some of the statistical tests that we've done,M-1A is certainly the least reliable predictor of real GNP of the fouraggregates mentioned. The differences are quite significant, andthat's why I am somewhat disillusioned about M-1A. We've tested itretrospectively and view it as a considerably poor forecaster offuture real GNP. That is the main reason I would like to drop it.Those are my recommendations, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Balles disagrees with targeting M-1A as an indicator of inflation and real GNP, based on his own experience and statistical tests. He argues for targeting M-1B and M2 instead.


Passage number 362.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, the passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The phrase "Governor Wallich" alone does not provide enough context to identify any disagreement.


Passage number 363.
-49-2/4-5/80MR. WALLICH. I think we face more inflation and lessrecession than would have been [the case] before recent changes in theeconomy. Now the question is: How does one finance a higher nominalGNP with a given amount of money supply. In Chuck's calculation youhave to look at the nominal GNP and ask how it can be financed fromthe rise in money, and a rise in velocity is very logical. Moreover,one can't say nowadays that we would get some rise in velocity out ofrising interest rates because presumably we wouldn't. So we'redependent, really, on the amount of money growth in the effectivemoney supply--that is, the amount of money growth plus the regulargrowth in velocity at a constant interest rate. And I think the staffputs the drift in the demand function at about 2 percent.Since we've opened up the question of the aggregates, I wouldlike to express some doubt not only about M-1A, on which I share whatothers have said, but M-1B. In general I think we are not yetincluding everything that acts like money, and we probably never will.Money market accounts and mutual funds are not in M-l, although Iwould suspect that they have a very strong effect on people's holdingsof demand balances. That is, they aren't used for transactions--theirvelocity is low--but they are very good substitutes for a cashbalance. I hear that brokerage firms are now setting up, in effect,zero balance overdraft facilities. If that takes over, one needs nocash balance at all any more; one can just finance one's current needsagainst one's stock holdings. There are Eurodollars, of which we[include] what seems to be a small part in the aggregates. I don'tthink we capture even all the Eurodollars owned by U.S. residentsbecause we don't know their total and we certainly don't include anypart of Eurodollars owned by nonresidents, even though one would thinksome of those dollars are going to be used in the United States, notfor purchases of goods and services but for purchases of assets, whichinfluence our interest rates and so on. So, I think the monetaryaggregate [targets] are really symbols of restraint--orders ofmagnitude, but not to be taken at face value. If we did take them atface value, I'd say look at M2 and you will find that underalternative I [the staff] projects [growth at] 9-1/2 percent, theupper limit. That's more than [the projected] nominal GNP increasefor 1980, which I believe is about 8 percent, so we'd be over-financing in those terms. This does not allow for any drift in themoney function.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 364.
MR. PARTEE. There's no drift on M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "There's no drift on M2" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 365.
MR. WALLICH. There may be no drift in M2, but that dependson how one believes these extraordinary items, Eurodollars and soforth, impinge. Well, that leads me to alternative III. I think wedo need wide ranges because it's simply impossible to target severalaggregates and make them consistent using anything like a singlenumber. I would place a great deal of weight on M2 for the reasons Ihave given. I think [alternative III] is consistent with financing [anominal] GNP increase of about 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and explaining their reasoning behind it.


Passage number 366.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: More context is needed to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 367.
MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just couldn'tdisagree more with some of the comments I have heard and I agreeentirely with some others. Chuck and I have this running discussionabout how we finance nominal GNP. He has his view. My view is that-50-2/4-5/80if you try to do [it his way], you just chase your tail. If in factthere is a relationship between money and inflation, by persistentlytrying to finance nominal GNP we end up generating more inflation--even at an accelerating rate--which therefore we have to finance andso on. So I would hope we would not take that [route].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Willes disagrees with some of the comments he has heard and expresses a different view on how to finance nominal GNP compared to Chuck.


Passage number 368.
MR. PARTEE. Oh, I don't disagree with that. It's a questionof whether one thinks this [degree] of weakness in the economy isreasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee expresses agreement and does not challenge or dispute the statement.


Passage number 369.
MR. WILLES. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a simple affirmation of agreement. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 370.
 Now, what I find most puzzling--and I will copy one of Fred Schultz's lines, which I always thoughtwas mine, and that is that I have a very simple mind--MR. SCHULTZ. Well, some of us will agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging the possibility that some people may agree with Mr. Schultz's statement about having a simple mind.


Passage number 371.
MR. WILLES. I would think, if we agree that the outlook isvery uncertain, that rather than arguing for more flexibility we wouldargue for less. That's because if the time pattern of the economy isvery unpredictable, then there's no way we can respond to change it ina predictable way and, therefore, we ought not to be responding. Weought to respond less rather than more, the greater the uncertaintyabout the outlook. As a consequence, unlike Nancy's and John'searlier suggestion that we do all we can to preserve our flexibility,I would say just the opposite. I think we ought to pick a path thatwe want to follow for the long term and stick to that path as long aswe can unless we receive major information that suggests we're way outof [line] for one reason or another. Of course, rational expectationswould say that even if we got such information, it's not clear wecould do anything about it and, therefore, we ought not to respond.Having said all that, obviously, I would much prefer thespecifications of alternative III. That looks like a very large dropfor M-1B from [growth of] 8 percent in 1979 to [a range with an upperlimit of] 6-1/2 percent in 1980. But the Bluebook says on theprevious page that for the last six months M-1B growth has only been6.1 percent, so the drop isn't as big as it might appear from the[table] on page 6. So, I would go with alternative III. I must say Iam in the group that thinks the range is too wide. I would beconcerned if money [growth] dropped, assuming we are measuringanything corresponding to money, down to 3 percent. On the otherhand, I would certainly hate to see it above 6 percent. So, I'dprefer a narrower range but would not want growth to go above 6percent on M-1A or 6-1/2 percent on M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing their own preferences and opinions, but there is no contradictory or conflicting viewpoint presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 372.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a [trickiness] of these figures.I think it's fair to say that M-1A was artificially high last yearbecause we did get some transition [flows] into NOW and ATS accounts,part of which came out of M2. Mr. Kimbrell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in this passage. The phrase "I think it's fair to say" suggests that the speaker has a different perspective or opinion on the matter than others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 373.
MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, one specific thing I would liketo see is that the 1980 targets be related to the 1979 targets and notthe 1979 results. We are all [talking about] the uncertainties. Ofcourse, there does not seem to be much uncertainty about [the risks ofa] recession and all of us are accepting that there are going to beinflationary tendencies and expectations. And I feel that our actionsshould attempt not to provide any unnecessary opportunities for strongmoney growth. I would hope that we indeed will begin to lower thesemonetary goals gradually. For that reason I also accept the thesis of-51-2/4-5/80narrower ranges, not more than 2 percentage points, and frankly with astrong determination to achieve them and control [money growth]. So Iwould [narrow] the alternative III ranges and I end up with 3-1/2 to5-1/2 percent on M-1A, 4 to 6 percent on M-1B, and 6 to 8 percent forM2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kimbrel is expressing his disagreement with using the 1979 results as the basis for the 1980 targets. He also disagrees with providing unnecessary opportunities for strong money growth and suggests lowering the monetary goals gradually. Additionally, he advocates for narrower ranges and provides specific percentages for M-1A, M-1B, and M2.


Passage number 374.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Smoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is incomplete, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 375.
MR. SMOOT. Governor Partee argued for alternative I, basedon the higher anticipated nominal GNP. Looking at my own staff'sprojections, our nominal GNP figures would be somewhat higher than theBoard's. But they also encompass a money supply growth rate in the4-1/2 to 5 percent range. Depending on which one of those I pick, Iam indifferent between alternative II and alternative III, which Ithink is where you were, Chairman Volcker. If I had to choose, Iwould choose alternative II based on the observation, which is madequite clearly in the Bluebook, that all of these alternatives suggesta lower rate of growth in money than occurred last year. And if wepay any attention to the long-term trend in money growth, then we arecoming down from a higher trend level. I must say that I have faith,as you do, that the staff's ranges are consistent; at least thenumbers for M-1B, M2, etc., appear to be consistent, and I wouldn'tquibble with those. So, based on that, we would be agreeable toalternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their position and expressing agreement with alternative II based on their analysis of the figures and projections provided by their own staff.


Passage number 376.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 377.
MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, unlike the humility of Mr. Schultzand Mr. Willes about being somewhat simple-minded, I must be humble insaying that my mind finds things very complicated. I have tried hardto move toward being simple-minded on some of these things. We havedifferent approaches to some of these problems. However, I find thatthe factors are so complicated and have such a margin of error that Imust stick to the 3-point range. Some people might accuse the Fed ofbeing a bit cowardly because the range is so wide. But the factorsthat we are dealing with are indeed so complicated that we must allowourselves this flexibility. I feel, if anything, even more stronglythan John Balles put it that we are [making this] unduly complicated.Again, I am striving toward being a little simpler. We are making ithard, and even harder for you, Mr. Chairman, when you try to explainto your audience on Thursday why we have decided to use both M-1A andM-1B when both of them will need adjustment when we get NOW accounts.And I agree we will get them nationwide. I think we'd look a lot moresensible to forget M-1A--as I said last time and I'll say it againthis time--and call it Ml, show some change, and not give theimpression by stressing M-1A that the lion has labored and hasproduced a mouse. There's too little change from the old M1 in whatwe are proposing, and I would rather see us stick with M-1B and givethe explanation of the adjustment in NOW accounts in a simple-mindedfashion rather than try to adjust both M-1A and M-1B to NOW accountswhen they come. This is the way in which my attempt to be simple-minded would direct us. I'd prefer alternative II with the 3-pointrange. I'd obviously prefer to concentrate just on M-1B and call itM1, [with a range of] 4 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Mayo expresses disagreement with Mr. Schultz and Mr. Willes' views on being simple-minded, as well as with the current approach to dealing with the complicated factors. He argues for simplification by focusing on M-1B and adjusting for NOW accounts in a straightforward manner.


Passage number 378.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're asking for.


Passage number 379.
-52-2/4-5/80MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chuck Partee has movedfrom one recommendation to another from last month to this month andI will also, but going the other way. Last month we were looking at asomewhat weaker economy and it seemed that perhaps the inflation ratewould fall off a bit through 1980. Also, the deceleration from whatactually happened in 1979 to what I would like to consider our target--the midpoint [of any of] the ranges [we select]--from about 7percent [growth] to 5 percent for M-1A, for example, seemed fairlyfast. And that is the reason last month that I would have opted forwhat now appears to be alternative I. But things have changed, atleast to my mind. We're now looking at a bit stronger economy through1980, as I tried to outline earlier today. Secondly, and moreimportantly, inflation quite likely will stay at the present level oreven accelerate as we get into the latter part of next year. As aresult, what we do on the monetary side seems extremely important.That leads me to say that I would go to alternative II, which has amidpoint--what I [consider] the target--of 5 percent. Whatever we'vesaid about ranges, they are unimportant to me except in how the publicperceives them. I would hope whatever targets this Committee sets,whether on the long run or the short run, that the Desk at least inits month-to-month or day-to-day operations will look at themidpoints. So, I am looking at 5 percent for M-1A or 5-1/2 percentfor M-1B. And I share Bob Mayo's view on going to M1 and doing awaywith M-1A and M-1B. I think they will confuse more than we will beable to explain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, the author is explaining their change in recommendation based on new information and their own analysis. They mention the opinions of others, but there is no clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 380.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 381.
MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I consider myself neither simple-minded nor complicated-minded, but just poorly educated for thisforum. Having said that, I would have some preference on thetechnical side for the wider 3-point range shown. In terms of theaggregates to focus on, my preferences would be M-1A and M2. We havecommented around the table about growth in bank credit and I do thinkthe Desk should be asked to keep an eye on that number, which haslooked so high the past year. My position is no different than it waslast month. I look forward to having the yearly goals show a gradualreduction in the aggregates. I am most impressed by the commentsPeter Sternlight made yesterday about inflationary expectations in themarket. I think there will be a great focus on these goals as youannounce them later this month; people will be looking for anindication of the posture of the Federal Reserve at this particularpoint in time. I might say, too, that as they look at our long-termgoals, they will [do so with] the immediate impression of economicdevelopments at the start of the year. January, I believe, will lookstrong. It may have an impact on the entire first quarter; people maynot discount it, as Fred Schultz has suggested, as being all due togood weather. So, my preference is alternative III as stated in theBluebook. And I would pick up the thought that Nancy Teeters notedearlier: That we will have opportunities to change the ranges atmidyear in the event that some of the gloomy prospects do actuallycome to fruition. But I don't share the gloomy prospects personally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. TIMLEN is expressing his own preferences and opinions but does not directly disagree with anyone else.


Passage number 382.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 383.
MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we have beentalking here about a series of figures which, quite frankly, I don'tcompletely understand and in which I have a great lack of confidence.-53-2/4-5/80The redefinitions seem to have added about 2 percentage points tothese past figures. We are questioning the function; we arequestioning the seasonals. I think the expectations have shifted onus. And if we are talking about supporting nominal GNP growth, Iwould observe that we had a 6.8 percent growth in M-1A last year and,if I read the correct line on this table, it supported an 11.3 percentincrease in nominal GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Coldwell, expresses his lack of understanding and lack of confidence in the figures being discussed. He questions the redefinitions and the seasonals and states that the expectations have shifted. This indicates a disagreement or contention with the information being presented.


Passage number 384.
MR. PARTEE. With a 300 to 400 basis point increase ininterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a range of increase in interest rates without any clear indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 385.
MR. COLDWELL. Yes, that's quite correct. In the coming yearit looks to me as if we're talking about a GNP increase anywhere inthe 8 to 10 percent range and maybe up to as high as 11 percent--thatencompasses most of the forecasts I heard this morning--and makingsome progress in reducing the stimulation that both monetary andfiscal policy have added these past few years. I have to come out infavor of a much tighter monetary policy. And I would pick up on somepeople's comments in that I would hate to see another 6 percentincrease in the monetary growth. So, I would put the target at 3 to 5percent, centered on 4 percent with a 2-point spread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion and proposes a target for monetary policy.


Passage number 386.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's [alternative] III plus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as it is unclear and does not provide sufficient information or context.


Passage number 387.
MR. BLACK. Is that for M-1A, Phil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question being asked by Mr. Black to Phil.


Passage number 388.
MR. COLDWELL. M-lA.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes a person's name followed by a single letter, which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 389.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the passage only mentions Governor Teeters without providing any information or statements that can indicate a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 390.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I am looking at where we want to be atthe end of the year. I can't conceive of our ending up at 11 percentbill rates and a 7 to 8 percent unemployment rate. I would [beinclined toward] an M1 target of 5 percent, but that implies 11percent on the T-bill and that's only a drop of one percentage pointin that rate. So, I come out somewhere between alternatives I and II.I also think that our primary problem this year is going to be keepingabove the minimum rather than going over the top of the monetarygrowth [ranges]. So, I would prefer alternative I but I could settlefor alternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 391.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're out of names.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact that "We're out of names."


Passage number 392.
MR. WINN. Paul, we have talked about the kind of minds wehave. I think we can all claim to have confused minds. And it'sclear that that's going to be the problem you face in yourpresentation. I would urge that we be sure to have the contrastbetween last year's targets and this year's targets on a similar basisso that people can understand whether the policy formulation is anincrease or decrease or remains the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. The speaker, Mr. Winn, is simply making a suggestion to Paul regarding the presentation.


Passage number 393.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I happen to agree with that. I amconfused. Were we going to present the comparable figures on the oldbasis. Was that your intention, Mr. Axilrod, if I may interrupt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement and confusion about the presentation of comparable figures.


Passage number 394.
MR. AXILROD. We hadn't intended to but we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 395.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I missed that in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply admits to missing something in the Bluebook, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 396.
-54-2/4-5/80MR. AXILROD. We presented them in an appendix in theBluebook, giving the comparable figures to alternative II. That willbe a decision for someone to [make]. That does run the risk of addingto the confusion, I might add.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they presented the information in an appendix and acknowledges that it may add to the confusion.


Passage number 397.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand. I think you have to leavethat to us, but I personally have some sympathy for doing it thisparticular time and then maybe forgetting about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their understanding and sharing their personal sympathy for a specific action.


Passage number 398.
MR. WINN. Those would be the figures on the same basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply refers to the figures on the same basis without any opposition or conflicting opinion being expressed.


Passage number 399.
 Wewon't present last year's on last year's basis and this year's on thisyear's basis--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I think we will do is present lastyear on last year's basis and on this year's basis. The question iswhether to present this year's target on this year's basis and on lastyear's basis, [showing] what the equivalent target is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses different possibilities regarding how to present information.


Passage number 400.
MR. WINN. It seems to me that we have to get this intoperspective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their opinion or observation.


Passage number 401.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no difference for M-1A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement expresses that there is no difference for M-1A.


Passage number 402.
MR. PARTEE. It sounds complicated, but it's just twocolumns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply giving his opinion about something being complicated but easily manageable.


Passage number 403.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right. There's no differencefor M-1A. That's the same as the old Ml, as I recall, for the year asa whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of agreement and recollection from the speaker.


Passage number 404.
MR. WINN. I have a tendency to want to eliminate theconfusion [caused] by too many numbers. We only add to the confusion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Winn is expressing his personal tendency to eliminate confusion caused by an excessive number of numbers. There is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 405.
So, I would be inclined to use M-1B at the moment as being the mostmeaningful, although I share Henry's feeling that it's not a very goodmeasure still in terms of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I could just interject a comment: Iunderstand the longing for simplicity, but I am afraid the reality iscomplicated. And M-1B is the figure that is going to be most thrownoff by the uncertainty about NOW accounts. It is just a fact of life.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply shares their inclination towards using M-1B as the most meaningful measure, while acknowledging that it may not be perfect. Another person interjects to express their understanding that simplicity is desired, but the reality is complicated and there are uncertainties that can affect the accuracy of M-1B. It is a statement of acknowledgement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 406.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, just as a response to that: Iassume from the Bluebook, Steve, that these different alternativeswere set forth on the assumption that we would not get nationwide NOWaccounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is referring to a Bluebook and making an assumption about the content of the document. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 407.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is a simple affirmation of something being correct.


Passage number 408.
MR. BALLES. If we do get them, we'll obviously have to goback to the drawing board.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 409.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd have to make an estimate, andthe estimate that is likely to be most different is for M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The phrase "the estimate that is likely to be most different" suggests that there are different opinions or perspectives regarding the estimate for M-1B. This indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 410.
MS. TEETERS. I think you should emphasize in the pressbriefing that we are quite possibly going to have to change thespecifications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests emphasizing the need to change specifications in a press briefing.


Passage number 411.
-55-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we'd have to change the targets, notthe definitions. You see, the danger is that we could get a bigtransfer from savings accounts into M-1B, and that's going to makethat figure look very peculiar. And we won't know it in advance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining a potential danger and suggesting a solution without indicating any opposition.


Passage number 412.
MR. WINN. I think the admonition that we are not castingthese in concrete forever is a very important one at this stage. Wehave a chance to look at these again based on [unintelligible]. Theinflation problem still dominates the public's attitude both towardour policy and what we are trying to achieve, and I would certainlywant those numbers to look lower than last year's in terms of how theyare set up. I think I'd probably come out with alternative III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement between speakers. It is one person expressing their opinion and discussing the importance of being able to reassess and make changes based on current circumstances.


Passage number 413.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Governor Rice" is simply stating the name of a governor and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 414.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative II with a rangeof 3 percentage points. Given the outlook for inflation over the nextyear, I think we're really going to have to show some reduction in therate of growth in the aggregates. While I agree with Governor Parteethat we want to be mindful of the amount of tension that we create inthe economy with respect to what we expect on nominal GNP growth, onthe other hand I also agree with Governor Wallich that we want to lookat this point at M2 with regard to the provision for nominal GNP.That brings me to alternative II, with the range remaining at thewider 3-point spread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their support for alternative II and explains their reasoning. They also acknowledge the points made by Governor Pardee and Governor Wallich, indicating agreement with both. Overall, the speaker provides a balanced perspective.


Passage number 415.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 416.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, last month I argued foralternative III, but on further reflection that seems a bit too tight,so I would move to alternative II. I would keep the 3-point range,however, because I think it is important for our credibility that weend up with a result that's within the range. I think the experienceof the last few months may have led us to believe that we can controlthe money supply much more finely than in fact is going to be thecase. We have been very lucky, you know, in the last few months. Inthis last month all of the misses in our estimates offset each othernicely; that is, the deposit mix estimates were offset by the excessreserve estimate. Furthermore, even though we came in low on M1, wesolved that problem by revising the seasonals. We're going to runinto times when we find we are not going to be able to control themoney supply quite as readily; and if we move to a very narrow range,we may regret it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is because the speaker is presenting their own change of opinion and rationale for it, without directly disagreeing with anyone else. They reflect on their previous argument for alternative III, but now believe that alternative II is a more suitable option. The speaker also acknowledges the importance of maintaining credibility and being cautious about overestimating their ability to control the money supply.


Passage number 417.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided to analyze for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 418.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I am not opposed to some degree ofconfusion. Last meeting it seems to me that we had a pretty hard timebeing very precise about these things. At the last meeting, I mademention of Heisenberg's theory of uncertainty, which in physics is atheory that when you try to observe sub-atomic particles the act ofobservation changes the way they act so you never know exactly wherethey are. I think that some of the same principles apply here and itseems to me that we should not try to be too precise at this point intime. These numbers are going to be revised. That's clear. Sometime during the year, for some reason, we're going to have to engagein some revision. So, I would agree with Mr. Winn that there is some-56-2/4-5/80considerable impact in terms of [reactions to] the numbers we announceand I would come down on alternative III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Schultz is expressing his agreement with Mr. Winn's point about the impact of the numbers, and he supports alternative III.


Passage number 419.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 420.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I am inclined pretty much alongthe line on which Bob Black started this discussion in that narrowerranges would seem desirable. And if we take a narrower range, then itseems to me that alternative II is appropriate. If we retain the widerange as stated in the Bluebook, which I am characterizing as wide,then I would be inclined to alternative III so as to get the ceilingsdown a bit. I am impressed also with Governor Wallich's comments. Infact, I have been inclined to postulate that the pace at which moneysubstitutes or near monies are developed is quite possibly a functionof the degree of restraint that we are attempting to impose upon thesystem. Consequently, the system may have substantial leakage or,alternatively, substantial elasticity. And that would tend to arguein favor of moving to pretty low numbers for the growth rates of theitems reported here. I rather expect that is what we will experienceas we move through the next two or three years and that we will haveto move to growth rates in these conventional measures well below anythat are currently contemplated if, in fact, we are going to make muchimpact on inflation. In presenting your views, I would think you aregoing to have to say something about 1981 as well as 1980. And itseems to me some rationalization along that line may be required interms of fitting the growth rate numbers projected for 1980 with theidea that we need to have an annual reduction in the growth ratenumbers until we do get to a non-inflationary environment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit or implicit disagreement or contention. It is simply an individual's analysis and opinion on the desirable ranges and growth rates in relation to inflation.


Passage number 421.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 422.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I am a little at a loss tounderstand why some of our colleagues, who I know are much moreeconomically sophisticated and learned than I am, express confusionand concern as to whether or not we have a fundamental policy mandateand whether or not we can accomplish that. If one looks at this in asimplistic fashion, [one thing is] certain: We have told the worldthat our primary objective is a reduction in inflation accomplished ona gradual basis so as to avoid, if possible, drastic recessionaryconsequences. And we have said we're going to accomplish thatobjective by gradually reducing the rate of growth of the monetaryaggregates. It seems to me that there has been overwhelming approval,both in the press and the public, and very little expression ofdisapproval of this basic policy objective. To me the biggest problemfacing us, as I hear from people in our community, is a broad doubt orskepticism as to our willingness or ability to accomplish theseobjectives. I vehemently disagree with those of you who say that itis questionable whether or not we can gradually reduce the growth ofthe monetary aggregates. We can do it. We can do it either bycontrolling the path of total reserves or controlling the monetarybase or a combination of both. I am a little concerned about the factthat we don't spend more time reflecting on what the monetary base andnonborrowed reserves and total reserves have done, as described onpage 2 [of the Bluebook], because these are specific ways whereby wecan accomplish our monetary aggregate growth [objectives]. In orderto do what we've said we're going to do, we have to strive for a 5 or5-1/2 percent rate of growth in M-1A or M-1B over the next year. Idon't think we can react to short-term shortfalls or overruns on these-57-2/4-5/80[aggregates]. Anybody who says what has happened in the last two orthree weeks is a cause for alarm just doesn't understand how thisprocess works. We have to set long-term targets and we have to stickwith those long-term targets unless and until there are fundamentalchanges in public thinking and fundamental changes in our policy thatwould [point] toward our retreating from these longer-term targets.I would agree with Mark and others that it would bepreferable, if we could possibly swallow this enormous step, to narrowour ranges so that we indeed can accomplish a 5 or 5-1/2 percentgrowth. I don't think it's our job to try to position ourselves sothat our targets are so broad that we can always say we accomplishedour targets if the world [falls apart] while we're protecting our ownreputations. Our reputation is on the line. People totally andbroadly subscribe to what the Chairman has announced and I don't thinkwe can enjoy the luxury anymore of vacillating. The fat is in thefire and I think a narrow range under either alternative II or IIIaround 5 percent for the M-1A and M-1B targets would be the best wayto accomplish this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roos is expressing his agreement with the policy objective of reducing inflation and gradually reducing the growth of monetary aggregates. He disagrees with those who doubt the ability to accomplish these objectives and suggests narrowing the targets for more effective implementation.


Passage number 423.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's obviously a majority for retaininga 3-point range, as there was last month. I would defend that in myown mind by the uncertainty of the figures that Frank Morris andothers have referred to and the real uncertainty in the economy, whichgoes in the direction of [our needing] a little leeway. I would notein that regard that I don't know of another central bank in the world,however monetarist oriented, that has a narrower target than 3percentage points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact about there being a majority for retaining a 3-point range and then expressing the author's defense and observation on the matter.


Passage number 424.
MR. PARTEE. The Bank of England.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement from Mr. Partee about the Bank of England.


Passage number 425.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. They have a 5 percentage point range,as I recall, 4 or 5. Four, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply recalling a specific information about a range of percentage points they remember, stating that it is either 4 or 5.


Passage number 426.
MR. TRUMAN. The Swiss have just a point or two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply starts with a statement about the Swiss without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 427.
MR. BLACK. And a pretty good inflation record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Black's inflation record is pretty good.


Passage number 428.
MR. WALLICH. But [their target] varies with the rate ofinflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention between individuals. It simply presents a statement by Mr. Wallich without any contrasting opinions or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 429.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do the Swiss have a pretty good record.They had something like a 15 percent increase in the money supply insome recent year, and they abandoned the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage simply states a fact about the Swiss having a 15 percent increase in the money supply and abandoning a target, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 430.
MR. WALLICH. I mean the range has to be seen relative to therate of inflation. At 10 percent inflation, 3 percent [growth inmoney] isn't much. At 2 percent [inflation] it would be a great deal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that the range has to be seen relative to the rate of inflation, implying that there may be differing opinions on the significance of a 3 percent growth in money depending on the rate of inflation.


Passage number 431.
MR. SCHULTZ. I think we can get off this subject.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz is expressing his opinion that they can move on from the current subject.


Passage number 432.
MR. ROOS. The Swiss did that on a contrived basis, though,to make their goods more competitive. It wasn't because the mechanismis not workable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is based on a specific observation or interpretation about the actions of the Swiss, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 433.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Be that as it may, the greatest singleview is for alternative III. There is a certain amount of clusteringat alternative II, and one for alternative I. And there are some in-58-2/4-5/80between alternatives II and III and between II and I. One possibleapproach would be to adopt the Balles approach, which he justified inpart in terms of the desirability of getting all the upper limits nohigher than the growth we had last year. He [suggested] a combinationbetween alternatives II and III, using the alternative II ranges onthe Mls and something like the ranges in alternative III on M2 and M3,if I understood him correctly. I assume the staff judgment as to theinternal consistencies of these ranges is not so precise that thatbecomes an impossible [combination].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is discussing and analyzing different alternatives and possible approaches, but there is no indication of conflicting opinions or disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 434.
MR. AXILROD. No, it doesn't become impossible, Mr. Chairman.But I remember last year that the old M2 ran above the projection, andthat is the aggregate the Committee has come closest to cutting downto just about the lowest that is economically sustainable. I wouldjust add that point. I think we gave very low, or conservative,estimates for M2. So there is some danger in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 435.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 436.
 Remember, you have money--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which way is the risk more. If interestrates decline, do you think M2 would balloon or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply posing a question and asking for speculation or opinion on the potential outcome.


Passage number 437.
MR. AXILROD. Well, in the old days, I would have said itwould have ballooned. Nowadays, with interest rates so far aboveceiling rates, we don't have that effect. We have put the moneymarket funds into M2 and there is going to be a lot ofsubstitutability between the money market funds and other elements ofM2. The risk is for higher growth if interest rates decline, but Idon't think it is nearly as great a risk as it used to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their perspective on the topic without contradicting any other viewpoints.


Passage number 438.
MR. PARTEE. I might just point out that M2 [growth in 1979]was very close to the upper limit on alternative II, John, and for M3[actual growth] was the same as the upper limit on alternative II.The aggregate that is really low is bank credit. I don't quiteunderstand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion or seeking clarification about the low level of bank credit.


Passage number 439.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, these are in my judgment very narrowdifferences. Let me just try, after everybody has listened to all ofthis, two alternatives: alternative III straight and alternative IIstraight. I might say it didn't make much difference in clarifyingany strong preference to add the views of nonvoting members onto thoseof the members; they're split in about the same way. So just for thevoting members, after hearing each other, how many would wantalternative III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating their observations and offering alternative options.


Passage number 440.
MR. BALLES. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of someone's name.


Passage number 441.
 Chairman, this will just be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am just talking about a flat "III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement to the Chairman, indicating that they are only discussing a topic related to a "flat III."


Passage number 442.
"MR. BALLES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 443.
 Really, between the one or the other--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now let me try "II." Who would findalternative II "acceptable". Four. Let me try the Balles alternativeand see how many would find that acceptable.SPEAKER(.). Read it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 444.
-59-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's alternative II for M-1A and M-1B, ifI understand it correctly, and alternative III for M2 and M3. Maybethat would be the nicest, if we could achieve a consensus on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their understanding and suggesting a potential solution.


Passage number 445.
MR. PARTEE. What about bank credit. Is that alternativeIII.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a question asking about a topic, bank credit.


Passage number 446.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I've been implicitly assuming that bankcredit takes a subsidiary role in this as it indeed has in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement or assumption regarding the role of bank credit.


Passage number 447.
MR. PARTEE. It is, of course, one of the figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is making a statement and there is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 448.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One could argue about that, I suppose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "One could argue about that" suggests that there are different opinions or perspectives on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 449.
MR. COLDWELL. It's so violently different from [the actualexperience in] 1978 and 1979.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a comparison between the current situation and the past, without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 450.
MR. SCHULTZ. I would like to have somebody explain theBalles approach to me. I find Steve's comments important here. Whyshouldn't it be alternative III on M-1A and M-1B and alternative II onM2 and M3. That would seem to me more consistent with what actuallyhappens in the economy. Am I looking at it the wrong way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Schultz is expressing his disagreement and seeking clarification on the Balles approach. He suggests an alternative approach that he believes would be more consistent with the actual happenings in the economy.


Passage number 451.
MR. BLACK. I would prefer that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Black's preference.


Passage number 452.
MR. PARTEE. John wants the top of the range below lastyear's [actual].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that John wants the top of the range to be below last year's actual value.


Passage number 453.
MR. BALLES. I want the top of the range at least moderatelybelow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 454.
MR. SCHULTZ. I understand what he proposed. He's justtaking a somewhat mechanistic approach. But I am thinking of whatactually happens in the economy. It seems to me that if we're goingto go away from alternative III, which is the alternative I continueto prefer, where we should ease is in M2 and M3 rather than the otherway around. Is that the wrong way to look at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Schultz is presenting his perspective and suggesting an alternative approach to the topic being discussed.


Passage number 455.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that seems to be a bit in line withMr. Axilrod's suspicions, for whatever that's worth. On the otherhand, it doesn't achieve Mr. Balles's visual purpose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents two different opinions or perspectives without any clear disagreement or argument between them.


Passage number 456.
MR. SCHULTZ. I don't understand that there's any particularreason to ease on M-1A and M-1B because I have some real questionsabout velocity. But if Mr. Axilrod is right, the figures on M2 and M3are likely to be more stringent than those on M-1A and M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Schultz is stating his lack of understanding and expressing his own questions about velocity. He is acknowledging that if Mr. Axilrod's point is correct, the figures on M2 and M3 would be more stringent, but there is no explicit disagreement between them.


Passage number 457.
MS. TEETERS. Do you all realize that alternative III meansessentially no decline in interest rates this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact and seeking confirmation from the others.


Passage number 458.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what the staff says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That's what the staff says" does not indicate any specific contention or disagreement. It is simply relaying information without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 459.
 I have alittle uncertainty about what that figure--MR. RICE. Is that a proposal, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a bit of uncertainty and seeking clarification.


Passage number 460.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't have too many proposals onthe table at the same time. I don't know whether Mr. Balles wants to-60-2/4-5/80retreat to Mr. Schultz. I am willing to try your original one andjust see [what support it commands].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they cannot have too many proposals at the same time and expresses their uncertainty about Mr. Balles' intentions. They mention being willing to try the original proposal and see how much support it receives. There is no conflicting or opposing viewpoints presented in this passage.


Passage number 461.
MR. BALLES. I would be interested in the vote on myproposal. I didn't see a show of hands yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their interest in seeing the results of a vote on their proposal.


Passage number 462.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we're talking about now is what isacceptable to the biggest group we can get, I think. I can try theSchultz alternative, too, to confuse the issue further, but let me trythe Balles alternative at this stage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different alternatives and considering which one would be most acceptable to the largest group.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 463.
MR. COLDWELL. You got 3-1/2 votes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement indicates that there is disagreement or contention. The mention of "3-1/2 votes" suggests there may be a disagreement or differing opinions among the parties involved.


Passage number 464.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's try the Schultz alternative.This is exactly the opposite. Alternative III on M-1A and M-1B andalternative II and M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not exhibit contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different alternatives, specifically Alternative III on M-1A and M-1B and Alternative II and M2 and M3.


Passage number 465.
MR. BLACK. This just means acceptable, not necessarilypreferable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "this" (referring to something previously mentioned) means something that is acceptable but not necessarily preferable.


Passage number 466.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This means acceptable. That is preciselyright. Are we really saying nothing is acceptable here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "This" is acceptable, agreeing that "That" is precisely right, and asks a question about the acceptability of things in the current context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 467.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I got more than he did.SPEAKER(.). No, you didn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz believes that he got more than the other person, while the speaker disagrees and claims that he didn't.


Passage number 468.
MR. SCHULTZ. I got 5 votes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple statement of fact without any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 469.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only thing I am convinced of is thatwe are in a range where the differences are very difficult toperceive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement expresses personal uncertainty rather than contradictory viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 470.
MR. BLACK. It's [as if we] perceive more [differences] thanthere really are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of brackets in "[as if we] perceive more [differences]" suggests that there may be someone questioning or disputing the idea that we perceive more differences than there really are.


Passage number 471.
MR. GUFFEY. You had 8 for alternative III, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about someone's vote without any indication of disagreement or debate.


Passage number 472.
MR. BLACK. You sure did. And that was a preference, notjust acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black acknowledging someone's preference.


Passage number 473.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am a little reluctant to go toalternative III. It is clear that that has a plurality, but whetherit is the one that maximizes the satisfaction around the table isanother question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their reluctance to choose alternative III but acknowledges that it may be the option that maximizes satisfaction for everyone at the table.


Passage number 474.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I can't really offer a compromise since Iwas for alternative I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee states that he cannot offer a compromise, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 475.
MR. SCHULTZ. You were the only one. Maybe you're the onlyone who can offer a compromise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing that the person they are addressing might be the only one capable of offering a compromise.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 476.
MR. COLDWELL. We can't possibly get close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage suggests disagreement or contention because of the use of the phrase "We can't possibly get close." It implies that the speaker disagrees with or opposes a potential idea or proposal.


Passage number 477.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just looking at what maximizessatisfaction for all, I urge again the Balles approach with a moresympathetic attitude by people around the table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply urging for the Balles approach with a more sympathetic attitude from the others.


Passage number 478.
-61-2/4-5/80MR. PARTEE. Maybe somehow it will work out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a hopeful and optimistic attitude, suggesting that the situation may have a positive outcome.


Passage number 479.
MR. TIMLEN. Is there any understanding as to where in therange the Desk would be shooting for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if there is any agreement or understanding about where the Desk would be aiming for.


Passage number 480.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, theoretically, we are shooting forthe midpoint, based on what we know now. We may modify that in theshort-run decision; we haven't gotten there. But for the year as awhole the implication is that the best judgment we can make is thatwe're shooting at the middle of all of these, which gives us someleeway on [M2 and M3] presumably, if we're really shooting at themiddle of the [target for Ml].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a decision and the best judgment they can make based on the information they have.


Passage number 481.
MR. BALLES. My presumption, Mr. Chairman, is that of coursewe would aim for the midpoint, but I would also very quickly add thatin view of all the uncertainty we would want to be able to move eitherway, including to the top of the range. I think we ought to keep thatflexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that they would aim for the midpoint, but also want the flexibility to move either way, including to the top of the range, due to the uncertainty involved.


Passage number 482.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would agree with that. But as of now Ithink we are saying the central tendency is the midpoints of theseranges, which gives us some potential leeway in deliberately movingaway from the midpoint and also gives us some leeway in thereconciliation among these various numbers. I suppose the implicationof that, to sell [this] alternative now, is that if we were literallyaiming for the midpoints throughout the year and M2 and M3 prove to bea little tight relative to the Mls, we would end up with a slightlylower M1 and a slightly higher M2 and M3, relative to the midpoints.If the staff estimate is correct and everything went perfectly, that'spresumably the way [it would turn out]. We would end up with themidpoint, theoretically, halfway between alternative II andalternative III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and discussing potential implications, but there is no evidence of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 483.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if the Committee is willing toaccept a range of 2-1/2 points, an almost perfect compromise is totake the bottoms of alternative II and the tops of alternative III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is proposing a compromise that takes elements from two different alternatives, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 484.
MR. BLACK. That's not a bad idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That's not a bad idea" implies agreement or approval.


Passage number 485.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'd feel more comfortable with that than withthe Balles approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It shows that Mr. Schultz prefers one approach over another but does not mention any opposition or conflict.


Passage number 486.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you say leave these where they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification or confirmation about leaving something where it currently is.


Passage number 487.
MR. ALTMANN. 3-1/2 to 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a range of percentages without any conflicting information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 488.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're narrowing all the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact or observation without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 489.
MR. ALTMANN. The bottoms are from alternative II and thetops are those in alternative III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents information about the bottoms and tops being from two different alternatives.


Passage number 490.
MR. BALLES. That runs counter to a clear majority view aboutkeeping a wide range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the majority view on keeping a wide range.


Passage number 491.
MR. MAYO. Yes, it does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Yes, it does" is a simple response that agrees with or confirms a previous statement.


Passage number 492.
MR. BLACK. But it appeases some of the rest of us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is expressing that something appeases some of the rest of the people, which implies a sense of agreement or satisfaction.


Passage number 493.
-62-2/4-5/80MR. PARTEE. That results in odd midpoints.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This is a mathematical expression and there is no room for contention or disagreement. It is a calculation that can be accurately solved.


Passage number 494.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You obviously know [the area we're in]. Ireally am resistant to getting down to 1/4 points. If what we'reaiming at for M-1A is halfway between [the midpoints of] alternativesII and III, [that difference is] 1/4 of a percentage point and I thinkwe're really there with the Balles approach as a practical matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 495.
MR. SCHULTZ. Are we not likely, though, to end up with asituation in which we're going to miss on both sides with the Ballesapproach. M2 and M3 may be strong and M-1A and M-1B could be prettyweak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that the Balles approach may result in missing on both sides, with M2 and M3 being strong and M-1A and M-1B being weak. This implies a difference of opinion on the effectiveness of the Balles approach and its potential outcome.


Passage number 496.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably these are the best estimates wehave. I will not vouch for the inter-relationships between them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging that the estimates provided are the best available and is simply stating that they cannot guarantee the accuracy of the inter-relationships between the estimates.


Passage number 497.
[They represent] an unbiased estimate of the consistent--MR. AXILROD. We rounded these to 1/2 points, by the way.For M2 and M3 I think the [actual] differences are 1/4 points amongthe alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 498.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're now unrounding them. Let me urgeupon you at this point the Balles alternative. How many find thatacceptable after this further [discussion].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is introducing the Balles alternative as a possible solution after discussing the concept of "unrounding." They ask how many find the alternative acceptable, indicating a desire for consensus or agreement among the audience.


Passage number 499.
MR. SCHULTZ. To show you how weak I am, I'll vote for it.As I do so, I am being dragged kicking and screaming into this. Iwould much prefer the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they are weak and being reluctantly dragged into a decision, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 500.
MR. BALLES. How many was that, sir.SPEAKER(.). Six.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange between Mr. Balles and the Speaker, with no conflicting opinions or arguments expressed.


Passage number 501.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I [add my vote], it's a majority. ButI can't believe that when we get down to a 1/4 point there is nocombination of numbers that does not provide a happier situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that if their vote is added, it would result in a majority. They also express their disbelief that there can't be any combination of numbers at a 1/4 point that wouldn't lead to a better outcome.


Passage number 502.
MR. TIMLEN. Could you try Steve's range, because its widthis 2-1/2 points as opposed to 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if someone could try Steve's range, providing a comparison of its width to further emphasize the point.


Passage number 503.
MR. ALTMANN. And not emphasize midpoints.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a preference or suggestion about not emphasizing midpoints.


Passage number 504.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But there's no substantive differencebetween them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage clearly states that there is no substantive difference between the mentioned subjects, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 505.
MR. BLACK. But it's the way it is perceived.SPEAKER(.). It is the way it is perceived by the public,Paul, that's important. I agree there isn't all that much differencebut the perception by the public--SPEAKER(.). It's the top of the ranges that scares me todeath.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speakers appear to be having a conversation where they express agreement and share their concerns.


Passage number 506.
MR. COLDWELL. We could widen the range to 3 to 6-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states a suggestion made by Mr. Coldwell without any opposing views or conflict presented.


Passage number 507.
-63-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we want to go in thedirection of widening the range. There are all sorts of ways we canget a quarter peoint difference between the averages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 508.
MR. WILLES. But the problem, Mr. Chairman, is not thequarter point difference on the midpoint. Where people separate is onwhere they think the bottom ought to be or where the top ought to be.And that's why Steve's proposal, I think, will get most of the votes.It's not the quarter point difference; it's where one is willing tolet it go on one side or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that people separate on where they think the bottom and top should be, implying different opinions and disagreements on those positions. The mention of Steve's proposal getting most of the votes suggests that there is disagreement between various proposals or perspectives.


Passage number 509.
MR. BLACK. I think that's a correct appraisal. I think themarket will look at it that way, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit disagreement or contention expressed in the passage. Mr. Black agrees with the appraisal and anticipates that the market will share the same view.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 510.
MR. PARTEE. We have a tremendous amount riding on ourability to be within these ranges--SEVERAL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The word "Yes" in response to Mr. Partee's statement implies agreement, suggesting that there is a disagreement or contention regarding the ability to be within the specified ranges.


Passage number 511.
MR. PARTEE. --and to cut the range to 2-1/2 points makes itrough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating his opinion or observation about a certain situation without any opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 512.
 And the possibility of inconsistencies here, even though weare within the staff's ranges--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are we talking about specifically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not expressing any disagreement or contention. It is expressing the potential for inconsistencies without any particular subject or topic being mentioned.


Passage number 513.
MR. ALTMANN. 3-1/2 to 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a range of percentages without any indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 514.
MR. MAYO. Why don't we just see what the vote is, Mr.Chairman, on the bottom of alternative III and the top of alternativeII, widening the range by 1/2 percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Mayo is suggesting a course of action to the chairman, but there is no indication of conflict or dispute.


Passage number 515.
MR. COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The text only mentions "Mr. Coldwell" without providing any context or stating any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 516.
 That's what I suggested, but he--MR. MAYO. It has some merit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests something and Mr. Mayo acknowledges its merit, indicating agreement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 517.
MS. TEETERS. If we want to compromise, we should go to 3-1/4to 6-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply suggests a specific range for a potential compromise.


Passage number 518.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the straightforward compromise, butI think we look foolish if we get into quarter points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses the speaker's personal opinion and does not indicate any contention or disagreement with others.


Passage number 519.
MR. PARTEE. We would bill the 3-1/2 percent [as appropriate]on the grounds of the great uncertainty in the year ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or suggestion made by Mr. Partee without any opposing views expressed.


Passage number 520.
MR. WALLICH. We could accept Steve's [suggestion] as long aswe don't focus on the midpoint. The midpoint gives us a quarter pointand looks foolish. A narrower range, other things equal, looksbetter. I see the risks; we might miss. We're much more likely tomiss on the up side than on the down side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is expressing his opinion and discussing the risks involved without contradicting or arguing against anyone else's viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 521.
MR. PARTEE. What I foresee is the possibility of misses ifthe relationships aren't right here. We may be within on M1 and outon M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing concern about the possibility of "misses" if the relationships are not "right." This suggests that there may be disagreement or differing opinions regarding the current relationships, specifically between M1, M2, and M3.


Passage number 522.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we do it the other way, we have abetter chance of being within something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing an alternative approach that may increase the likelihood of achieving a certain outcome.


Passage number 523.
-64-2/4-5/80MR. WILLES. But that's precisely why people care so muchabout either the bottom or the top. Even though we may miss, if we'regoing over the top, that raises the flag a lot faster than if we'restill within all the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that explains why people care about either the bottom or the top.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 524.
MS. TEETERS. I have noticed that people worry less when wego under than when we go over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is a contention or disagreement because the statement suggests that people worry less when going under something compared to when going over it. This implies a difference in opinions or perspectives regarding which direction is more worrisome.


Passage number 525.
MR. MAYO. It depends on one's point of view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "It depends on one's point of view" suggests that there may be differing perspectives or opinions, but it does not indicate contention or disagreement. Instead, it acknowledges that different people may have different viewpoints on the topic.


Passage number 526.
MR. WINN. Well, I'll go back to my original question. Whatare you going to say about last year's ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about what will be said about last year's ranges.


Passage number 527.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. About last year's ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions "last year's ranges" without any opposing opinions or conflicting information.


Passage number 528.
MR. WINN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 529.
 People are going to compare ranges and ranges,not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what we're going to tell them isthat on M1, depending upon how you look at it, we were somewherearound 5.5 or 6.8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that people will compare ranges and the speaker is explaining that on M1, the percentage ranges were around 5.5 or 6.8.


Passage number 530.
MR. WINN. That's what we hit, but [the question is]: Are wesetting our objectives lower or higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply posing a question about whether objectives are being set lower or higher.


Passage number 531.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All of these objectives, properlyinterpreted, will be lower. It may take some interpretation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not contain any contentious or disagreeable content. It is simply suggesting that interpreting the objectives correctly will result in lowering them.


Passage number 532.
MR. WINN. But didn't we say 3 to 6 percent last year on Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 533.
Sure it has changed, and so forth--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement acknowledges that something has changed but does not provide any conflicting or opposing views.


Passage number 534.
 Well, we said 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent byone interpretation, with 1-1/2 percent ATS--MR. BLACK. That's really what it was, when you come rightdown to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply clarifying and summarizing a previous statement or agreement.


Passage number 535.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't like this way of skinningthe cat, but do you want to do these 2-1/2 percentage point ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a personal preference but asking for someone else's opinion.


Passage number 536.
Let's see who finds the 3-1/2--MR. MAYO. What are we talking about. The 2-1/2 points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question and a statement seeking clarification or context.


Passage number 537.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.SPEAKER(.). John, I assume you'll go with this proposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating an assumption about John's decision to go with a proposal.


Passage number 538.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we get no more votes for that onethan the other one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply states that they do not receive any more votes for one thing than the other.


Passage number 539.
MR. SCHULTZ. Straight alternative III got the most votes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact, which is that alternative III received the most votes. There is no disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 540.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without providing the passage, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 541.
MR. WILLES. Take an acceptable vote on alternative III; Ithink you'll get 9 out of 12.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of opinion or prediction about the outcome of a vote.


Passage number 542.
-65-2/4-5/80MR. HOLMES. Mr. Chairman, another compromise would be totake a flexible midpoint. Take the [average of the] midpoints fromalternatives II and III and say you expect variations around that of1-1/2 percentage points on either side, as we have in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Holmes is suggesting a compromise by taking a flexible midpoint and using the average of the midpoints from alternatives II and III as a reference point for expected variations.


Passage number 543.
MR. BLACK. That would be 3-3/4 to [6-3/4 for M-1B].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states two different numerical values without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 544.
MR. SCHULTZ. It gets us to quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Schultz is a straightforward remark without any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 545.
MR. COLDWELL. Would it help, Mr Chairman, if we used M-1B asopposed to M-1A as the starting point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests using M-1B instead of M-1A as the starting point but does not express any disagreement or opposition towards M-1A.


Passage number 546.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the figures are supposed to be thesame.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "the figures are supposed to be the same" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It implies that there is an expectation or assumption that the figures should be identical.


Passage number 547.
 I don't know how to--MS. TEETERS. Yes, but M-1B has the most potential forfluctuation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "I don't know how to--MS. TEETERS" suggests uncertainty, but there is no conflicting or contradictory viewpoint expressed. The subsequent statement about M-1B having the most potential for fluctuation is unrelated and does not indicate disagreement.


Passage number 548.
MR. COLDWELL. But M-1B has the most long-run potential.M-1A, if you read it as "MIA," is "missing in action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by MR. COLDWELL about the potential of M-1B and his interpretation of the acronym M-1A.


Passage number 549.
"MR. BLACK. M-1B is "misinformed bunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement just represents the opinion of MR. BLACK using colloquial language.


Passage number 550.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to me that the logical thing,without getting into tiny fractions, is either to do the Ballesapproach or the reverse of the Balles approach, which is about as muchof a compromise as one can get, retaining the wider ranges. Now,that avoids quarter percents on either the midpoints or the outside[limits of the] ranges. Who do we have reconsidering. Or who wantsto make another proposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply presents different options and suggests a compromise without expressing any opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 551.
MR. MAYO. In the interest of simplicity, I am prepared toshift my vote to alternative III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Mayo is willing to change his vote to alternative III for the sake of simplicity.


Passage number 552.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with alternative III--frankly,I have no particular problem with it--is that it's going to make somepeople more unhappy than any of the other alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's opinion about alternative III without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 553.
MR. MORRIS. But only 1/2 of 1 percent were unhappy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a statistic without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 554.
MR. MAYO. There's a multiplier here, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not include any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It simply mentions the existence of a multiplier without any debate or disagreement.


Passage number 555.
MR. RICE. Let me put it this way: It makes me unhappy butin the spirit of unanimity I would change my vote and go withalternative III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker expresses a personal unhappiness with a potential decision but is willing to change their vote for the sake of unanimity. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 556.
MS. TEETERS. It's a full percentage point drop in the growthrates from last year. Doesn't it mean that we're going to have anincrease of 2 percentage points in the unemployment rate and no changein interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Ms. Teeters is presenting factual information about the drop in growth rates and speculating about the potential impact on the unemployment rate and interest rates. There is no evident disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 557.
MR. PARTEE. That's probably right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 558.
MS. TEETERS. Where are interest rates in [that scenario].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking for the location of interest rates in a specific scenario.


Passage number 559.
MR. RICE. Well, I surely share [that concern] with you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement by saying they share the concern.


Passage number 560.
-66-2/4-5/80MS. TEETERS. Even taking all the probabilities in the staffestimate, the likely rate of [GNP] growth is between .8 and -2.2percent. That is just not a very good economy, gentlemen, to have 12percent interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 561.
MR. WALLICH. But, Nancy, on the other hand, we'd get a risein the rate of inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only presents a statement from Mr. Wallich without any opposing viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 562.
MS. TEETERS. We're going to get that anyway, Henry, fromOPEC over the first three months of this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by MS. TEETERS.


Passage number 563.
MR. COLDWELL. If we're going to get it anyway, you better bedown where I am.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell is simply suggesting that the listener come down to his location.


Passage number 564.
MR. SCHULTZ. Actually, alternative III, you have toremember, is much more lenient than where Governor Coldwell would liketo be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 565.
 So that--MR. KIMBREL. Associate me with that, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 566.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 567.
 Of course, he won't be here to--MR. COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that Mr. Coldwell won't be present for something.


Passage number 568.
 No, I am going to be out in the ranks of theunemployed with fixed incomes to pay the price--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would recommend to you the Ballesposition. But if you're bound and determined to go to alternativeIII, we'll go to alternative III. Let's try Balles once more.SPEAKER(.). I'm not going to vote for it this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own personal decision and preference, but there is no clear indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions with others.


Passage number 569.
MR. SCHULTZ. Things are coming my way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is simply stating that things are going well for him.


Passage number 570.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many did you get. What was the count.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The first sentence asks a question about the quantity of something, while the second sentence is inquiring about a specific number or count. The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 571.
MR. ALTMANN. Five.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 572.
MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: Without the passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 573.
 PARTEE & MR. TIMLEN. Five; we've lost one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact that five have been lost.


Passage number 574.
MR. BALLES. Well, I tried, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Balles tried to do something.


Passage number 575.
MR. BLACK. That's the end of Balles, et al.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not provide any information that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the end of an individual or a group named Balles. It does not indicate any conflicting opinions or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 576.
MR. MAYO. The "et als" are still around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states that "the 'et als' are still around," without providing any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 577.
MR. BALLES. My next move would be to alternative III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any mention or discussion of alternative III, so there is no contention or disagreement regarding it.


Passage number 578.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With great reluctance, I will try "III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement that could be interpreted as conflicting or contradictory. It only expresses the speaker's hesitation or unwillingness to try "III."


Passage number 579.
"MR. ALTMANN. Nine, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a number.


Passage number 580.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is a mistake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 581.
MR. COLDWELL. Why, Paul. What's your principal reservationabout it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a question being asked by Mr. Coldwell to Paul about his reservation.


Passage number 582.
-67-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My reservation is not the substance of it,but that I don't think it correctly gets to the midpoint of the rangeof opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 583.
MR. COLDWELL. Well, go back and try the Schultz approachagain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to try the Schultz approach again.


Passage number 584.
 That looks to me as if it buys a good share of those of us whoare concerned about--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses an observation or opinion without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 585.
 By the Schultz approach you mean justreversing--MR. COLDWELL. Reversing the Balles points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply clarifies the meaning of the Schultz approach by stating that it refers to reversing the Balles points. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 586.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I am perfectly happy to do that.Let's try that one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing willingness and enthusiasm to do something.


Passage number 587.
MR. COLDWELL. Take M-1A and M-1B of "III" and M2 and M3 of"II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. This passage seems to be referring to specific sections or parts of something without expressing any conflicting ideas or contradictory statements.


Passage number 588.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage only mentions the Chairman Volcker without providing any information that suggests disagreement or contention.


Passage number 589.
 Let's see whether that captures--MR. ALTMANN. Seven.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a statement made by a person named Mr. Altmann, without any contradictory or conflicting information.


Passage number 590.
MR. BLACK. Seven. Doesn't it make you two even a littlehappier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black simply asks a question about whether the situation makes the others happier.


Passage number 591.
MS. TEETERS. A 4-1/2 percent rate of growth for Ml. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is simply stating a factual figure of a 4-1/2 percent rate of growth for M1.


Passage number 592.
MR. COLDWELL. Well, if that's the case, we better stay withalternative III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that they should stick with alternative III based on the information or context given.


Passage number 593.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think everyone is stuck on III; that'sokay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and stating that it is acceptable for everyone to be stuck on III.


Passage number 594.
MR. ALTMANN. So, it's alternative III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement, not a dialogue or conversation, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 595.
MR. TIMLEN. How would the chair vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents a question about how the chair would vote.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 596.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.SPEAKER(.). You would vote for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker is stating that they would vote for something, but it is not clear what they are referring to. The lack of specific information creates ambiguity and potential disagreement.


Passage number 597.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll vote for alternative III ifthat's what everybody wants to vote for. I don't see the significancein the 1/2 percentage point difference that some other peopleapparently see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their willingness to vote for alternative III if that is the popular choice, and stating that they don't understand the significance that others place on a small difference in percentages.


Passage number 598.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't either, but it takes me a wholepoint [lower].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 599.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing understanding.


Passage number 600.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, is the staff to assume that inmaking its GNP projections, it should take the 4-1/2 percent rate ofgrowth for M-1A as a center point. That is a lower rate of growththan we had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 601.
-68-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I presume that in some sense that must bethe implication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a mathematical expression that can be simplified by performing the operations in the correct order.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 602.
MS. TEETERS. You realize we're already in trouble in termsof being in conformity with the Administration's forecast. At leastyou have to do the testifying on Humphrey-Hawkins. We're alreadyinconsistent; this is making it worse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement or contention between the speaker (Ms. Teeters) and someone else who is being asked to testify on Humphrey-Hawkins. Ms. Teeters points out that they are already inconsistent with the Administration's forecast, and having to testify is making the situation worse.


Passage number 603.
MR. COLDWELL. The President has given up on Humphrey-Hawkinsfor this coming year anyway. He moved out [the time period in whichto reach the objectives].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the President has given up on Humphrey-Hawkins for the coming year and mentions that he has moved out the time period to reach the objectives.


Passage number 604.
MS. TEETERS. He may have moved it out but theAdministration's forecast is markedly different. And we will have togo up to the Hill and say we're going to keep money so tight thatthere is no way that the Administration's forecast can be realized.That's about what it comes down to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that the Administration's forecast is different and that they will have to inform the Hill about their decision to keep money tight, making it unlikely for the Administration's forecast to be achieved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 605.
MR. SCHULTZ. I am really much more concerned about M2 and M3than I am M-1A or M-1B because at these interest rates and theseinflation rates I am very unsure of the connection between the two.And I think there is going to be a demand shift this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses uncertainty about the connection between M2 and M3 and suggests that there will be a demand shift this year. This indicates a possible disagreement or contention about the relationship between these factors and the potential outcomes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 606.
 The staffindicates that they can see no indication yet, but--MR. PARTEE. [It can] hardly be bigger than it was last year.We already had a great big demand shift in the recorded figures forlast year. For M-1B, which I think a lot of people would support asthe better redefined money, our midpoint will be 3 points below whatwe realized last year. Three points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Partee disagrees with the staff's indication that there is no indication yet, as he argues that there was already a big demand shift in the recorded figures for last year and predicts a lower midpoint for M-1B compared to the previous year.


Passage number 607.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that figure is a little artificialbecause we had the shift into ATS and NOW accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information about a figure and explaining that it may be slightly artificial due to certain factors.


Passage number 608.
MR. BALLES. This is a question of fact, Mr. Chairman. Whatimpressions do you have as to whether the Congressional Committeeconsiders the ranges as having a very strong implication that we'llmove toward the midpoint. I haven't gathered that that was true inthe past; we have ranges with the precise idea of being flexible. In-house we may well aim for a midpoint. But in terms of the Congress,is my impression wrong that they look on these as ranges we feel freeto utilize fully depending on unfolding conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own impressions and seeking clarification on whether those impressions align with the views of Congress.


Passage number 609.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't answer that question. It probablyimplies a degree of sophistication on the part of Congress that isbeyond any generalization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is asserting that the question cannot be answered and suggesting that it requires a level of sophistication that cannot be generalized. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 610.
MR. BALLES. There seems to be a feeling around the tablehere that if we adopt alternative III, we're struck with themidpoints. I don't think we are, frankly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles is expressing his own opinion and clarifying a misunderstanding or misconception that others may have. He is stating that he does not believe they are "struck with the midpoints" if they choose alternative III.


Passage number 611.
MS. TEETERS. What else is the Desk going to aim for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks a question about the Desk's intentions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 612.
MR. BALLES. What's the purpose of having the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential for contention or disagreement in this passage because the purpose of having the range is not clearly stated.


Passage number 613.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd certainly have a tendency right nowto aim for the midpoint, not knowing anything else. That's pendingfurther information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their inclination towards a specific action due to the lack of available information, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 614.
-69-2/4-5/80MR. MAYO. That is true in the short run, Paul, but as theyear moves on, we have that flexibility. We just finished using itthe last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Mayo, acknowledges the truth of what Paul said and then adds additional information about having flexibility in the future.


Passage number 615.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, in the short run.SPEAKER(.). We sure did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "We sure did" suggests agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 616.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I don't know if this will behelpful, but one possibility--in the spirit of what has been discussed--is to take the 3-point ranges for M-1A and M-1B of alternative IIand to lower the top ends of M2 and M3 by 1/2 point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply offering a suggestion or possibility in the spirit of the previous discussion.


Passage number 617.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was going to suggest the opposite.If there's more of a concern about M2 and M3, maybe we should take a1/2 percentage point off the top of the M1 ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting an alternative approach, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument with the previous statement.


Passage number 618.
MR. AXILROD. Then you have more substitutability among thedeposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod without any conflicting opinions or opposing perspectives being presented.


Passage number 619.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it leaves us a little more leeway onM2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present a clear stance or argument, and there is no indication of contention or disagreement between different parties. It simply states that "it leaves us a little more leeway on M2 and M3," without specifying what "it" refers to or providing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 620.
MR. PARTEE. I'd go for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 621.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably they are, theoretically, alittle more volatile anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only presents a statement about something being more volatile in a theoretical manner. There is no mention of any contrasting opinions or conflicting viewpoints that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 622.
MR. COLDWELL. 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent on M-1A.SPEAKER(.). No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both speakers simply provide information without expressing any contradictory opinions or positions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 623.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [For M-1A] 3-1/2 to 6 percent--acompromise between alternatives II and III on both the Mls.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that the suggested percentage range is a compromise between alternatives II and III, suggesting that there is disagreement or contention between these options.


Passage number 624.
MR. SCHULTZ. All right. I'd go for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, is agreeing with a proposal or suggestion.


Passage number 625.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No (Insufficient Information)

The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 626.
 And 4 to 6-1/2--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 4 to 6-1/2 percent on M-1B, which isprobably going to have to be revised anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the percentage on M-1B and suggesting that it may need to be revised.


Passage number 627.
MR. PARTEE. I'd be happy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: to explain.


Passage number 628.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And leave the 6 to 9 percent and 6-1/2 to9-1/2 percent [for M2 and M3, respectively].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating the specific percentages for M2 and M3.


Passage number 629.
MR. BALLES. What was M-1A, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It simply asks for information about M-1A.


Passage number 630.
MR. ALTMANN. 3-1/2 to 6 percent. And M-1B is 4 to 6-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Altmann simply states the range of percentages for M-1B, ranging from 3-1/2 to 6 percent and 4 to 6-1/2 percent.


Passage number 631.
MR. COLDWELL. What about M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. It is a simple question being posed by Mr. Coldwell.


Passage number 632.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're the same as in alternative II.SPEAKER(.). There's something wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the alternatives are the same as in alternative II and then expressing that there is something wrong.


Passage number 633.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a bit of logic in it, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement "There's a bit of logic in it, I think" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It suggests the speaker's personal opinion that there is some logic present in the situation or statement being discussed.


Passage number 634.
-70-2/4-5/80MR. SCHULTZ. That's logical, and I like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement and appreciation for the logical nature of the statement.


Passage number 635.
MR. BALLES. Just a comment on that, Mr. Chairman: Thereason I was turned off by alternative II for M2 and M3 is that if wewent for the upper end of that range, which I presume we could, thatwould result in no decrease at all in the growth rates of those twomagnitudes for 1980 from what we experienced in 1979.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their personal opinion and the reasons behind it.


Passage number 636.
MR. PARTEE. If we go right to the top.SPEAKER(.). We also have to recognize that they're ratheruncontrollable by us with money market funds and Eurodollars andCaribbean dollars and RPs in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's recognition of the uncontrollable nature of money market funds, Eurodollars, Caribbean dollars, and RPs.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 637.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We lose that visual effect, but it'sgetting argued that the economics are a little against us in terms ofthe uncertainty and it gives wider ranges. I think there's a certainsense in doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement or contention in the passage. The statement "it's getting argued that the economics are a little against us" suggests that there is a difference in opinion or viewpoint regarding the economics of a certain situation.


Passage number 638.
 It has the disadvantage that--MR. COLDWELL. So the midpoint on M-1A would be 4-3/4percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 639.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. [Unintelligible] misleadwith that quarter percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone was misled by a quarter percent.


Passage number 640.
MR. WALLICH. That's just raising it, on average, because thelower ends don't really mean anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 641.
MR. PARTEE. Well, they could.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 642.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's raising depending upon where webegin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests that something is subject to change or variation based on the starting point or initial conditions.


Passage number 643.
MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems that we'd very likely dosomething if it came out there. Even I would be prepared to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing his willingness to do something if a certain condition is met.


Passage number 644.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say raising on average. Depending onwhat one is looking at, it's accepting the upper constraint ofalternative III on M1. That's the one you're worried about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement reflecting a hypothetical situation and considering different perspectives.


Passage number 645.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I was more worried about M2, and there wehave an increase. Raising the lower constraints on M-1A and M-1Bdoesn't really accomplish anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich simply expresses his concern about M2 and states that raising the lower constraints on M-1A and M-1B doesn't achieve anything.


Passage number 646.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's try this one. I appeal toyou: Anyone around this table who is good enough to know thedifference between 1/2 point, with great [conviction], is pretty good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement that suggests that someone who can differentiate between fractions with confidence is skilled or knowledgeable.


Passage number 647.
MR. TIMLEN. Is that for simple or complicated minds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 648.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does it have any appeal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any argument or conflicting viewpoints. It is a simple question asking if something has appeal or not.


Passage number 649.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'd vote for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Schultz, is stating his personal opinion and intention to vote for something. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 650.
MS. TEETERS. Want another straw vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is simply asking for another straw vote.


Passage number 651.
MR. KIMBREL. Just to be sure I am with you, read thosenumbers one more time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply wants to confirm that they have correctly understood the numbers.


Passage number 652.
-71-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are: 3-1/2 to 6 on M-1A; 4 to 6-1/2on M-1B; 6 to 9 on M2; and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 on M3. Who finds thatacceptable.SPEAKER(.). Here we go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply presenting different options or ranges for measurement M-1A, M-1B, M2, and M3. The speaker is asking who finds these options acceptable, implying that they are open to discussion or approval.


Passage number 653.
MR. ALTMANN. Eight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or disagreements. It is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 654.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And I make nine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the phrase "And I make nine." It simply states a numerical value without any conflicting ideas or viewpoints.


Passage number 655.
MR. COLDWELL. What did we finally get on the vote forstraight alternative III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply asking for information about the vote results.


Passage number 656.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think about the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage given. The speaker's statement "I think about the same" indicates that there is agreement or similarity in their thoughts.


Passage number 657.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. There is not enough context provided to determine if MR. ALTMANN is involved in any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 658.
 I had seven, not counting--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Seven, not counting me. So we got onemore vote out of this one, right. Let's go with that one then. Allthe people who like narrow ranges ought to be enchanted by that 1/2percent [reduction in the ranges for M-1A and M-1B].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear indications of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 659.
MR. PARTEE. The narrower M1 range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or a response.


Passage number 660.
MR. GUFFEY. Which one did you go with, the last one.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response "Yes" is a straightforward affirmation.


Passage number 661.
MR. GUFFEY. I thought we had more votes for alternative III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 662.
MR. TIMLEN. I thought so, too.SPEAKER(.). Try again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Timlen agrees with the speaker.


Passage number 663.
MR. ALTMANN. No, I had seven not counting the Chairman.Want to try it again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 664.
MR. BALLES. What was the vote on the last one, Murray.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in this passage.


Passage number 665.
MR. ALTMANN. Eight plus the Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or statements. The statement "Eight plus the Chairman" is simply a statement of a number without any context provided.


Passage number 666.
MR. SCHULTZ. I think the Chairman is saying that we may havehad more votes on that, but those who are the unhappiest would findthis last one acceptable. Is that your reasoning, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz is seeking clarification on the Chairman's reasoning, but there is no indication of disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 667.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know quite what I will find atthis point, frankly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is expressing the speaker's uncertainty or lack of knowledge about what they will find, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 668.
MR. SCHULTZ. I can go either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "I can go either way" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that the person is flexible and open to different options or opinions.


Passage number 669.
MR. RICE. In light of this vote, I'll shift from my lastvote and make it even. I voted for alternative III in the spirit ofcompromise, but now that I know we can get 8 votes for this, which ismore acceptable to me, I would like to switch my vote and make it [9].SPEAKER(.). Let's have a vote on this compromise and seewhat we get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice is simply stating that he wants to change his vote based on new information. The speaker is suggesting a vote to see what the outcome is.


Passage number 670.
-72-2/4-5/80MR. BLACK. Maybe I ought to reactivate my proposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that Mr. Black is considering reactivating his proposal.


Passage number 671.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's take a vote on the latest proposal.Is everybody clear about what we are voting on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker simply asks for clarification and if everyone understands the subject of the vote.


Passage number 672.
MR. MAYO. The same thing that we just voted on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is referring to a previous vote, indicating agreement or alignment with the decision that was made.


Passage number 673.
MR. ALTMANN. That's right, the 3-1/2 to 6, 4 to 6-1/2, 6 to9, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a range of numbers without expressing any opposing views or arguing a point.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 674.
MR. BLACK. What about bank credit. Are we going to have toput that in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The mention of bank credit introduces the possibility of contention or disagreement, as different individuals may have differing opinions on the topic.


Passage number 675.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Bank credit, I guess, is 6 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a guess about the range of bank credit, without providing any conflicting information or presenting different viewpoints.


Passage number 676.
MR. ALTMANN. 6 to 9.SPEAKER(.). What about M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The exchange between Mr. Altmann and the speaker seems to be a simple question and response.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 677.
MR. SCHULTZ. Henry thinks it's too high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by Henry's belief that "it's too high," which suggests that he disagrees with someone else's opinion about something.


Passage number 678.
MR. PARTEE. If we expect to get it, we're going to have toraise marginal reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is not expressing any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a condition that needs to be met.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 679.
MR. ALTMANN.Chairman VolckerPresident BallesPresident BlackGovernor ColdwellPresident KimbrelPresident MayoGovernor ParteeGovernor RiceGovernor SchultzGovernor TeetersFirst Vice President TimlenGovernor WallichYesYesYesYesIt's mighty hard, but I voteyes, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the statement "It's mighty hard, but I vote yes, too," indicating that there may have been differing opinions or difficulty in reaching a consensus.


Passage number 680.
YesYesYesYesYesYesIn the spirit of compromise,yesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I appreciate your swallowing allthese 1/2 percentage point differences. I think it's probably moreimportant to swallow the 1/2 point differences than to achieve the 1/2point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges and appreciates the willingness to compromise and suggests that it is more important to accept small differences than to aim for a specific outcome.


Passage number 681.
MR. WALLICH. Well, can we swallow something real now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply asking if they can discuss something tangible or practical.


Passage number 682.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. After all this time, we have a greatdecision. How much problem are we going to have with our evennarrower differences on the short-run ranges. Do you want to try todo this [before lunch].SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and is confident about the decision that has been made.


Passage number 683.
MR. BLACK. Maybe we can just vote without any statement fromanybody. It might be better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black suggests a possible course of action without expressing any opposition or disagreement towards it.


Passage number 684.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without any further context or information provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 685.
-73-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's see where we are without goingaround the table. Do you want to say a few words, Mr. Axilrod--veryfew.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating that someone named Mr. Axilrod may have the opportunity to speak briefly.


Passage number 686.
MR. AXILROD. I will skip the introductory part, a page and ahalf, which says that interest rates aren't projected to come down asmuch as they used to be because the economy is projected to bestronger. [Secretary's note: For the full text of Mr. Axilrod'sstatement, see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact that interest rates are not projected to come down as much as they used to because the economy is projected to be stronger. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 687.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand this precisely, youralternative B, at least for M1, reiterates the target we already setat the last meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is simply stating that alternative B is reiterating the target set at the last meeting. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 688.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is "Yes" because the presence of the word "yes" in the response suggests that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine the exact nature of the disagreement.


Passage number 689.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And this can viewed as kind of a mid-quarter relook at that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express a disagreement or contention. It is simply referring to a mid-quarter relook.


Passage number 690.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a straightforward confirmation of agreement.


Passage number 691.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But M2 is a little below, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention; it simply states a fact.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 692.
MR. AXILROD. The [new] M2 is a totally different concept.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the word "totally" suggests that the M2 is very different from its previous iteration.


Passage number 693.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We didn't set a target for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that a target was not set for a particular thing, without any conflicting or opposing opinions or views being expressed.


Passage number 694.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply acknowledging that something is correct.


Passage number 695.
 It was the old M2--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That target was 7 percent; that's whatconfused me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 696.
MR. AXILROD. That's right. And it is in fact running alittle low relative to the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any opposing view or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 697.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you think this 6-1/2 percent that youhave here for the new M2 is roughly consistent with the 7 percent thatwe had on the old M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that the 6-1/2 percent figure for the new M2 is approximately consistent with the 7 percent figure for the old M2.


Passage number 698.
MR. AXILROD. I would guess it's a shade lower because theold M2 is running a shade lower. It's either consistent or a shadelower. I haven't worked it out in detail month by month on moneymarket funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and making a guess based on available information. There is no opposing viewpoint presented or disagreement between multiple parties.


Passage number 699.
MR. WALLICH. But it contains very different components.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states that the subject contains different components, without indicating any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 700.
MR. AXILROD. Oh yes, that's right. That's why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Oh yes, that's right" indicates agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 701.
 It hasmoney market funds--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it has been running higher than 6-1/2percent, apparently, because you have the implied growth for Januaryto March of 5-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating a fact about the growth rate of money market funds for the period of January to March.


Passage number 702.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. The actual growth in M2 is 8.3 percentbecause, among other reasons, we had this very sharp expansion inmoney market funds in January, which we've been expecting to slow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about the growth in M2 and provides a reason for it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 703.
-74-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a question of procedure we have todecide upon, which is whether to reiterate or change the targets thatwe had for the first quarter. [We can comment on] any tentativefeeling that we have about the second quarter but we don't have to putthe second quarter into the directive, and I think it's probablyinappropriate to put the second quarter in the directive at thispoint. So, if people agree with this, the only thing we have to havein the directive is a number for the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The passage discusses whether to reiterate or change the targets for the first quarter and whether or not to include the second quarter in the directive. There is a question of procedure and different opinions on what should be included in the directive. Some may argue for including the second quarter, while others believe it is inappropriate at this point.


Passage number 704.
MR. AXILROD. To be clear, Mr. Chairman, alternative B, as weconstrue it, is simply reiterating the Committee's policy of last timewith respect to M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a clarification about a policy without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 705.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "right" on its own does not provide enough context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 706.
MR. AXILROD. That's in new terms and takes account of theactual growth that occurred in January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 707.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And in both cases--just slightly in thecase of Ml and a little more than slightly in the case of M2--the rateof growth in January was above our targets [for the quarter].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that the rate of growth in January was above the targets for the quarter in both cases. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 708.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. But, again, this is a totally differentM2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply acknowledges a different perspective or context.


Passage number 709.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, after we translate them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, after we translate them


Passage number 710.
MR. AXILROD. But the old M2 is running a little lowerrelative to target than we had expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that the old M2 is running lower relative to the target than they had expected.


Passage number 711.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So if we take alternative B, conceivablywe could shade it a bit in the light of our earlier discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a hypothetical situation and considering adjusting their position based on a prior discussion.


Passage number 712.
 But Ithink we're talking--MR. PARTEE. I think what we'd shade is the second quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion but there is no indication of disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 713.
After all, the first quarter--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that would be my inclination.Looking at this in view of what we just decided, the second quarterfigures may be a little high. But we don't have to decide upon thatnow. Otherwise, what you're saying is that "B" is basicallyreiterating what we said before, which does imply a little slowergrowth rate in February and March than we in fact had in January.That's because January was high in M2--and M1 came out a little bit onthe high side, but not very much--because of the money market fundbulge. I would suggest to you, but I don't want to hasten you ifthere's some vital question that I am missing, that just for the firstquarter "B" is reasonable. I think it's not only in line with what wedecided last time, but what we want to continue to decide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily considering different perspectives and discussing possible interpretations or decisions.


Passage number 714.
MR. MAYO. Are we content with a point target here. Is thatthe way we should read this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking whether a point target is satisfactory and suggests considering it as the correct interpretation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 715.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is the central tendency, obviously.Last time we worded it 4 to 5 percent on Ml. We could raise thequestion again of whether we want to continue with that wording. Wesaid 4 to 5 percent on M1 and about 7 percent on M2. I suppose whatwe'd be saying here is that the Committee reiterated--if you want to-75-2/4-5/80word it that way--the 4 to 5 percent range on Ml. And on the new M2basis, we'd shave the target a half point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that there may be a need to reconsider the wording regarding the percentage range for M1 and M2. This implies that there is some contention or disagreement about the current wording.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 716.
MR. MAYO. There could be some argument, Paul, that we'refarther along in the quarter and should narrow that range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. 

The speaker, Mr. Mayo, suggests that there could be an argument for narrowing the range because they are farther along in the quarter. This implies that there might be disagreement or different opinions on whether or not to narrow the range.


Passage number 717.
 Or wecould say 4-3/4 percent, which is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't feel strongly about that.Even on the new technique we're not that close. This is a pure matterof preference; we can word it either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that there is no strong preference on the matter and that it is purely a matter of personal preference.


Passage number 718.
 I don't have any--MS. TEETERS. I would prefer to word it "4 to 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, there is no statement of disagreement or contention. The speaker simply states their preference in wording something a certain way. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 719.
"MR. MORRIS. I think there's a lot to be said for stabilityfrom month to month in these directives, unless there's a major reasonto change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the belief that stability in directives from month to month is beneficial unless there is a significant reason to change them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 720.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Particularly if we keep that same wording,we'd be a little hard pressed to [rationalize] changing it by aquarter percentage point, which one could argue we might want to do onthe basis of the long-term range, all else being equal. But that'ssuch a fine adjustment. More substantively one could argue, givenwhat's going on, that we might want to be tighter or easier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents two potential points of contention or disagreement. 

First, there could be contention about whether or not to change the wording by a quarter percentage point. The author suggests that it might be difficult to rationalize such a change, but others could argue that it is necessary based on the long-term range.

Secondly, there could be different opinions about whether to be tighter or easier in response to current circumstances. The passage mentions that one could argue for either option based on what is going on.


Passage number 721.
MR. COLDWELL. I would argue for alternative C with aborrowing level of $1.6 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the speaker's argument for alternative C with a borrowing level of $1.6 billion.


Passage number 722.
MR. PARTEE. 1.6.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a simple statement or introduction with no conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 723.
MR. COLDWELL. That is about what they had, $1.5 billion, foralternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Coldwell is simply stating a fact about the amount of money allocated for alternative C, which is $1.5 billion.


Passage number 724.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think "C" is clearly saying, given whatwe know now that we didn't know last time, that you want to be alittle tighter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states the speaker's opinion about what "C" is saying. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 725.
MS. TEETERS. I think we should stick to where we were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states the opinion of "Ms. Teeters" regarding sticking to a certain location.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 726.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "B" says that we want to play it aboutwhere we've been playing it; "A" says we distinctly want to be alittle easier. I think those are the choices here.SPEAKER(.). I'd keep "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. "B" and "A" have different opinions on how they want to play it - "B" wants to keep playing it the way they have been, while "A" wants it to be a little easier.


Passage number 727.
"MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think we ought to stay where we wereuntil we go off in a big way, which we'll do soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his opinion about staying in a certain place until they go off in a big way.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 728.
MR. TIMLEN. While I prefer what Phil Coldwell said, I wouldvote for "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention between Mr. Timlen's preference and Phil Coldwell's perspective.


Passage number 729.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other comments. I reallydon't want to rush this, but I think we ought to go to lunch if wedon't have a consensus here. If there's a lot of argument that weshould be distinctly tighter or if the differences are massive, [maybewe should break for lunch]. In fact if we took "C," I think we wouldhave to raise the targeted level of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting the option of going to lunch if there is no consensus or if there are significant differences in opinion.


Passage number 730.
 I don't know what isconsistent, but I---76-2/4-5/80MR. COLDWELL. They have $1.5 billion in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage, as it only states information without any conflicting or contradictory statements.


Passage number 731.
MR. WALLICH. The measure of tightness in the face of higherinflation is not the money supply. It is really the interest rate, orthe real interest rate. I see that as having come down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the measure of tightness in the face of higher inflation is the interest rate. There is no explicit contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 732.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon whether you're looking atthe long-term or the short-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply stating that the answer depends on the specific context being considered (long-term or short-term rates). It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 733.
MR. WALLICH. It doesn't bother me to tighten the moneysupply, not because I think that's the proper response but because Ithink it will have the desired result.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, expresses that tightening the money supply doesn't bother him personally, not because he believes it is the correct response, but because he thinks it will achieve the desired outcome. This statement reflects his personal opinion and reasoning without any contradictory views presented.


Passage number 734.
MR. SCHULTZ. It will have a result all right. It willreally knock housing and autos in the head.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that a specific event will have a negative impact on the housing and auto industries.


Passage number 735.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Willis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I need the specific passage or sentence to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 736.
MR. WINN. Paul, there's another question. Maybe this is notrelevant, but in view of our unwillingness to come to terms with thelagged reserve question and in view of my nervousness with respect toour luck in holding out on this setup, is this perhaps the appropriatetime to raise the question, given the fluctuations in borrowings andthe growing differential between market rates and the discount rate,about changing the rate as part of this picture of [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement between different speakers or positions. It is a question being asked by one person, Mr. Winn.


Passage number 737.
MR. SCHULTZ. You mean the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement from Mr. Schultz.


Passage number 738.
MR. WINN. The discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is a statement by Mr. Winn about the discount rate, without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 739.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's always a relevant policy variable.But to some degree there's a choice. We can be easier on the reserveprovision and raise the discount rate. We can be tighter on thereserve provision and not raise the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents two options without stating a preference or suggesting any disagreement among different parties.


Passage number 740.
MR. WINN. But the danger is that we will lose control in thelatter case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Winn is expressing a concern about losing control in a certain situation, but there is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 741.
MR. WALLICH. I think we should be clear on what overallresponse we want and to me that is expressed in the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing his opinion and sharing what he believes should be the overall response. There is no conflicting point of view presented.


Passage number 742.
MR. COLDWELL. I think we have a chance here to make a nibbleinto that long-term range; and if we give that up now, we may not havea chance later on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Coldwell is expressing his opinion and suggesting that they should take advantage of the opportunity they have now because it might not be available later.


Passage number 743.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the funds rate is theoretically notpredictable under what we're doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that the funds rate is not predictable based on what they are currently doing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 744.
 But if we go toward "C," we arebiasing it, presumably--MR. COLDWELL. On the upper part of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement "But if we go toward 'C,' we are biasing it, presumably--MR. COLDWELL. On the upper part of the range" suggests disagreement or contention. The use of the word "presumably" indicates that there is some uncertainty or disagreement about the potential bias introduced by going toward option "C."


Passage number 745.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --on the upper part or for an increasefrom where we are. Not knowing anything else, I don't know what wouldactually happen. But presumably we would push the level of borrowingsup a bit, which might or might not push the funds rate up. In "B," wewould not push the borrowings up, which might or might not beaccompanied by stability in the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply stating two different possibilities without expressing a clear preference or opinion.


Passage number 746.
-77-2/4-5/80MR. AXILROD. Initially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only states the name "Mr. Axilrod" and mentions nothing about any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 747.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Initially. And it's all going to belooked at--. The last money supply figures we have are weak, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing information about the money supply figures being weak.


Passage number 748.
MR. AXILROD. I am a little hesitant because I haven't seenthe last [figures] on the new basis. On the old basis they were weak,but I haven't seen the new ones on the new weekly seasonal patternyet. The old figures were weak, but we had expected a considerablerebound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The speaker is expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge about the current figures, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 749.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Unintelligible] foreign deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as it includes an unintelligible phrase.


Passage number 750.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know how to [interpret] thesilence of most people. But Governor Coldwell has expressed himselffor wanting to tighten up a little here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker does not know how to interpret the silence of most people, while also mentioning that Governor Coldwell has expressed his desire to tighten up a little in some unspecified aspect. There is no explicit disagreement or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 751.
MS. TEETERS. I would prefer alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses a preference for alternative B without opposing or challenging any other options.


Passage number 752.
MR. PARTEE. It seems to me that we might very well get abulge in money as we get into the spring, for one thing because ofthose [tax] refunds. Isn't that the time to do the tightening ifthere's going to be a tightening--when we have a demonstrated increasein the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an opinion or suggestion by MR. PARTEE.


Passage number 753.
MR. WALLICH. It raises a problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a problem.


Passage number 754.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Given the most recent behavior of thepublished money supply and given the value in some continuity and notwanting a feeling of too much fine-tuning when nothing is clearlygoing wrong, I would suggest that we reiterate the directive that wehad last time which says 4 to 5 percent [on Ml]. I think we have tochange the M2 figure because of the change in the definition of M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement presents a suggestion based on the recent behavior of the published money supply, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 755.
MR. AXILROD. Do you want to add M-1B into the directivealso.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a suggestion or question, indicating that someone is considering whether or not to include M-1B in the directive.


Passage number 756.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could add M-1B into the directive, butI think it ought to be done the same way, with a range, whatever theconsistent number is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 757.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide an analysis or answer based on the information "MR. AXILROD" alone.


Passage number 758.
 In our view it's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You think it's 3/4 of a point higher. Iam surprised there's that much difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing surprise at the difference in opinion between themselves and the other person, but there is no argument or evident disagreement taking place.


Passage number 759.
MR. AXILROD. In that period it was 3/4 of a point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about a certain period, without any indication of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 760.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we could say 4 to 5 percent for M-1Aand 1/2 point higher for M-lB.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a suggestion or possibility, rather than as a conflicting or contrasting viewpoint.


Passage number 761.
MR. AXILROD. About 1/2 point more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about someone named Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 762.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And 6-1/2 percent for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a specific interest rate for M2 without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 763.
 That looks alittle--MR. PARTEE. As newly defined.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it only presents a statement without any contradictory viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 764.
-78-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we'd make it clear that these are thenewly defined numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is simply stating that -78-2/4-5/80 are newly defined numbers, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 765.
MR. COLDWELL. Your borrowing level for "B" would be $1billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It states a fact about the borrowing level for "B" being $1 billion.


Passage number 766.
MR. AXILROD. The average borrowing for January was $1.2billion, and that's what we were suggesting as the initial level. Iwould add that, following that very sharp spurt in borrowing lastweek, partly because the Desk is aiming at [a lower level], borrowinghas been running much lower this week; it's averaging about $892million so far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information about the average borrowing levels for January and the current borrowing levels for the week. There is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 767.
MR. COLDWELL. But consistent with "B," you're talking $1billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states Mr. Coldwell's statement about talking $1 billion in a manner consistent with something mentioned earlier.


Passage number 768.
MR. AXILROD. We mentioned $1.2 billion in the Bluebook.Previously, at the last meeting, $1 billion was discussed; butborrowing seemed to be running higher than that. So it's a fuzzyquestion as to where precisely borrowing is going to want to end up.But we suggested $1.2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply mentioning different figures that were discussed and stating that the exact amount of borrowing is uncertain.


Passage number 769.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The borrowing figure has been very fuzzyrecently, to say the least. Whatever figure we think about now mightbe adjusted fairly promptly in the light of whatever numbers come in.What I am saying, partly in the interest of consistency, is that weare looking for M-1A between 4 and 5 percent and M-1B between 4-1/2and 5-1/2--or we could say 1/2 point higher. I don't know if there'sany preference between those. Then there is somewhat of a technicalproblem in that we don't get the M2 figure as early, but I think itcould be said that we believe this is consistent with an M2 figure, asnewly defined, of about 6-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is discussing numerical figures and expressing uncertainty about the exact numbers, but there is no disagreement being presented.


Passage number 770.
MR. COLDWELL. That says that nothing has happened since thelast time we discussed this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage simply states that nothing has happened since the last discussion. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 771.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Basically, I think it does. That's theissue: Whether we want to take this opportunity to make a change inwhat we laid down a month ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing the author's opinion on whether or not something should be changed. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 772.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I think there has been a distinctperception of a higher rate of inflation by the public. And there hasbeen a challenge on whether or not we are still hanging in tough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "And there has been a challenge on whether or not we are still hanging in tough" suggests that there is a difference of opinion or varying perspectives on the current situation.


Passage number 773.
MR. SCHULTZ. I think alternative B represents somerestraint. Restraint is continuing and we're beginning to see it inthe things that I called attention to. I would not like to see uschange from alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz is expressing his opinion and preference for alternative B without opposing or contradicting any other viewpoint.


Passage number 774.
MR. PARTEE. The only reason we don't have a considerableshortfall is because of that seasonal adjustment. Otherwise, we arehanging with a policy that gives us a shortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the seasonal adjustment affecting the shortfall.


Passage number 775.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is the issue. It involves notjust what we want to do now but has some future implications as to howmuch we want to fine-tune these numbers at monthly intervals or theintervals at which we meet. Sometimes we are going to want to change-79-2/4-5/80them, I think, so I am not completely allergic to it. This would be avery small change between "B" and "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing potential future implications and expressing openness to making small changes.


Passage number 776.
"MR. COLDWELL. It's also partly a perception of front-endloading.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact or observation without presenting any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 777.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or information about their role or actions.


Passage number 778.
 Consistent with the decision we just madefor the long run, "B" has a very slight amount of front-end loading,if you mean by front-end loading going below the--MR. COLDWELL. More restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the decision made is consistent with their previous decision and that "B" has a slight amount of front-end loading. The mention of "MR. COLDWELL" does not suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 779.
MS. TEETERS. Well the January-to-March growth implied by "B"is well below what happened in January. So, by definition, we'regoing to get some tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact and reasoning based on that fact.


Passage number 780.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In any event, we will get a slight amountif these numbers come out that precisely. All these numbers imply aslightly slower rate of growth than what we actually had in January.And I think we could say in the policy record at the very least thatthat implication exists.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is analyzing the numbers and stating that they indicate a slightly slower rate of growth than what was observed in January. They also suggest that this implication exists in the policy record. There is no contradictory or conflicting information presented.


Passage number 781.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, if it's your preference to statethis as ranges of 4 to 5 percent and 4-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, is theimplication that the Desk would aim for the midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Balles suggesting a range for the Desk's aim, but it does not mention any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 782.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think that is true for this period.I have a slight preference for a range just because we are never goingto hit the exact figure anyway--we're not that good--and it justindicates that there's a little [flexibility]. But the implicationclearly is that for now we aim for the midpoint. Now, what we do asthe period [progresses] if we get outside it in either direction andwhether it's practical to get all the way back to the midpoint [is thequestion].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their agreement with a statement and mentioning a slight preference for using a range instead of an exact figure.


Passage number 783.
 There is some flexibility [with a range], but I don't feelstrongly as to whether it's stated as a midpoint or--MR. BALLES. With the understanding, whether it's in therecord or not, that we would in fact [aim] for the midpoint, I for onewould find it acceptable. My preference would be to be a little moreprecise in the instructions to the Desk as to what to aim for andrecognize that we might not be able to hit it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement among the speakers. They are discussing their preferences and suggestions for instructions to the Desk.


Passage number 784.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's separate these two questions.Let me just get a show of hands. Who basically wants to keep themidpoint where we had it, with the modification that means [given] achange in the [M2] definition, but does not want to say that we want adifferent basic [objective for] money growth in the first quarter.This recognizes that that means a slightly lower rate of growth inFebruary and March than we in fact had in January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for a show of hands to see who agrees with keeping the midpoint where it is, but modifying the definition of a change in money growth.


Passage number 785.
MR. ALTMANN. Nine, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions the number of individuals represented by Mr. Altman, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 786.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that seems to be the preference.The subsidiary question--I think it is distinctly subsidiary--iswhether you want to word it the way we did last time, as I suggestedwith the new definitions, or do you want to word it as 4-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It merely discusses different options for wording something.


Passage number 787.
-80-2/4-5/80MS. TEETERS. I would prefer to word it the way we did lasttime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 788.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Could we have a show of hands on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for a show of hands to gauge agreement or support for a particular statement or idea.


Passage number 789.
MR. ALTMANN. Five.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a straightforward statement or remark.


Passage number 790.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we want to word it the other waythen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. It suggests a possible alternative or different approach but does not engage in a disagreement or argument.


Passage number 791.
 It's about evenly split, but I--MR. PARTEE. I think we're better off stating them all as"abouts"--"about 5" and I guess "about 6-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is merely a discussion about a possible way to state certain numbers.


Passage number 792.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. The alternative is sayingabout 4-1/2 percent and--. Well, I think the 6-1/2 percent ought tobe worded differently because we don't have that number right away andwe can't have the implication that we're following that week by weekbecause we just don't have it. So, with that change in language, it's4-1/2 percent for M-1A and 5 percent for M-1B, which I notice ishalfway between "B" and "C." And then "The Committee believes that isconsistent with about 6-1/2 percent for M2 as newly defined.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a change in wording and expressing their opinion on the numbers being discussed.


Passage number 793.
"MR. MAYO. How do you explain, Paul, why we have a pointtarget even with the "about" in front of it for the short run and wehave a range for the long run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is a question asking for an explanation, but there is no conflicting opinion or argument presented.


Passage number 794.
MR. PARTEE. Because that's the way the Manager [operates].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or observation about the way the Manager operates.


Passage number 795.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We run on a reserve path. What we're aimingfor is a reserve path that's built on the midpoint if you pick a rangeor the approximate point if you pick an approximate point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Sternlight is explaining the goal of running on a reserve path, which is to have it built on the midpoint or approximate point, depending on the situation.


Passage number 796.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hate to introduce this again, but whatwe did once was to say 4-1/2 percent--it happened to be 4-1/2[unintelligible]--and it was clear in the record, though I forget justhow, that lower was better than higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion that a lower percentage is better than a higher one.


Passage number 797.
MR. PARTEE. But that still seems to me an instruction to theManager.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 798.
MR. MAYO. It's an instruction to the Desk. Okay, I buythat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they agree with the instruction given.


Passage number 799.
MR. PARTEE. The last paragraph still has [unintelligible]but in the second [to last] paragraph the instruction is to run hisreserve [operations] so as to be consistent with growth of about 4-1/2percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply pointing out a discrepancy or inconsistency in the instructions given in the last paragraph and the second-to-last paragraph. There is no argument or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 800.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with a previous statement or idea.


Passage number 801.
MR. PARTEE. He's going to miss--maybe or probably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating two possibilities, "maybe or probably," regarding someone missing something.


Passage number 802.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I don't really think it makes anydifference what instruction will be given to the Manager [initially].The [question] is whether or not to put people on notice that nobodyis good enough to meet [a precise] target, and we may imply that byusing a small range. But I don't think it's a very significant-81-2/4-5/80question. Shall we vote. It's 4-1/2, 5, and 6-1/2 percent stated as"abouts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing the author's opinion on the significance of a particular question.


Passage number 803.
"MR. PARTEE. Initial borrowing is at $1.2 billion or about$1-1/4 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the initial borrowing amount.


Passage number 804.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Borrowing is at $1-1/4 billion, let's say.Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply presenting a hypothetical borrowing amount.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 805.
MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesGovernor Coldwell NoPresident Kimbrel YesPresident Mayo YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesFirst Vice President Timlen YesGovernor Wallich NoNine for, two against.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes


