Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee March 15, 2011  A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., starting at 8:30 a.m. on Tuesday, March 15, 2011.  Those present were the following:  Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Elizabeth Duke Charles L. Evans Richard W. Fisher Narayana Kocherlakota Charles I. Plosser Sarah Bloom Raskin Daniel K. Tarullo  Janet L. Yellen Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, Sandra Pianalto, and John C. Williams, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee James Bullard, Thomas M. Hoenig, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively William B. English, Secretary and Economist Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Nathan Sheets, Economist  David J. Stockton, Economist James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Steven B. Kamin, Loretta J. Mester, David Reifschneider, Harvey Rosenblum, Daniel G. Sullivan, and David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; William Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors  Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director, Board of Governors Lawrence Slifman and William Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Andrew T. Levin, Senior Adviser, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors; Stephen A. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Joyce K. Zickler, Visiting Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michael G. Palumbo, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Andrea L. Kusko, Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Blake Prichard, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Jeff Fuhrer and Robert H. Rasche, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and St. Louis, respectively David Altig, Richard P. Dzina, Ron Feldman, Craig S. Hakkio, Richard Peach, Glenn D. Rudebusch, Mark E. Schweitzer, and John A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It simply lists the attendees of a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, Minneapolis, Kansas City, New York, San Francisco, Cleveland, and Richmond, respectively Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on  March 15, 2011  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  I would like to begin by welcoming John Williams to the table.  John has been at 18 previous meetings, so it is not a new experience for him, but this is a new position.  We welcome you, and wish you the best of luck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply welcoming John Williams to the table and expressing good wishes for his new position.


Passage number 3.
 MR. TARULLO.  Doesn’t he have to sing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply asks a question about someone singing.


Passage number 4.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  The FOMC song; it’s a great one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 5.
  [Laughter] MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of laughter suggests a lighthearted or positive atmosphere.


Passage number 6.
 WILLIAMS.  I’ve been around long enough to know the tune:  “It’s a Small World.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating their understanding of a familiar saying or situation.


Passage number 7.
”  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Warsh is not with us today, as you can see.  He’ll be leaving at the end of the month, so this would have been his last meeting.  We will, of course, miss Kevin very much.  We will have an opportunity at the April meeting to honor him and say good-bye. Our ever-alert staff has informed me that today is the 75th anniversary of the FOMC.  The first meeting was in March of 1936.  This is meeting number 725.  If we keep going, we will eventually get it right.  [Laughter]  We would like to celebrate, but somebody has taken away the punchbowl.  [Laughter]  However, there will be a “Happy 75th Anniversary” cake at lunch today, so you’ll understand where that is coming from.  Without further folderol, item 1 is financial developments and open market operations.  Let me turn it over to Brian Sack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mostly lighthearted and includes jokes and a mention of a 75th anniversary celebration.


Passage number 8.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Brian.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement thanking someone and asking if there are any questions for Brian and mentioning President Kocherlakota without any context that would indicate disagreement.


Passage number 9.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, I had a question about how the equity premium is being calculated—you take a ratio of some kind of earnings divided by the price index and then subtract out some measure of the risk-free rate, is that how it’s being calculated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 10.
 MR. SACK.  Right.  It’s based on current dividends, a projection of dividend growth that comes from analysts, and market interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not include any conflict or disagreement. It simply provides information about the basis of something without any contradictory statements.


Passage number 11.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m asking because I’ve seen other forecasts that use different measures of earnings, like a 10-year moving average of earnings.  Were you using last year’s earnings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker has seen other forecasts that use different measures of earnings.


Passage number 12.
 MR. SACK.  No.  This uses a forward-looking measure of earnings from analysts’ expectations.  This is the Board staff’s measure that appears in the Tealbook and elsewhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating information about the use of a specific measure of earnings from analysts' expectations.


Passage number 13.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the given passage. The phrase "Vice Chair" by itself does not indicate any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 14.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I should point out that there is probably a bit of overoptimism in the analyst estimates.  If you look at their earnings forecasts over time, they tend to be optimistic in terms of what earnings actually occur.  So that probably causes that equity risk premium measure to be biased upward a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not express contention or disagreement. Instead, it acknowledges that analyst estimates tend to be optimistic and suggests that this positivity may cause the equity risk premium measure to be slightly biased.


Passage number 15.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Tarullo's name and does not provide any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 16.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, I would guess that the primary dealers canvassed by the Desk reveal the most about likely market reactions to tapering or nontapering.  But I have noticed that economists, not traders, seem more evenly split than the primary dealers on whether we are going to taper, so there is at least some difference of view out there in the market.  Are there any factors that would militate in favor of tapering, maybe differences in circumstances between now and last year when we observed the relative dominance of the stock over the flow effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that economists and traders have different views on whether tapering will occur, indicating a difference of opinion in the market.


Passage number 17.
 MR. SACK.  Even in the previous round of asset purchases we weren’t convinced that tapering was necessary, but it seemed like a prudent risk-management strategy.  To the extent that there are flow effects, this would essentially space them out gradually over a period of time. As I said, at that time we thought most of the effects came from the stock, and what we’ve learned looking back on that program gives us even greater confidence in the stock view.  We also feel that we are pushing much less dramatically on the Treasury market than we were on the mortgage-backed securities market.  At one point we owned something on the order of 80 percent of the total outstanding stock of the current coupon that we were buying in MBS.  In Treasuries, looking across all coupons, we own less than 20 percent today.  Given our smaller presence relative to the market and the liquidity of the market, we think we can back away without much or any market impact. Of course, you can make the same argument you made back then.  If there were no costs to tapering, then introducing some schedule of tapering could minimize any risks that are left, even if we think they are small.  But that would be a decision for the Committee about whether it saw any costs to tapering that would outweigh that.  I would argue that there is perhaps a very small benefit to tapering, just for insurance, but it’s very marginal in our view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sack, is discussing the potential benefits and risks of tapering and expressing their own viewpoint.


Passage number 18.
 MR. FISHER.  So the answer to Dan’s question is that the dealers are better informed about the market dynamic and the stock argument than the economists appear to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the dealers are more knowledgeable about the market dynamic and stock argument than economists.


Passage number 19.
 MR. SACK.  It depends on which set of economists you’re talking about, because economists are also involved in responding to the dealer survey.  So at least this set of economists who are watching these issues carefully took the view that we’re not likely to taper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that different economists may have different views on the issue.


Passage number 20.
 MR. FISHER.  May I ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks if they can ask a question.


Passage number 21.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based solely on the given information. More context is needed to assess the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 22.
 MR. FISHER.  Brian and I have talked about this, but not this bluntly—is there any reason why the dealer survey can’t be shared with the FOMC principals as it goes out, so we know what’s in the dealer survey.  After all, Brian, you are operating on our instruction, and the Desk is responsible for collecting the responses.  It would be interesting for us, I think.  I had a chance to look at the survey once, but as a matter of course, is there a reason why we don’t have a dealer survey circulated amongst the principals of the FOMC.  Is there any reason not to.  We might learn something from it.  Do you feel uncomfortable with doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 23.
 MR. SACK.  We are certainly not against receiving input from the FOMC.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker clearly states that they are not against receiving input from the FOMC.


Passage number 24.
 MR. FISHER.  No, not receiving our input, just letting us see what is in the dealer survey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Fisher is not receiving input, but is only able to see what is in the dealer survey.


Passage number 25.
 MR. SACK.  I see.  There may be some consequences about whether it then officially becomes FOMC material; there may be some issues we need to think through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that there may be consequences and issues that need to be considered regarding whether something becomes FOMC material.


Passage number 26.
 MR. BULLARD.  If it gets reported here, is it not FOMC material.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is simply asking a question about the classification of certain information.


Passage number 27.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  After the fact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 28.
  MR. FISHER.  May I just ask that that be considered, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t think it’s a big deal, but I just think it would be helpful for us.  Again, it would bring us up to date.  All of us are intensely interested in the reports that Brian gives us.  It would help us process better the responses, as Brian reports them to the Committee.  And, after all, he is conducting this on behalf of the Committee.  We are members of the Committee.  Unless there is a legal reason not to do it, I’d like it to be considered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 29.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, are you talking about getting the questionnaire in advance or the results.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is simply seeking clarification on what President Fisher is referring to, either the questionnaire or the results.


Passage number 30.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m talking about the questionnaire.  Brian summarizes the results very adequately for meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is simply expressing that Brian's summary of the questionnaire results is sufficient for meetings.


Passage number 31.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, getting the questionnaire in advance.  Why don’t we investigate to see if there are any legal or security issues regarding that possibility.  I think, in general, more transparency within the Committee is better, but I can think of one issue, which is that we don’t want the dealers inferring too much about policy intentions from the questions on the questionnaire.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: Although there are two different perspectives presented in the passage (one suggesting that getting the questionnaire in advance is a good idea and the other offering a potential concern), there is no contention or disagreement between these perspectives. The passage simply acknowledges that there may be a potential issue with dealers inferring policy intentions but does not present any argument or disagreement about it.


Passage number 32.
 MR. FISHER.  The Committee is not surveying the dealers.  I just want to see what the questions are that are being asked to the dealers.  Also, I wouldn’t recommend that we do our own analysis of responses.  That is the responsibility of the Desk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage only states the opinion and preference of Mr. Fisher regarding the responsibilities of the committee and the Desk.


Passage number 33.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We’ll look into that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: "We'll look into that" is a neutral statement that does not express any disagreement or contention. It suggests a willingness to investigate or explore a certain matter, but does not indicate any conflicting opinions or opposition to the topic at hand.


Passage number 34.
  MR. SACK.  In this survey, we were able to make this inference about tapering without adding an additional question because we already had a question about the size and duration of the Treasury program.  To preview what could happen for the next meeting, I think we do intend to ask more extensive questions about exit strategy, very similar to what we did in early 2010.  At that time, we got a very complete reading of their expectations of exit strategy, and I think we would like to update that for the April meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing the survey methodology and mentioning future plans to ask more extensive questions about exit strategy.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No explanation is provided in the passage, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 36.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just want to follow up on the tapering issue.  I was a little surprised that it has become the default that we would end abruptly, and I thought that, as you described, the end of the MBS purchase program was successfully tapered.  There was a lot of market talk at the time that if the Committee didn’t continue MBS purchases, mortgage rates would go up sharply.  That was effectively mitigated by our tapering program, and not too much happened when we pulled out of that market.  I thought that the default would be that we would do something similar.  I understand the arguments that you just made, but why not do something similar, because otherwise you are exposed to adverse events that would occur in the first two weeks of July, and then would be blamed on the Committee, and then the Committee would be under pressure to reinstitute purchases in order to get those yields to move in the way that markets thought they should move.  So I thought that that tapering would be the default, but it seems like it has gone the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing surprise and questioning the decision not to taper.


Passage number 37.
 MR. SACK.  Well, I’ll just repeat that I think there is perhaps a marginal benefit to tapering to provide insurance against a market outcome, even if we don’t expect it.  But our judgment is that it’s a fairly marginal benefit at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion and acknowledges that it may only have a marginal benefit.


Passage number 38.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions for Brian.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage only states that there are other questions for Brian and mentions President Lacker without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 39.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, the markets group did a nice piece on the effect of the increase in the FDIC premium on funding conditions.  My understanding is that that’s likely to discourage several large institutions in the United States in how they conduct arbitrage of borrowing in the RP market, and that they are planning to reduce their reserve holdings with us.  Also, I understand that a large part of the increase in reserve holdings in the past several weeks has been among U.S. affiliates of foreign institutions, and that they seem to be funding that increase with borrowings from their parent.  I was wondering if you had any insights into this trend, which seems likely to continue, and whether you think that it is going to have any impact on how the effect of the FDIC premium plays out in U.S. funding markets and, in particular, the shift to funding these reserve holdings of foreign institutions through parents.  There’s this rabbit hole, and you wonder from where the parents are funding the increased dollar holdings.  And is that affecting the U.S. money market.  Does that end up being funded by money market mutual funds that are holding an increasing share of foreign bank paper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states some observations and asks for insights into certain trends. There is no explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 40.
 MR. SACK.  I don’t have a lot of insight into the distribution of reserves between the domestic and the foreign entities.  I think that is something we would have to look at.  In terms of the FDIC fee, you are correct:  the assessment fee will come into place April 1, and it will raise the cost of keeping reserves on the balance sheet and doing the arbitrage that should keep other short-term interest rates relatively close to the interest rate on reserves.  We anticipate that this could widen the gap between market interest rates and the interest rate on reserves by a couple of basis points.  That is essentially what we see in the markets.  If you look out to federal funds futures contracts in the middle of the year, they are trading around 14 basis points.  That’s a couple of basis points below where the effective federal funds rate is today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information and explaining the potential impact of the FDIC fee on the gap between market interest rates and the interest rate on reserves.


Passage number 41.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions for Brian.  [No response.]  Okay.  Seeing none, we need to vote to ratify domestic open market operations since January.  May I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The lack of response and the request for a motion indicate a smooth and unanimous process.


Passage number 42.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Ms. Yellen was moved by something, without providing any further context or details.


Passage number 43.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  Thank you.  We turn now to item 2, the economic situation, and I will turn to Dave Stockton.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be determined by the absence of any words or phrases that indicate disagreement, such as "objection" or any arguments presented. The statement "thank you" also suggests a cooperative or agreeable tone.


Passage number 44.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there questions for our colleagues.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude and asks if there are any questions for the colleagues.


Passage number 45.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask a question both of Dave and of Nathan.  Dave, you gave a rather extended monologue on inflationary pressures, and you concluded by referring to the TIPS-based measures that Brian talked about, and added a comment about the Michigan survey.  Would you say that long-term inflationary expectations remain stable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher is simply asking a question to Dave and Nathan based on their previous statements. The tone of the passage is neutral and does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 46.
 MR. STOCKTON.  I think I would at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I think I would at this point" simply indicates the speaker expressing their opinion without any conflicting views being mentioned.


Passage number 47.
 MR. FISHER.  Based on those new data points, you still feel that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if the person still feels the same way based on the new data points.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 48.
 MR. STOCKTON.  Yes.  I mean, reasonably stable.  As Brian noted, we don’t really see much evidence yet in the TIPS markets that there’s been a significant shift in inflation expectations.  What we have on the upside on inflation expectations comes from the first half of March in the Michigan survey.  Even those longer-term expectations tend to be sensitive to gasoline prices.  As I indicated, even if you look at the increase in the 5- to-10-year ahead, and make some reasonable adjustment for the fact that near-term expectations have increased significantly, that upward movement, even if you abstract from that, might be one tenth or two, which is within the range in which things have been moving.  But I think that certainly is going to bear watching going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Stockton, is suggesting that there is not significant evidence of a significant shift in inflation expectations based on the TIPS markets and the Michigan survey. However, he also acknowledges that longer-term expectations can be sensitive to gasoline prices and suggests that the increase in near-term expectations may have influenced the upward movement. This suggests a potential difference in interpretation and analysis of the data.


Passage number 49.
   MR. FISHER.  Nathan, you talked about Japan in terms of the impact of the devastation particularly on the Japanese equity markets.  Could you give us just a first glance—and I realize this needs to be studied—as to what kind of impact it might have on the price of key commodities, such as lumber, iron ore, and steel, that will likely be imported to rebuild Japan.  And then the supply constrictions on autos and other products that they do export, or the price effect, say, on semiconductors.  Have you had a chance to at least initially think that through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is asking Nathan for his thoughts and analysis regarding the impact of the devastation on the Japanese equity markets and the potential impact on commodity prices and supply constrictions.


Passage number 50.
 MR. SHEETS.  Given the rapidly moving events, any answers to those questions are still highly speculative.  If they’re able to quickly get a handle on this situation, and it is similar to what we saw with Kobe, then I would say those kinds of effects would be minimal.  But if the situation continues to escalate—for what it’s worth, that seems to be the message we are getting from the Nikkei.  Following the Kobe quake, the response was very similar to what we saw yesterday in equity markets.  But then there was a modest bounceback, rather than the 10 percent plunge.  So it seems to me that there is a lot of concern.  If anything now, the risks are tilted to the downside.  Substantial disruptions there would require substantial rebuilding, and as you suggest, would probably put some downward pressure on commodity prices in the very near term when they weren’t being imported there.  But over the medium to long run, as they were rebuilding, it could be a substantial upward impetus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a cautious and speculative opinion about the potential effects of the situation.


Passage number 51.
 MR. STOCKTON.  We would probably expect to see some upward pressure in the tech sector from the supply chain disruptions that occurred.  I think Japan provides a significant fraction of the wafers that are used by Taiwan to actually punch out the semiconductor chips.  Almost certainly, there will be some upward pressure in that area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It simply states a potential expected outcome without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 52.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 53.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In reading the Tealbook discussion of the inflation projection, I wasn’t surprised, but it does rely heavily on resource slack.  Maybe it’s the fact that the section on resource utilization immediately precedes the inflation discussion that reminds us of that.  I know that many around the table are uncomfortable with this type of inflation forecasting, and I know that some have suggested that we focus a little more attention on growth rates.  You don’t emphasize growth rates so much for inflation determination.  Would you care to discuss the evidence and provide a little bit of a guide as to how we might think about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 54.
 MR. STOCKTON.  I wouldn’t want to overstate the importance of slack.  In the models that we use, in terms of year-to-year variation in core inflation rates, slack still only accounts for a small fraction of those year-to-year variations.  But we do think there is evidence to support the view that levels of slack, especially when they are as large as they currently are, place downward pressure on inflation.  In the context of stable inflation expectations, however, as that slack is taken up, there will be some upward pressure on inflation.  This is not an accelerationist view of price determination that underlies the basic forecast. In at least some of the models, there has been evidence that there are some speed effects.  They tend to be small, and they’re not the dominant factors.  You can see speed effects most importantly operating through things like intermediate materials prices, which are set in more auction-type markets, and as demand improves, it isn’t the level of slack that matters, it’s the actual change in supply and demand that matters.  That shows through in the initial phases of recovery when you are getting a significant pickup in the industrial sector—there are more-rapid gains in intermediate materials prices, at least for a time.  Then, of course, when that initial phase is over, those price increases generally tend to slow down.  That is what we call the chief speed-type effect, and that effect is built into our basic forecast here.  I think we’d look at both of those things, but clearly we do believe that the evidence in both wage and price determination is that the level of slack is an important determinant of prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It presents an explanation of the importance of slack in inflation rates and acknowledges the evidence supporting this view.


Passage number 55.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Bullard without providing any further information or indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 56.
 MR. BULLARD.  I just have a couple of questions, Mr. Chairman.  We often say with the Michigan survey that it is very sensitive to gas prices.  So what is the correlation between gasoline prices and the movements in those expectations.  Do we know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 57.
 MR. STOCKTON.  If you run regressions to take a look at the importance of food and energy prices, there is a little bit of excess sensitivity, but mostly the coefficients on those regressions suggest that gasoline prices affect price expectations in the same way that gasoline prices affect overall inflation.  So there tends to be in the short run some excess sensitivity, but over the longer term, not so much.  We had a picture in yesterday’s pre-FOMC briefing of both the short-run and longer-term responses to the Michigan survey, and you can clearly see short-run inflation expectations responding quite significantly to gasoline price spikes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is discussing the results of regression analysis and presenting the findings without any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 58.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  I’ve said this myself many times, so I’m very familiar with it.  But does it matter.  One of the things that we often say about movements in key prices is that it might feed through to expectations and more general price increases, and this is the danger, and this is what we’re worried about.  Should we be dismissing that, or should we be taking that on board as an important indicator.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is acknowledging a point that he agrees with and is questioning whether it should be disregarded or taken into consideration as an important indicator.


Passage number 59.
 MR. STOCKTON.  I think to the extent that you think the rise in oil prices or gasoline prices will be temporary, that would be an important piece of your forecast of how those expectations will evolve.  If you think that’s not going to be temporary, then you might think you’d get a more persistent rise in inflation expectations, if those prices continue to rise at the rapid pace they have of late.  You’re right, it’s the level of inflation expectations that matters.  It’s not the source.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 60.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  My other question is:  Is slack large in Europe, and is that going to temper inflation developments in Europe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking a question about the level of slack and its potential impact on inflation in Europe.


Passage number 61.
 MR. SHEETS.  Our reading of the output gap in the euro area is somewhere between 3 and 3½ percent of GDP.  Certainly, our feeling is that that would be a factor weighing on underlying inflation in Europe.  The spike that they are seeing is very much driven by various kinds of energy prices.  Underlying inflation, core inflation there, is running about 1¼ percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an explanation of the speaker's reading of the output gap and its impact on inflation in Europe.


Passage number 62.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context about Governor Tarullo that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 63.
 MR. TARULLO.  Nathan, doesn’t that vary a good bit, though, by country.  That is, the amount of slack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Tarullo regarding the variation of slack by country.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 64.
 MR. SHEETS.  Absolutely.  That figure that I cited was for our estimate of the euro area as a whole.  Now, the ECB may have a more narrow assessment of how much slack there is, but German unemployment is down relative to before the crisis by 2½ percentage points, while Spanish unemployment is up 10 or 12 percentage points.  So there is a dramatic difference between the peripherals and particularly Germany.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement about the level of slack in the euro area and the dramatic difference between peripheral countries and Germany in terms of unemployment rates.


Passage number 65.
 MR. PLOSSER.  So what would you say about the United Kingdom, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about the United Kingdom without any additional context.


Passage number 66.
 MR. SHEETS.  Which bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation:  The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing statements. It simply states "MR. SHEETS. Which bit." without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 67.
 MR. PLOSSER.  The amount of slack versus the inflation rates in what you’d call underlying core there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Plosser discussing the relationship between slack and inflation rates in underlying core.


Passage number 68.
 MR. SHEETS.  We also see a fair amount of slack in the United Kingdom.  Our view is that it’s been special factors that have driven up U.K. inflation—depreciation of the pound, taxes, energy price increases, and so forth—but we have been telling that story now for quite some time, and the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England has been telling that story for quite some time.  I think all of us are getting a little bit uncomfortable as to whether there may not be something more there with the inflation story as headline inflation reaches the 4 percent range.  My reading of the breakevens for the United Kingdom is that I do see a gentle upward climb in those breakevens, and I think there maybe has been a little bit of increase in inflation expectations.  They have a very complicated monetary policy conundrum there.  I think it’s striking that at their last meeting they got dissents on both sides:  They had two folks who were dissenting for tighter policy, and one who was dissenting for easier policy.  They are in a very difficult situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It merely describes the current situation and viewpoints of Mr. Sheets regarding inflation and monetary policy in the United Kingdom.


Passage number 69.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard, were you done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply confirming whether President Bullard has finished speaking.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 70.
 MR. BULLARD.  I just wanted to ask a follow-up question.  Is regional variability in unemployment in Europe different than it is in the United States.  There is regional variability in the United States, with significant differences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage is suggesting that there may be differences in regional variability in unemployment between Europe and the United States, which means there is a potential for contention or disagreement on this topic.


Passage number 71.
 MR. SHEETS.  I’m not sure we have a state counterpart to Spain, for instance, but there is a fair amount of variability in Europe, and there is a fair amount of variability across the U.S. states.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that there is variability in Europe and across U. S. states.


Passage number 72.
 MR. BULLARD.  Maybe not at the state level, but probably at the county level—very high unemployment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Bullard about the possibility of high unemployment at the county level.


Passage number 73.
 MR. SHEETS.  Yes, sure, if you go down there, but then the counties would be a smaller, more concentrated geographical area than one of these countries, with the possible exception of Luxembourg.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and adding some clarification with the phrase "with the possible exception of Luxembourg."


Passage number 74.
 MR. BULLARD.  And Liechtenstein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based on the given information.


Passage number 75.
 MR. FISHER.  San Marino.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is any contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 76.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Trichet has been making this argument—and I would just inject that I don’t find it completely plausible—Germany is 2½ percentage points below the pre-crisis level in terms of unemployment.  Spain is 12 percentage points above the pre-crisis level.  They don’t have a common fiscal authority.  They don’t have common unemployment or retirement funds.  I think the problems that they face in terms of heterogeneity seem to me to be much deeper than ours, although we certainly do have some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing the belief that the problems faced by Germany and Spain in terms of heterogeneity are deeper than those faced by the speaker's own country.


Passage number 77.
 MR. BULLARD.  I’m not sure what the numbers are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard simply states that he is unsure about the numbers, without expressing any opposition or conflicting views.


Passage number 78.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement based on the given information. The passage only mentions "President Lacker" without providing any context or further details.


Passage number 79.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to ask more on the staff’s thoughts on this dilemma about oil price futures projecting a return to low rates of change, and yet they keep getting it wrong.  Just as a context for this, a stylized characterization of the four years from the end of 2003 to the end of 2007 is that core ran 2¼.  We kept seeing energy price increases.  We kept thinking they were about to flatten out, but they didn’t, and we ended up with overall inflation of 3 percent averaged over four years.  You might judge that something of a failure, at least a disappointment.  So what kind of scope do you see for the line of reasoning that would say, “The futures markets may say this, but let’s act as if they are going to get it wrong and reduce the target core we want to try and run on a sustained basis, just to leave room for an upward trend in the relative price of energy.”  We get these financial stability reports, by the way, that routinely question the market’s assessment of a whole range of asset classes.  Why don’t we do that with the oil futures prices as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply raising a question and asking for the staff's thoughts on the matter.


Passage number 80.
 MR. SHEETS.  That’s a broad question.  Obviously it’s one that we’re struggling mightily with.  Looking at the path of oil prices and other commodity prices over the past decade, it does seem like there’s a trend there, and I think we could go back over the various Greenbooks and Tealbooks over the last 10 years, and essentially each time the staff has said, “It’s going to flatten out.”  One point here is that we have looked far and wide for other frameworks that would dominate the futures markets, and we haven’t found anything better.  We present the futures markets in our forecast as a useful intellectual benchmark.  I would say that if the Committee’s view is that prices and the risk to oil are skewed upward relative to what we’re writing down, the Committee is free to incorporate that into its deliberations, but we are just trying to provide an intellectual benchmark that’s defensible and coherent for oil prices.  That said, we’re continuing to look, and over the next six or eight weeks we are going to look even harder than we ever have before, into other ways and other approaches that we might use to forecast oil prices and other commodity prices.  In particular, it strikes me as if there might be something about China’s share in the global economy that might be useful to us in doing these forecasts.  As you say, it’s a dilemma; it’s a challenge.  Obviously, as asset-like entities, commodity prices are very, very hard to forecast, and consistent with that, the essential random-walk nature of the futures forecast is more or less what you would expect for that kind of a thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the difficulties and challenges of forecasting oil and commodity prices, and is acknowledging that they have not found a better framework than the futures markets. They mention that if the Committee has a different view, they are free to incorporate it, but the speaker is simply providing an intellectual benchmark. There is no argument or disagreement presented in this passage.


Passage number 81.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that President Lockhart had a two-hander, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 82.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Nathan, regarding the predictive power of futures markets, I had the impression that they had individual idiosyncrasies.  In the case of short-term oil futures, my sense was that the spot price and the storage cost create the curve.  The futures price is obviously different than the spot because of the addition of the storage cost.  Whereas for a food commodity, it would be more a question of predicting supply and demand, with maybe something else factored in.  In foreign exchange, we know that futures prices are no prediction of the future spot rate; they’re just interest rate differentials.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding and observations about different types of futures markets.


Passage number 83.
 MR. SHEETS.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage consists of a statement made by Mr. Sheets, and there is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 84.
 MR. LOCKHART.  To what extent is using just commodity futures as a benchmark a valid approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question asking for an extent of validity in using commodity futures as a benchmark. It does not include any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 85.
 MR. SHEETS.  As I noted, we have looked at a variety of other approaches and assessed their forecasting power and also their biasness or lack of biasness in forecasts, and we have not found anything that dominates the futures curves.  The way we’ve characterized the futures curves, and I think it’s the correct characterization, is that they are not very good, but they’re at least as good as everything else that we’ve looked at so far, but we’re going to continue to look.  It’s also true that if you look at the disaggregated futures curves, as you’ve indicated, you get heterogeneous stories for heterogeneous commodities.  For instance, as I mentioned, right now many of the food commodities, given these weather shocks, are expecting declines going forward, and that seems to be a perfectly plausible, perfectly reasonable expectation.  It’s the best we’ve got.  There are underlying stories that are useful in helping us think through what is going on in these markets.  We’ll keep looking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the findings and observations of the speaker regarding their assessment of the futures curves and the usefulness of disaggregated futures curves for different commodities.


Passage number 86.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name of a person, President Plosser, and does not provide any context or information that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 87.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Just to follow up, Dennis’s points about both costs of carry and storage have become important elements in how you think about the actual path of the futures curve.  Have you looked at predictive content of the overall shift in the curve as opposed to the level.  Because I thought there was evidence that when the whole curve moves, it tells you something more than the path, and I think that is what Dennis was getting at.  I wonder if you had any thoughts about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply asking for clarification and discussing a point made by someone named Dennis.


Passage number 88.
 MR. SHEETS.  In some sense, that is the random-walk nature, that these whole paths are typically moving around just for the spot price. The question is how much in addition to a random walk we are getting from the futures curve.  It is just a little bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply describing the random-walk nature of the spot price and discussing the additional influence of the futures curve.


Passage number 89.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I don’t know whether it’s a random walk or not.  We’re talking about predictability here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 90.
 MR. SHEETS.  Yes, that’s right, how much additional predictive power do we get in the futures curve relative to the random walk.  And the answer is, it’s a pretty darn close call.  I think that is consistent with your point that it is the movement of the up and down of these curves, but that that movement is generally being determined by what’s going on in the spot market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It presents a statement and a subsequent agreement with that statement, indicating consensus between the speaker (Mr. Sheets) and the person being addressed.


Passage number 91.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you did not provide any passage for me to analyze. Please provide the relevant passage so I can assist you further.


Passage number 92.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Nathan, I wish you the best of luck in your search.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing well wishes to Nathan in his search, which indicates a positive and supportive attitude.


Passage number 93.
  [Laughter] MR. STOCKTON.  If he’s successful, he won’t be sitting here anymore either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that if the person is successful, they won't be present in the current situation. The inclusion of laughter indicates a lighthearted tone.


Passage number 94.
 [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let me put it this way.  If there was an easy solution to be found—the private sector has hundreds of people that have searched everything to find it.  So you have to be skeptical that there’s a better way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses skepticism about finding an easy solution and suggests that the private sector has extensively searched for it.


Passage number 95.
 MR. SHEETS.  Right.  The question is, can we find a better benchmark to condition the forecast on.  I think that’s the question, which may or may not have better RSME kinds of properties or better biasness or unbiasness properties.  But are we conditioning the forecast on the right set of assumptions.  My guess is that I’m going to come back at the next meeting and say, “Look.  Here’s the futures curve.  This is what we’re conditioning on.”  We want to keep looking, but I’m not naïve about it either.  I agree with what you’re saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 96.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 97.
 MR. BULLARD.  I just have one more question, Mr. Chairman.  In your discussion, Nathan, you talked about weather disturbances and food prices.  Do we have independent evidence that global weather patterns have been particularly different from other years, other than looking at just prices of food products and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement or contention. The speaker is questioning whether there is independent evidence to support a claim made by Nathan regarding global weather patterns and their impact on food prices.


Passage number 98.
 MR. SHEETS.  You’re pressing me here.  My expertise in meteorology is limited.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges the limitations of their expertise in the field of meteorology.


Passage number 99.
 MR. BULLARD.  I thought that there are a lot of data on this, and we could actually check that independently instead of just relying on the stories that are told in financial markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 100.
 MR. SHEETS.  Right.  There are numerous anecdotes.  In addition, we are being affected by “La Nina” kinds of developments, which have been extraordinary and unusual, and it is reasonable to expect that they are going to normalize in coming years.  We have been in touch with the USDA and others so that what we’re saying is consistent with what other agencies are saying, what other analysts are saying, and the broad view of the markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing different factors that are affecting a certain situation and mentions that their views are consistent with other agencies and analysts.


Passage number 101.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else.  [No response.]  All right, thank you very much.  We’re ready now for the economic go-round, and we’ll start with President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that there is no response and proceeds with the next topic.


Passage number 102.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As we collected inputs from our business contacts and directors over the last two weeks in the Sixth District, we probed especially on economic growth assumptions, including changes in outlooks as a result of oil prices, business cost pressures and pass-through intentions, and on planned investment, including motivations for expenditures.  Most sources described the economy as stronger and increasingly self-sustaining but voiced concern about the potential adverse effects of continued upward pressure on oil prices.  Contacts representing industries with little connection—namely, the auto industry, food retailing, and tourism—point to $4 per gallon gasoline as a tipping point for consumer budgets.  According to these sources, at $4, significant changes in consumer spending behavior should be anticipated.  Some contacts expressed concern particularly about the region’s economy continuing to be weighed down by excess residential real estate and the potential for resumption of falling home prices.  Our questioning on actual business cost pass-through from rising commodity prices was mixed and inconclusive.  However, a number of contacts across a wide spectrum of businesses are at least entertaining the idea of trying to push higher costs along.  A few are confident they will be successful, but most are taking a wait-and-see approach.  We heard little from our contacts about continuing disinflation, and it’s clear to us the tone of the conversation around inflation has shifted to upside inflation risk and, in their view, reality. There are a few upside developments to report.  Industrial activity is strong in the Sixth District.  Air travel nationally, both business and pleasure, is much improved from this time last year, and wage pressures remain light, particularly for lower-skilled and less-educated workers.  While conditions across business and industrial sectors differ, most have evidenced improvement in the last few months, and business executives are cautiously positioning their companies for higher business activity.  The exceptions are largely associated with homebuilding, commercial real estate construction, and building materials. Turning to my outlook, my baseline outlook looks essentially the same today as it did the last time we met.  I continue to expect the economy to gradually gain strength over the course of this year and next.  My growth path for the economy is more modest than the Tealbook’s.  The difference owes largely to my assumption that businesses will continue to be cautious regarding capital spending for business expansion as well as new net hiring.  This results in a more modest rise in private spending over the forecast horizon. I have not revised my inflation outlook and still see the underlying price trend on a path consistent with our price stability mandate.  That said, I think the price conditions, as opposed to inflation conditions, are creating quite tricky circumstances that present communications challenges.  Nonmonetary pressures on prices—that is, commodities’ supply and demand, for example, affected by weather—combined with rising global demand from strong economic growth in emerging markets and accelerating recovery in advanced economies, combined with rising risk premiums in petroleum markets reflecting unrest in the MENA region are fueling increasingly vocal inflation anxiety.  My conclusion is, all indications of expectations bear very close watching. Anticipating the policy round discussion of statement language, let me add that my reading of the core inflation data since November leads me to the view that the word “subdued” may not aptly characterize what has occurred.  As I see it, there has been an upward firming of the inflation trend as was intended. My sense of the balance of risks associated with my economic growth projection is reasonably balanced.  It is worth mentioning, however, that prior to the emergence of the Middle East–North Africa unrest and the resulting rise of oil prices, I was moving toward an outlook that acknowledged more upside than downside risk to growth.  Two downside considerations are in my mind returning the scales to balance.  As I said, oil prices and, second, a resumed decline in home prices could damp household confidence and sap some of the strength coming from consumer spending. I think the risks around the inflation projection are also balanced, but here I make that judgment with more apprehension.  While longer-term inflation expectations measured by TIPS or household survey data are still inside their range of the past five or six years, they are at the upper ends of those ranges.  It seems to me, therefore, a lot depends on those expectations remaining steady.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily presents information and observations about the economy and the speaker's outlook.


Passage number 103.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude towards President Rosengren.


Passage number 104.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since our last meeting, we have received data which, after taking into account the noise created by inclement weather, seems largely in line with what we had been expecting.  What had not been anticipated at the last meeting were the changes sweeping the Middle East that have contributed to higher oil prices or the horrible tragedy unfolding in Japan.  It’s probably too soon to know whether developments in the Middle East will cause a temporary spike, which would have very little effect on the outlook, or a more permanent change in the price of oil.  However, assuming that oil prices remain elevated and adding to that the greater degree of near-term fiscal restraint under discussion in recent weeks, the net effect of these changes from the past meeting is to leave my inflation forecast little changed, but to reduce somewhat my outlook for the future growth in the economy. Like the work presented in President Evans’s analysis, work done by Boston staff suggests that the impact of the oil supply shocks will have minimal impact on the underlying inflation rate in the medium term.  This econometric result likely derives from a number of factors.  First, commodities account for a relatively small share of our economy, as a labor-intensive service sector has become more important.  Second, with longer-term inflation expectations well anchored, perhaps due to the greater confidence in the Federal Reserve’s commitment to controlling inflation, a change in the relative price of commodities is unlikely to pass through into final goods prices.  Finally, with significant slack in labor markets likely to remain in the economy for some time, it is unlikely that rising commodity prices will have much impact on wages and salaries. Together, these factors likely account for why over the past two decades even large food and energy price movements have had minimal impact on underlying rates of inflation.  Thus, while recent food and energy shocks will cause total measures of inflation to diverge temporarily from core, we expect total inflation to return to the core inflation rate over time, leaving little or no imprint on the core inflation rate.  Given that core measures remain well below 2 percent and that there remains significant slack in the economy, I expect it to take some time before the inflation rate settles at 2 percent. While the effects of oil price shocks on inflation are likely to be quite modest, they are likely to have a contractionary effect on economic growth.  Boston modeling implies that recent increases in oil prices will shave roughly 0.4 percentage point off GDP growth and cause the unemployment rate to be roughly 0.2 higher than it would be absent the oil shock.  In addition, if the Congress were to implement additional spending cuts this year of $50 billion, that would also reduce GDP by roughly the same magnitude as the oil shock.  While I’m pleased that the incoming data have been broadly consistent with a mild recovery, the contractionary effects of the oil shock and fiscal austerity, coupled with continued risks from housing, state and local spending, and international events, have persuaded me that continued accommodative monetary policy is necessary to support this modest recovery and to provide some insurance should any of these risks materialize.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is presenting his analysis and opinions based on the data and factors he has observed. He discusses the impact of oil prices and fiscal restraint on inflation and economic growth, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 105.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 106.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To Nathan, I want to just suggest that when I became a member of the FOMC, I had a friend give me a crystal ball to use, and over the years it has done just about as well as our models.  [Laughter]  So feel free, if it would be any help to you. I’m going to focus on my District because the District is moving pretty much in parallel with the nation, with a couple of exceptions, which I’ll mention.  The District is continuing to expand.  It has since the last FOMC meeting in several areas.  Our labor market is improving.  In fact, in some of the high-skilled areas, we’re seeing some indications of shortages.  But other than that, of course, we have a lot of slack there as well.  District manufacturing activity continues to strengthen, thanks to export activity.  Our input costs have risen further, and a few contacts are indicating that they are purchasing additional raw materials way in advance, as they try to anticipate higher future costs.  More District contacts also reported higher prices for finished goods, and expectations for higher finished goods prices increased sharply in our last survey. One exception, of course, is energy, which in our region is picking up a lot of momentum as they shift from gas to oil, and we’re seeing a lot of investment activities in those areas, and some increase in employment in those areas as well.  In addition, strong global demand and tight inventories continue to push our agricultural commodity prices up, and we are seeing increasing amounts of interest from money managers and others in not only our commodity side, but in the land side as well.  As I have been pounding away at the fact that our land speculation is getting more out of hand, my most recent example is a pretty strong signal that we’re heading in the wrong direction:  In a conference we had on lending in Omaha a few weeks ago, one of our staff was talking with one of the possible lenders that was looking at activities; the individual was in lending from Los Angeles and felt that lending in movies was too risky and was turning to land.  They were actually looking for land deals in the region, so it’s in trouble.  Other than that, the inflation outlook continues to be modest but building, and we will continue to watch that in our region as well; I think it is very similar to what we’re seeing at the national level.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about their district's economic conditions and trends.


Passage number 107.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Evans.


Passage number 108.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any specific information or statements that can be subject to debate or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone referred to as "President Pianalto" to someone else.


Passage number 109.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Over the past few weeks, I have been hearing more comments from my business contacts about the need to begin thinking about tightening monetary policy.  In part, these comments reflect continuing improvements in the economy.  But, more importantly, the recent surge in oil prices has heightened concerns about inflation. I realize that we have differences of opinion about the outlook for GDP growth over the next few years, but I think the growing public attention on inflation merits a careful review of our inflation projections.  So this morning I am going to focus my comments on why I expect core inflation rates to only drift up gradually from current levels and to remain below 2 percent for the next couple of years. I see three key pieces of evidence to support my moderate inflation outlook—the current low underlying inflation rate, limited pass-through of commodity prices, and low inflation expectations that are embedded in financial markets.  On the first point, the current low underlying inflation rate, we have only recently seen clear evidence that the disinflation that started in late 2008 has ended.  I could use a variety of statistics to make this point, but I think the median CPI illustrates this point particularly well.  As recently as late 2008, the median CPI was running at 3 percent.  It bottomed out in the third quarter of last year at just ½ percent, and today the increase in the median CPI stands at 0.8 percent.  While the disinflation trend appears to have ended, the median CPI and other core inflation measures have bottomed out substantially below 2 percent.  In light of the fact that history shows us that core inflation is highly persistent, and research has shown that core measures are superior predictors of future inflation, this is one set of reasons that I think underlying inflation will likely remain moderate. On the second issue of commodity prices, my staff conducted an analysis of the effects of larger-than-expected increases in energy and commodity prices that persist through 2012.  Their results show only limited effects from these persistent shocks on core inflation.  These results are consistent with the estimates from models like FRB/US and the one that President Evans used in his memo.  The most important result from these analyses is that this Committee has time to offset any upside surprises in inflation if we were to see such a scenario develop.  The modest pass-through reflected in my inflation forecast is also consistent with the anecdotes that I am hearing from my business contacts.  My contacts have been talking a lot about trying to pass along input price increases.  And while many businesses would like to pass on commodity price increases, my business contacts have also revealed that there are important limits to pass-through.  The CEO of a construction firm reported that many construction contractors are simply eating cost increases because of the hypercompetitive construction market.  His view is that some of these contractors will not make it, but they also would not survive if they raised prices.  A plumbing fixture company described in detail the engineering process that allows them to experience a large increase in copper prices and then, through efficiencies and product redesign, convert that into minor price increases at the wholesale level.  At that point, they evaluate how much of a price increase a particular customer will tolerate, and right now it’s not much.  I read the comments from my business contacts as indicating that, yes, firms are interested in passing on price increases, and some are succeeding.  But the dynamics that limit pass-through help to explain why consumer price increases have been so limited after months of commodity price increases. Turning to inflation expectations, my third point in the inflation outlook, the big worry is that if commodity prices persist, they could push up long-term inflation expectations, leading to higher core inflation over the medium term.  This is well represented in the Tealbook’s “persistent rise in inflation” scenario.  In addition to monitoring inflation expectations five and more years out, I like to consider the expectations over a policy horizon of just three years.  The Cleveland Fed inflation expectation model identifies inflation expectations, real interest rate, and risk premium components over a three-year horizon.  Our model shows that inflation expectations remain low, although expected inflation over the next three years does show an increase of 30 basis points from December to March for the headline CPI.  However, that 30 basis point increase is front loaded, with most of the inflation expectations increase occurring over the next 12 months when we would expect pretty significant headline inflation numbers, just on the basis of recent energy prices.  In fact, since December, our estimate of inflation expectations for the coming 12 months has increased by nearly ½ percentage point.  In the next two years, though, expected inflation stays 20 to 30 basis points below 2 percent. I think the evidence that I have discussed supports a baseline outlook where underlying inflation is only gradually increasing.  However, I certainly recognize that the risks to the inflation outlook are numerous, and that they may be growing.  The heightened inflation concern expressed by some of my business contacts is worrisome.  These views may make inflation expectations more volatile, particularly when the nation is facing significant, if likely transitory, commodity shocks.  This concern has caused me to shift the balance of risks on inflation to the upside.  The risks to the outlook for economic growth have also expanded with the tragic developments in Japan and continued unrest in the Middle East.  However, with the recent labor market news surprises to the upside, I still see the risks to growth as balanced.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own analysis and opinions on the inflation outlook, acknowledging potential risks, but there is no mention of opposition or disagreement from others.


Passage number 110.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is simply a polite expression of gratitude from President Plosser.


Passage number 111.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I just want to comment that we will be talking about the exit strategy at the next meeting.  Bill, is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker simply wants to comment on the topic that will be discussed at the next meeting and checks with Bill to confirm if it is correct.


Passage number 112.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply confirming that the other person's statement is correct.


Passage number 113.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "President Kocherlakota" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a position or title without providing any context or information to suggest disagreement.


Passage number 114.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing gratitude and acknowledging President Williams.


Passage number 115.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 116.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply contains a courteous expression of gratitude from President Lacker.


Passage number 117.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply expresses gratitude and acknowledges President Bullard.


Passage number 118.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Fisher.


Passage number 119.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  It’s 11 o’clock.  I understand coffee is ready.  Why don’t we take 20 minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing gratitude, mentioning the time, acknowledging the availability of coffee, and suggesting taking a 20-minute break. There is no conflicting or opposing viewpoint being expressed.


Passage number 120.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Thanks very much.  Let’s continue the go-round with Vice Chairman Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply indicating a break in the conversation and the intention to continue with the Vice Chairman. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 121.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and "Governor Yellen" are expressions of gratitude and acknowledgment, respectively, and do not indicate any disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 122.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data we have received since our last meeting support the view that the recovery is gathering steam and has become self-sustaining.  Private demand, rather than temporary fiscal stimulus or inventory investment, is increasingly powering the expansion.  Even so, there are ongoing drags from housing, nonresidential construction, and state and local government spending, along with new downside risks relating to possible near-term federal spending cuts and the negative spillovers from higher gas and commodity prices, and broader uncertainties relating to the Middle East, North Africa, Japan, and the euro area.  These risks to the recovery have grown in recent weeks, and they diminish my confidence that we will enjoy smooth sailing ahead. With respect to private spending, I am encouraged that business surveys and anecdotal reports have taken on a more optimistic tone.  Businesses appear far more upbeat about sales and express greater willingness to invest and even hire.  These improved attitudes are consistent with the patterns we are seeing in capital spending.  Recent signals pertaining to consumer spending have been harder to read, but, on balance, they too point to at least moderate growth in line with disposable income.  And surging auto sales suggest a release of pent-up demand. Consumers are hardly ebullient, but they seem more optimistic and for good reasons.  The stock market has recovered, labor market conditions have improved somewhat, those with jobs have less reason to fear losing them, and the burden of debt payments has abated to more normal levels.  Further, a tax cut is beginning to show up in paychecks.  Of course, declining house prices are a continuing negative for household wealth and borrowing capacity, and the intermeeting evidence suggests that this trend continues unabated. Anecdotal reports suggest that access to financing, especially for car loans, has improved even for those with poor credit histories, and this may be an additional factor boosting purchases.  Looking forward, though, I am concerned about the vulnerability of consumer spending to further upward movements in oil prices.  And in this regard, the plunge we saw last Friday in the Michigan survey’s consumer sentiment measure, serves as a wakeup call. History shows that gas prices are highly salient to households, and rising prices at the pump can quickly affect consumer confidence.  In recent weeks, the negative effect of rising gas prices on confidence has apparently overwhelmed all of the positive factors that were and should be boosting confidence.  We should expect some toll on spending, because higher oil prices affect not only consumer psyches but also their purchasing power.  Auto purchases could be especially vulnerable. Turning to the labor market, I see hopeful signs of improvement.  Employment is rising in both the establishment and household surveys, initial claims have declined, and an increasing fraction of firms indicate an intention to add to their payrolls.  That said, like President Evans, I am skeptical that conditions have improved and slack has diminished by quite as much as Tealbook assumes, based on the 0.9 percentage point plunge in the unemployment rate since November.  Such a large decline in the unemployment rate over a short period of time is historically unprecedented, and to my mind, the patterns in the data are hard to interpret.  In particular, I don’t see much auxiliary evidence to corroborate such a large improvement.  For example, even though employment has expanded in both the household and payroll surveys, overall job gains since employment stopped falling have been modest, and the gains since November are far too small to account for such a large drop in unemployment.  Furthermore, there is no evidence of a rebound in labor force participation—something I would expect to see during a recovery.  Hours have also been flat, and this leaves me wondering whether a portion of the recent decline in unemployment may reflect a shift of discouraged workers from the unemployment pool to those counted as out of the labor force.  For example, about 3.8 million workers lost their jobs between November 2008 and March 2009, and those who are still unemployed would have exhausted extended unemployment benefits in recent months.  I recognize that such an interpretation of the data may be completely wrong, but I do see a significant mystery here, and I hope we can unravel it in the coming months. Turning to inflation, it is clear that headline inflation will be elevated in the months ahead due to surging energy and commodity prices.  Friday’s Michigan survey shows that rising gas prices have not only lowered consumer sentiment, but already boosted inflationary expectations.  The survey reveals a sizable increase in inflation expectations one year ahead and a smaller increase in inflation expectations at the 5-to-10-year horizon.  I view this development with concern, but I am not alarmed because, as David and others have noted, the pattern we are seeing is quite typical.  Consumers commonly react strongly to contemporaneous movements in inflation, particularly to gas price increases.  In other words, they overreact to recent inflation data.  This suggests that when headline inflation comes down, as I expect it will if commodity prices either stabilize or reverse course, consumer inflation expectations should fall in tandem.  We have seen this pattern repeatedly in the past.  With respect to pass-through from higher commodity prices, the evidence points strongly to only very limited pass-through to core inflation and inflation expectations since the mid-1980s. I want to thank President Evans for carefully laying out the evidence in his memo to the Committee, and I would like to say that I completely agree with the conclusions he draws.  Thanks to well-anchored inflation expectations and limited pass-through, our Committee has had a good deal of flexibility in responding to such shocks as oil prices escalated between 2004 and 2008, and my expectation is that monetary policy will probably not need to respond this time around either.  That said, it would be dangerous for us to take the stability of long-term inflation expectations for granted.  So we must be vigilant in monitoring data bearing on pass-through of commodity price increases to core inflation, second-round effects on wages, and movements in inflationary expectations in the days ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the positive signs of improvement in the economy, but also expresses concern about ongoing drags from housing, construction, and government spending, as well as potential risks from federal spending cuts and global uncertainties. The speaker is also skeptical of the extent of improvement in the labor market and expresses concern about the potential impact of rising gas prices on consumer spending. Finally, there is disagreement about the potential impact of higher commodity prices on inflation and the need for monetary policy to respond.


Passage number 123.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude to Governor Duke, indicating a positive sentiment.


Passage number 124.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My conversations with bankers were pretty brief this time.  Most reported seeing very little change in credit since the last time we spoke, with continued gradual improvement in credit quality and weak loan demand as universal themes. The question I normally ask the CEOs that I speak with is:  What are the most important things that you are worried about, that are on your mind.  Well, due to the timing of the calls, it didn’t seem appropriate at this point to discuss interchange fees, because the comment period had closed—or capital plans, because the results have not yet been communicated—or mortgage servicing, given the ongoing settlement talks with various government entities.  After carving out these three items, there was very little left to report.  [Laughter] As I read through the Tealbook and the staff forecast, I kept noticing the assumption for easing of credit conditions.  And while I do see evidence of easing, I think the improvement is quite uneven across product types and markets.  Unsurprisingly, the products where conditions are closest to pre-crisis norms, competition for new loans is most vigorous, and volumes are returning, are also the products where the delinquency and charge-off rates never got very far out of line.  Nonrevolving consumer loans, primarily auto and student loans, are the best example of this, and Governor Yellen and President Fisher have both already mentioned auto lending.  Auto dealers are attributing stronger sales to the broad availability of credit, and bankers attribute growth in auto loans to stronger demand.  Bank and nonbank lenders report terms and conditions in auto lending are at historical norms, and the pricing, volume, and composition of auto ABS would similarly indicate a return to normal.  So I think it is entirely possible that the auto market could be a barometer of demand unconstrained by tight credit conditions.  Student loans are also growing at a strong pace, but they show up as a negative on bank balance sheets as the government has now taken over the guaranteed student loan program.  Several factors are probably interacting to produce the growth.  The legislation authorized higher maximum loan sizes.  Lower home prices have resulted in less home equity availability—a historical source of loans for education.  Tuition costs are rising as states and foundations have less capacity, and reduced job availability could be leading more people to seek additional education.  I don’t worry very much about a credit-funded bubble in autos, but there are growing reports of students ending up with debt that is much larger than the earning power of their degrees, and the inability to relieve the debt load as these loans cannot be discharged in bankruptcy. The other bright spot in lending is business credit.  Delinquency and loss rates on C&I lending spiked during the recession but only to levels typical for recessionary periods, and they are now declining in typical cyclical fashion.  C&I lending is the only category of bank lending that is still showing growth.  However, loans made by large banks to large firms appear to be the primary reason for this growth.  Small loans to businesses have been falling for all three quarters since banks began reporting the data on a quarterly basis.  And while C&I loans at banks under $10 billion are down for the year, they did grow slightly from the third to the fourth quarter, possibly a sign of a little momentum.  Interest rate spreads on C&I loans are coming down for larger loans, but not for smaller commitments.  However, every bank now reports more competition for C&I loans.  Demand still seems to be driven by loans for acquisitions or one-time transactions, and credit line usage remains at historical lows.  Unused lines of credit are up, likely due to new line approvals that are not yet drawn.  And the NFIB survey still shows declining levels of small businesses that sought new credit, indicating weak demand, and fewer respondents saying credit is more difficult to obtain, indicating improved availability.  All in all, the business credit market appears to me to be ready to fund demand by businesses whenever it materializes.  New issuance of CMBS continues to grow from low levels with some notable but not yet alarming relaxation of terms from the very tight standards of the early new issuances.  And while overall commercial real estate loans in banks are still declining, the decline is driven primarily by steep drops in construction and land development portfolios.  Rents and vacancies seem to be improving, with particular improvements in multifamily and hotel cash flows.  Indeed, if there is an area where I would look for overheating, it would be in multifamily. Credit card delinquencies are approaching normal levels, and charge-off rates are dropping sharply, but issuers report that their portfolios are increasingly skewed toward transactors who pay off monthly balances rather than those who fuel their spending through higher credit card debt.  And credit card balances continue to decline, as do available credit lines. Everything related to residential real estate, whether it’s construction lending, mortgage lending, or home equity, is mired deep in the mud. Completely unrelated to credit, I was a lot more confident that the recovery was on firm footing before this spike in gas prices.  I am much more worried that higher gas prices will cause skittish consumers to pull back again than I am about the effect on inflation, and I am concerned that businesses that are unable to pass through price increases will offset risk to their profit margins with renewed reluctance to hire.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and observations about different areas of lending and credit.


Passage number 125.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 126.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As the minutes have passed, I have been trying to mentally cut back my statement.  So I’m going to extemporize a bit. The first point, on which I agree, I think, with virtually everybody, is that since our last meeting, the gradual recovery in the U.S. economy looks better grounded than ever.  But as many of you have commented, the external risks—and I would say largely non-economically originating risks—are substantially larger than I think any of us anticipated. I won’t dwell on an assessment of the economy right now.  I do want to identify two questions, which I think will have some salience for us going forward.  One is probably a secondary question but was raised by Dave Stockton in his presentation, which is whether the less-than-expected levels of personal consumption expenditures observed over the last couple of months are more due to a growing set of concerns about these external problems, such as oil price increases or otherwise, or whether they have more to do with a chronic sense of concern about job prospects or other things more internal to the U.S. economy. The second question, I think, is actually substantially more consequential, and this is the one raised variously by Charlie, Narayana, and Janet, which is to say:  What is going on in the labor market.  And exactly what conclusions can we, or should we, be trying to draw from the decline in the unemployment rate, notwithstanding the quite modest pace of net job creation along with the observed decline in the labor force participation rate.  I think this one will have a lot of consequence for us as we have to make decisions over the course of the next year, and, like Janet, I am a little skeptical of at least some people’s reactions—nobody on the Committee, but some people’s reactions—which is to say, well, let’s just assume that the trend for longer-term labor participation needs to be adjusted downward yet again.  I just don’t think we know enough.  Maybe looking at the U-5s is one way to get at the information; maybe there are other methods as well.  But something is going on here that is not jumping out coherently from the different data streams. The last comment I want to make is to try to draw together thematically a lot of the very trenchant observations that Bill Dudley made about various international developments.  I think what is unusual about the adverse and worrisome developments for our economy right now is that they are dominantly noneconomic in origin.  They are grounded basically in political or, more recently, natural factors, and they are also dominantly, though not exclusively, foreign.  Obviously first is the possibility of oil supply disruptions, which could be somewhere between problematic and paralyzing, depending on how they go forward.  But, look, we are just not particularly well equipped to make an assessment of how likely supply disruptions in Bahrain or any other Middle Eastern/North African country actually are.  I’m not sure how confident the guys down C Street are in their ability to make those predictions either, but we surely can’t. Second are the persistent sovereign and bank debt problems in the euro periphery.  I am a little bit more like Bill.  I read it a little less optimistically than the staff has, I think.  The way I looked at last Friday’s agreement is that Europe is still doing just enough to keep a step ahead of the problems rather than clearly outpacing them.  This pattern, I think, keeps open the possibility that some catalyst will accelerate the crisis quickly enough that the rather slow-moving European policy apparatus cannot keep up.  I do think that our financial institutions in the United States have reduced their direct exposure to potential crisis countries substantially, although the transmission of problems from the periphery to core European country banks could still have an effect upon U.S. financial institutions and our own economy.  I continue to restate Nathan’s mantra that Europe has both the financial and technical resources to contain this set of threats, but the condition that one needs to add is:  if the political will to do so is present.  Understandably, the domestic and intra-European politics of all of this are very difficult. Then there is Japan.  I really don’t think that we know nearly enough at this moment to speak with any confidence about what the medium-term impact of the tsunami and the consequent problems with the nuclear industry are going to be on Japan’s economy, much less the growth or inflationary effects on the rest of the world.  Ordinarily, we might think that, notwithstanding the human tragedy, the reconstruction efforts of a rich country would provide a medium-term fiscal boost, particularly since the devastation largely spared Japan’s industrial base.  But the scope of damage to the power infrastructure in particular, coming in the context of more than a decade of economic stagnation and unfavorable demographic changes, raises at least the possibility of substantially less transient and more negative effects.  So my point in rehearsing all of these possibilities is that they are very hard to work into an economic model, formal or intuitive.  We are more in the realm of uncertainty than of calculable risk, at least risks calculable through economic analysis. Indeed, even the list of lesser but domestically grown potential downside effects on medium-term economic growth contains items like the legal uncertainties around liability for the foreclosure imbroglio and the prospect of accelerated fiscal contraction driven by larger political debates.  In these circumstances, it would obviously be imprudent to downplay these possibilities.  And while we may need to react should one or more of these risks be realized, it is certainly not clear to me that even the most serious of these largely external risks has any immediate implications for monetary policy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly a series of observations and opinions about the state of the U.S. economy and the risks and uncertainties it faces.


Passage number 127.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is a polite expression of appreciation and acknowledgement.


Passage number 128.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic recovery is proceeding at a moderate pace, but as I’ve noted before, reductions in employment, income, and wealth have hurt households since the onset of the financial crisis.  I don’t want to restate many of the excellent points that have been raised around the table, so I’ll use my time to underscore but one aspect of my outlook. In short, the views of your so-called business contacts are supported by the views of my so-called household contacts.  [Laughter]  Admittedly, with two teenagers at home and one home from college, all of whom consume large amounts of milk, cereal, facial cleansers, and gasoline, the age of my sample size is skewed to the downside.  That said, consumers who are full adults and run households face more downside risk from higher prices at the pump as well as a groundswell of fiscal austerity facing the nation at all levels of government.  As we know, consumer sentiment tumbled in early March, reversing just about all of the improvements since last October.  Optimism on the employment outlook among consumers also retreated.  The Reuters/Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index primarily attributes the overall swoon in sentiment to surging gas prices.  This swoon would tend to be consistent with the fact that the drop in confidence is considerably steeper among lower-income for whom gas prices are hitting especially hard than for higher-income households.  This sharp reversal of what had been an upward drift in consumer sentiment between October and February is disconcerting.  It doesn’t bode well for economic growth.  The rising cost of food and fuel, especially if these factors continue to rise, together with the effect of suboptimal job creation, could hinder or even derail growth in consumer demand. I’d also like to remind the Committee that the housing market is also hindering growth in consumer demand.  Household equity is far from being restored.  From 2005 to the end of 2010, $6.8 trillion in home equity has been lost.  With our staff’s assumptions of there being a $0.03 loss in consumption for every $1.00 loss in home net worth, this $6.8 trillion in lost home equity represents a loss of more than $200 billion in consumption.  And given the delays between drops in household equity and changes in consumption, the losses to consumption have not all been realized. House prices continue to decrease, and despite household efforts to pay down their mortgages, home equity continues to fall.  Indeed, cash refis are flat at zero.  So not only is the so-called wealth effect of housing on consumption flat, but the ability of homeowners to tap quickly into any equity to fund household needs and other consumption is all but gone.  The housing market still shows no signs of emerging from the significant overhang of residential real estate that is in foreclosure or entering the foreclosure process. The baseline forecast of continued recovery depends importantly on steady improvements in, among other things, consumer confidence and the willingness of firms to hire, but these improvements may be materializing slowly.  If so, risk aversion among households will increase, boosting precautionary savings by households and making firms more reluctant to boost capital spending and increase payrolls.  The recent payroll tax cut, which was effective in January of this year, appears so far to be unnoticed by consumers, and if it remains as such will not have an appreciable effect on consumer spending. I haven’t addressed the economic impact of the earthquake and tsunami tragedies in Japan on household net worth, but I believe they loom large and will exert downward pressure on household consumption.  The consequences on consumption and economic growth are not yet fully known, but, if realized, will slow the path toward recovery.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a statement from one person, Ms. Raskin, who is expressing her views and concerns about the economic recovery and its impact on households. There is no indication of opposition or disagreement from other individuals in the passage.


Passage number 129.
 MR. ENGLISH.2  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the package labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.”  The package includes the three revised draft statements that we distributed yesterday, along with associated draft directives. Turning first to alternative B on page 3, Committee members may think that the medium-term outlook for real activity and inflation remains broadly in line with their expectations at the time of the January meeting, and, accordingly, that no change in the course for monetary policy is called for.  Even after the declines in the unemployment rate over the past few months, policymakers may see unemployment as too high and likely to remain so for some time, and they may anticipate that higher energy and other commodity prices will boost headline inflation only temporarily, as long as longer-term inflation expectations remain anchored.  Indeed, because higher commodity prices can also be expected to reduce real income and damp consumer spending, policymakers may think it appropriate to leave policy unchanged in the face of such a shock.  With measures of underlying inflation still low, you may be inclined to continue with the current purchase program at this meeting and wait for additional information on output, inflation, and inflation expectations before deciding on your next step.  Moreover, Committee members may be concerned that unexpectedly discontinuing or reducing the purchase program could cause confusion about the Committee’s intentions and thereby weigh on household and business confidence, particularly given the elevated uncertainty caused by the recent events in the Middle East, North Africa, and Japan. As for the statement language, the first paragraph would be updated to suggest somewhat greater confidence in the recovery and to acknowledge the run-up in commodity and oil prices.  Paragraph 2 would no longer suggest that progress toward the Committee’s objectives has been “disappointingly slow.”  Instead, it would note the temporary boost to headline inflation from energy and other commodity prices, and say that the Committee expects limited pass-through to underlying inflation.  The language added yesterday emphasizes that you will “pay close attention to the evolution of overall inflation and inflation expectations.”  Finally, in paragraph 3, the bracketed words could reintroduce the pace of asset purchases as an addition to their cumulative total.  However, doing so would likely lead market participants to believe that the Committee was signaling the likelihood of some change in its plans—perhaps an intention to adjust that monthly total before long—that you might not intend. A statement along the lines of alternative B is generally in line with market expectations and would probably have little effect on asset prices.  Alternative C, page 4, might be appropriate if the Committee saw the rapid decline in the unemployment rate over the past three months, the rise in headline inflation, and the uptick in some measures of inflation expectations as suggesting that the upside risks to real activity and inflation had increased significantly.  The intended size of the asset purchase program would be cut to $450 billion and the statement language adjusted to signal an early move toward exit.  Almost two years into the economic recovery, you may be worried that the higher prices for oil and other commodities could, in a context of very accommodative monetary policy and large federal deficits, lead to an increase in longer-term inflation expectations that would be very costly to address later on.  If so, you might judge that a reduction in accommodation at this meeting could lead to improved medium-term macroeconomic outcomes.  Some of you may also find a reduction in policy accommodation attractive because of concerns about signs of potential asset price misalignments or increased leverage in some parts of the financial system that could contribute to financial instability down the road. The statement under alternative C would provide a somewhat more upbeat assessment of current conditions and the outlook than under alternative B, noting that the recovery “is strengthening” and that conditions in the labor market “are improving.”  The inflation discussion in paragraphs 1 and 2 is the same as in alternative B.  Paragraph 3 scales back the size of the asset purchase program, and the statement would also indicate that reinvestments of principal would continue only “for the time being” and that the Committee anticipates “low levels” of the federal funds rate for “some time,” rather than “exceptionally low” levels for an “extended period.” Alternative C would surprise market participants and would likely lead to an increase in longer-term interest rates, lower stock prices, and a rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar. Alternative A, page 2, would also be a surprise to the markets, but in the opposite direction.  Alternative A might be seen as appropriate if policymakers have read incoming data as suggesting that the recovery has not been as strong as was anticipated at the January meeting or if they see greater downside risks to the outlook for economic growth arising, for example, from the possible effects of higher energy and other commodity prices on household spending or from uncertainty about the likely outcome of the recent events in the Middle East, North Africa, and Japan.  In this environment, members may think that a move toward easier policy is significantly more likely than one toward tighter policy over coming months, and that emphasizing that the door is open to additional policy accommodation could reassure households and businesses and so support the recovery, even if no policy change were ultimately required. The language of alternative A would suggest that the Committee had not upgraded its view of the economy, noting only that the recovery is continuing and that employment remains at low levels.  Paragraph 2 would end by noting that “downside risks to the economic outlook remain significant.”  Paragraph 3 would confirm that the Committee “will” purchase the full $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities, and that it is “prepared to expand and extend the purchase program” if needed to achieve its objectives.  The fourth paragraph would provide more-explicit forward guidance about the expected path for the federal funds rate by specifying that exceptionally low levels were likely “at least through mid-2012.” Finally, I wanted to briefly return to the issue of tapering the Federal Reserve’s purchases of Treasury securities that Brian raised earlier.  Tapering would involve gradually reducing the pace of purchases over coming months and, if the Committee still intended to reach $600 billion of purchases, extending them into the third quarter.  As Brian noted in his Desk report, the depth and liquidity of the Treasury market suggests that significant tapering is unlikely to be necessary to avoid an adverse market reaction, and that most market participants do not appear to be expecting tapering.  Nonetheless, you may find some amount of tapering attractive as a form of insurance against an adverse market reaction to the end of purchases. There are several other issues that the Committee might want to consider regarding the possible desirability of tapering.  If it were to taper, the Committee would have more time before the end of the program to make adjustments—either up or down—to the overall volume of purchases if that became appropriate.  However, some policymakers may be worried that tapering could increase public uncertainty about the Committee’s intentions regarding the size of the program and so could prove counterproductive.  The Committee also might be concerned that an extension of the period over which purchases are completed could, if macroeconomic conditions changed sufficiently rapidly, lead to an undesirable delay in the Committee’s move toward exit. Draft directives for the three alternatives are presented on pages 6 through 8 of your handout.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That completes my prepared remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting three alternatives and discussing the possible outcomes and concerns associated with each one.


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Bill.  Any questions for Bill.  [No response]  Seeing none, we can turn to the policy go-round, and we’ll start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there are no questions for Bill and moves on to the next topic.


Passage number 131.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I also believe we should complete the full $600 billion in the government securities purchase program.  On balance, the oil shock and fiscal austerity have not significantly altered my view on medium-term inflation pressures but have made me somewhat more concerned about the strength of the recovery. I would note that President Hoenig’s comments as well as the financial stability memo have highlighted that agricultural land prices are rising quite rapidly in many farm states.  I do not believe that this is a reason to raise rates or to alter monetary policy.  However, I do believe it warrants careful supervisory scrutiny.  Higher farmland prices are a reaction to improvements in developing economies and their ability to spend more on importing food, as well as to a series of disruptions that have hurt food production in other areas of the world.  Tightening monetary policy will do little to effect farmland prices, but it will almost surely make a slow recovery even slower.  While monetary policy is probably not appropriate for targeting agricultural and other commodity prices that I do not expect to have broad effect on overall prices, as I discussed earlier, supervisory policy could be quite effective in the case of surging agricultural land prices.  Requiring higher underwriting standards for land purchases and requiring banks to conduct stress tests to assess the adequacy of their capital in the event of a rapid reversal of farmland prices does seem appropriate. In terms of the tapering that we had just discussed, I think it’s going to be very difficult to actually have that communication strategy at this point, so my preference would be not to taper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and their belief that the government securities purchase program should be completed. They also express concerns about the strength of the recovery and highlight the need for careful supervisory scrutiny of rising farmland prices. They conclude by stating their preference not to taper at this point. There is no indication of disagreement or contention with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 132.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We are, in fact, as I understand it, talking to banks about the farmland situation, and Kansas City is playing an important role in that.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is discussing the farmland situation with banks, and Kansas City is involved in this discussion.


Passage number 133.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I said earlier, I see parallels between our situation today and the unexpectedly rapid increase in core inflation in 2003 and 2004.  In late 2003, the recovery was disappointingly slow.  We were expecting persistent slack to hold down inflation, perhaps to lead to outright deflation.  Energy prices were surging.  Flat futures curves led us to believe energy prices would level out.  Our estimates of economic slack led us to believe that core would remain low.  Instead, as economic growth picked up, core inflation rose rapidly, from under 1.5 percent to 2¼ percent.  That pickup in inflation turned out to be persistent.  Core inflation remained around 2¼ percent and bounced right around there for the next four years, and that set the stage for our inflation outcome over that four years, which turned out to be not that great—3 percent overall headline inflation. As I said earlier, in assessing this risk, I think it’s useful to consider the perspective of a typical business person trying to figure out their pricing strategy.  On the one hand, core inflation has been running relatively low in the last couple of years.  And if they’ve been paying attention, they’ve probably heard of Fed officials emphasizing their commitment to price stability.  On the other hand, their firms’ experience coming out of the last recession, although many years ago, may be present in their mind and may suggest that now’s the right time to expect an increase in inflation.  They are no doubt aware that the Fed has been purchasing securities and flooding the banking system with liquidity.  They may have come across some fringe commentators or bloggers or maybe even some political figures ranting about hyperinflation right around the corner.  In the reporting on QE2, they may have picked up that the Fed wants the inflation rate to be higher than it is now, and they may have not been exposed to the excellent statements you’ve made, Mr. Chairman, making very clear that we do not intend to overshoot an inflation rate of 2 percent.  So there may be a substantial number of business people who have absorbed ideas suggesting there’s a substantial risk of higher inflation ahead.  Some of the ideas they’ve absorbed may be not well founded, but they might affect inflation nonetheless.  I recognize that the risk that core inflation ratchets up is always with us, but what I’ve tried to do is make the case that at this time in the business cycle, that risk is more present for us, more pressing, and ought to be considered substantially more urgent now than is typically the case.  I think this risk poses very difficult challenges for us.  We should, of course, do anything we can through statements and communications to enhance our credibility and get the message out about our expectations regarding inflation.  But actions often speak louder than words.  And I think we need to be prepared to take actions to keep core inflation under control in this episode. For today, I feel an irresistible attraction to alternative C, but I can support the status quo with the economic updating in alternative B at this meeting.  At our next meeting, if core inflation were to continue to rise, if we were to see another very strong employment report or other signs of stronger-than-expected growth, I would strongly support reconsidering ending the asset purchase program earlier.  Beyond that point, my best sense is that we’re going to need to take action sometime this year, either initiating asset sales or raising the funds rate by the end of the year. As for tapering, it strikes me as excessive fussiness about the timing of purchases, and the challenges to communication suggest we just follow through, if that’s what we’re going to do, on a pre-decided schedule.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is stating their perspective and offering their opinion, but there is no indication of disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 134.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude from someone named President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 135.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, but I would like to propose changes to the third sentence of paragraph 2 of alternative B, and I’m suggesting these changes because I think the tension in the public’s mind about what’s going on with headline inflation and our accommodative stance makes it important for us to clarify.  So with that backdrop, I would propose replacing the word “temporarily” with the word “currently,” and I would propose dropping the word “headline” from that sentence.  Then in the next sentence, instead of saying “limited pass-through to underlying inflation,” I would say, “The Committee expects these effects to be transient,” comma, “and” instead of “but,” “it will pay close attention to the evolution of overall inflation and inflation expectations.”  The impact of these changes would be to say that we are seeing upward pressure on inflation right now, but we are not reacting to them because we expect those changes to be only transient in nature. As President Bullard articulated, I do think our ultimate variable of interest is headline, but it’s over a sufficiently long period of time.  The reason we’re not reacting to these changes is not because they’re showing up in headline, it’s because of the fact that we expect them to be sufficiently short lived.  So that’s my proposed change to alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is proposing changes to alternative B but is supportive of the overall alternative.


Passage number 136.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Would you read the proposed change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking whether the reader would be willing to read a proposed change.


Passage number 137.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Do you want me to read the whole thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the passage.


Passage number 138.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Read the two sentences that you changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you have not provided any sentences for me to read and determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the sentences and I'll be happy to assist you.


Passage number 139.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  “The recent increases in the prices of energy and other commodities are currently putting upward pressure on inflation,” period.  “The Committee expects these effects to be transient, and it will pay close attention to the evolution of overall inflation and inflation expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is stating two statements about inflation without stating any opposing views or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 140.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think, actually, that’s very good.  Is there a feeling around the table. PARTICIPANTS.  Yes, I agree.  Very good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention in the passage. The participant's agreement with the speaker's opinion suggests an aligned consensus, indicating no disagreement or contention among them.


Passage number 141.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "All right." It is a simple statement indicating agreement or acceptance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 142.
 MR. FISHER.  May I ask one question, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the following passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, wants to ask a question, indicating a potential difference of opinion or desire for further clarification that might not align with the Chairman's views.


Passage number 143.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 144.
 MR. FISHER.  This is picky, but why use “and” instead of “but”.  If you say “and,” you’re sort of dismissing it.  If you say “but,” you’re saying we have to pay attention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing disagreement or contention by questioning the use of "and" instead of "but." They believe that using "and" dismisses the issue at hand, while using "but" would suggest that it requires attention.


Passage number 145.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, but—sorry, “but” is fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "But" is being used as a conjunction to introduce additional information after an interruption, not to express disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 146.
 MR. FISHER.  I hate to butt in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses hesitation or reluctance to interrupt or interject their opinion.


Passage number 147.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You did that just for that reason, I’m sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is expressing a statement of certainty and agreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 148.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So the idea is:  “…these effects to be transient, but it will pay”—.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage begins with laughter, implying that there is some disagreement or skepticism about the idea being discussed.


Passage number 149.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's fine" indicates agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 150.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I think that’s very constructive, thank you.  Who’s next here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude for the previous comment and asking who will speak next.


Passage number 151.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I have a few more words to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates that Mr. Kocherlakota wants to further express his thoughts, but it does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 152.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m sorry.  You’ve contributed so much already.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement. The passage expresses regret and appreciation for the contributions made by the person being addressed.


Passage number 153.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Well, thank you.  I’m opposed to tapering our purchases; I agree with both President Rosengren and President Lacker on that.  I like the preliminary discussion of exit in the Tealbook.  I’m looking forward to a fuller discussion in April.  Certainly, I don’t think we’ll be in a position at that point to settle this question of when exactly exit will begin, but I’d like us to begin to settle on the sequencing of timing and moves after a given start date. In the last six weeks, the Tealbook has moved up its projection of our first interest rate increase to the third quarter of 2012, but I anticipate exit to be a multimeeting process that will most likely begin three to four meetings before the actual raising of rates.  I would think it would begin with the changing of language, but that’s something we can start to discuss next time.  If my forecast is right, that would mean we will start the process in about a year.  Of course, raising rates in the third quarter of 2012 is a point forecast, and the Tealbook also includes a 70 percent confidence interval for that point forecast.  That error band includes an increase in the fed funds rate of 50 basis points by the end of 2011.  So that’s what’s in that 70 percent error band. In a similar vein, it’s instructive to look at table C of the March 11 memo to Reserve Bank Research Directors from Thomas Tallarini.  (I stole it from my Research Director.  I don’t think I’m supposed to be looking at those things.)  That table uses simulations of FRB/US to estimate the probability that the fed funds rate will exceed 25 basis points at some point during the year 2011, and the table reports that estimated probability as being 52 percent. So monetary policy is about risk management, and good risk management means being ready for the possibility that we may need to initiate exit by as early as September or November, and I hope we do that planning for that possibility.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker states their opposition to tapering purchases and expresses agreement with President Rosengren and President Lacker on this issue. They also mention their anticipation of a multimeeting process for exit, starting with changing language, and discuss their forecast for interest rate increases. There are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented in the passage.


Passage number 154.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 155.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  The editing suggestions seem fine with me. The outlook is improved.  Underlying inflation continues to be low, so I expect to support completing our $600 billion of purchases until we’re finished in June.  I have a preference for no tapering of the program. There is a clear risk for policy and our credibility if inflation expectations were to increase substantially.  I think we all understand and agree on that.  I did take a little additional comfort from Brian Sack’s report that indicated that the one-year forward inflation breakevens have only increased a touch once you start looking two years and out, and so most of the shift has been in the near term.  But we need to keep the inflation expectations risk front and center, so I wholeheartedly agree that we should monitor that. Still, I think resource slack is important, and I welcome President Kocherlakota’s insightful comments about slack estimates from the simplest New Keynesian models.  I am a little skeptical about the sturdiness of these conclusions, and I think he used the term “reliable measures.”  I’d like to see more on that, I agree with that assessment. Inflation dynamics from the simplest New Keynesian models don’t seem to match the data.  It actually takes quite a lot of work in order to introduce mechanisms like that, and, in fact, some New Keynesian models that don’t have enough of the inflation dynamics embedded in them likely have mean reversion baked into their inflation forecast.  If they don’t have enough inflation persistence, and then they see data that show a drop in inflation, they’re going to see that inflation goes back up, and 2 percent is probably what’s baked into that model.  So I’m really not sure what confidence we should have coming out of those types of models unless the match of the model with the data is reasonable.  I think that’s something that we have to understand.  In the DSGE versions that we use in Chicago, we put a lot of emphasis on the channels that help induce more inertial inflation dynamics, and I would say, like Jeff Fuhrer’s research has emphasized on this, it’s a very important feature.  I’d like to see similar slack assessments coming from models that match the data better, and in the memo that I circulated on commodity prices, I had a line in there that alluded to this.  I think there’s risk in putting too much weight on theoretical constructs that don’t really describe the data nearly well enough.  I’m not quite sure how much emphasis we should put on that. In terms of policy going forward, the Tealbook has the assumption that the interest rate takeoff will occur in mid-2012.  Yes, that could happen; I could see that that could be acceptable even with my outlook and concerns.  I still expect that core PCE inflation at that time is going to be 1½ percent or less, so I’m a little nervous about that, but if the facts change, I will change my opinion on that. Thinking about exit strategy, I can even imagine a reverse tapering of our $600 billion asset purchase, along the lines that Presidents Kocherlakota and Bullard have previously mentioned, that might take place before the rate liftoff.  I’d just like to understand the possibilities there a little bit more, so in the discussion that we have about exit strategy, perhaps a little more emphasis on that than what the consensus was over a year ago. Putting it all together, given the outlook and the inflation risks that we face and the slack estimates that I think are appropriate, I am comfortable with alternative B, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses skepticism about the conclusions drawn from New Keynesian models and suggests that more weight should be placed on models that better match the data. They also express concern about the timing of an interest rate takeoff and suggest the possibility of a reverse tapering of asset purchases.


Passage number 156.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude by President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 157.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  I thank President Evans for his close attention to my remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention between the two individuals. Mr. Kocherlakota expresses thanks to President Evans for paying close attention to his remarks, suggesting a positive and collaborative tone between the two.


Passage number 158.
 MR. EVANS.  I learned from President Bullard last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement by Mr. Evans, mentioning that he learned something from President Bullard in the past. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement alone.


Passage number 159.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I will just articulate one thing, which is that I am only emphasizing one aspect of the New Keynesian model, which is the Phillips curve itself, and so when you want to evaluate what I’m saying, you want to do it like a GMM test, or something like that, of that one particular equation.  So that’s the only piece of the model that I’m exploiting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are emphasizing one aspect of the New Keynesian model and explaining how it should be evaluated.


Passage number 160.
 MR. EVANS.  We have research evidence on that from the Chicago Fed.  Jonas Fisher and Marty Eichenbaum did work looking at exactly that type of GMM Euler equation, and it doesn’t do very well unless you add more dynamics to that, but we could go back and look at that more carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the research evidence from the Chicago Fed and suggests the possibility of further examination.


Passage number 161.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  With great reluctance, I think I’d point out it’s getting a little bit latish.  [Laughter]  Let’s try to minimize the research program component today.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their reluctance and suggesting that they should minimize the research program component. The laughter that follows indicates a light-hearted atmosphere rather than disagreement.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Pianalto.


Passage number 163.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, and I also support the changes that President Kocherlakota has recommended in the language in paragraph 2.  I am more confident today than I was at our January meeting that an expansion is taking hold, and although I expect headline inflation to be close to 2 percent this year, I expect core inflation to rise only gradually toward 2 percent over the next few years. The most significant risk I see on the horizon is that the pass-through from oil and other commodity prices to core inflation proves to be much greater than the empirical evidence suggests it will be.  As we talked about today, one mechanism through which this could occur would be for persistently high headline inflation to destabilize longer-run inflation expectations.  Of course, the key to stability of long-run inflation expectations is policy credibility, and we should do everything we can to buttress the confidence in our resolve to maintain price stability.  That’s one of the reasons, like President Plosser just mentioned, that I support publicly announcing an explicit numerical inflation objective.  And with the potential for inflation expectations to be more volatile with energy and commodity price shocks, I think the sooner we clarify our inflation objective the better. Finally, given Brian’s comment, tapering of our final asset purchases doesn’t appear to be necessary.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 164.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 165.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be brief.  I generally support alternative B for today, with an eye toward a version of alternative C at a future meeting.  I would not change the extended period language as it is changed in alternative C any time soon.  I think as soon as we do that, it will signal imminent rate hikes.  So I think we want to be very careful about that.  I counsel patience for today because I’d like to gather more information on developments in the Middle East and North Africa, and I would like to get past the late March period, which is supposed to produce a deal in Europe.  So I’d like to get more information on both of those situations.  Hopefully, those situations will not develop into full-fledged global macroeconomic shocks, and we’ll be able to assess the situation at our next meeting. I have a few comments on alternative B.  In paragraph 2, the phrase “limited pass-through to underlying inflation” makes it seem as though core inflation is a goal in itself.  However, President Kocherlakota has conveniently eliminated my concerns here.  So I fully support what he has suggested.  He gets exactly to the ideas that I wanted to get through, which are that what we want to convey is that we think this is temporary, and we’re going to watch the situation closely, which I think is what the change does. I would like the pace of $80 billion, which is down in paragraph 3, to be included in the statement.  I think that could be done here with little fanfare.  That would give us a dimension on which we can adjust going forward.  So I’d like that in there.  Please insert sufficient passion with that part of my speech.  [Laughter] On tapering, my colleagues are wrong on this.  You should be tapering.  So I’ll be the excessively fussy guy.  I think it’s just prudent policy to engineer a smooth transition.  I see little merit in an abrupt stop.  Either nothing will happen, which is what you are all saying, or rates will jump up in that window and we’ll get blamed for it.  So I don’t see any reason to do that.  It should be easy to taper, and why not do it.  It will take that risk off the table. I do appreciate the sudden conversion of the Committee to rational expectations macroeconomics, but it’s not the right policy at this juncture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard expresses his support for alternative B and his interest in alternative C in the future. He also mentions his concerns about changing the extended period language and expresses the need for more information on developments in the Middle East and Europe. He supports President Kocherlakota's suggestions and mentions his desire to include the pace of $80 billion in the statement. While he disagrees with his colleagues on tapering, he does not confront or argue with them. Overall, there is no direct disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Adaptive learning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any specific information or context related to adaptive learning that can be used to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply mentions adaptive learning without providing any further details or opinions.


Passage number 167.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage shows that Mr. Tarullo responds to something with laughter, indicating a light or humorous tone.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the actual passage provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 169.
 MR. TARULLO.  Jim, isn’t there a little bit of tension between wanting to include the $80 billion and favoring tapering.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The mention of tension between wanting to include the $80 billion and favoring tapering suggests a disagreement or conflicting preferences regarding these two options.


Passage number 170.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, if we’re going to say it’s $80 billion now, we can adjust it if we’re going to taper, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating that if the current estimate is $80 billion, it can be adjusted if they decide to taper.


Passage number 171.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 172.
 MR. FISHER.  May I just ask for a clarification, Mr. Chairman.  The last time we discussed the $80 billion, as I remember, Michelle spoke passionately about not including it.  Could someone just review the reason we did not include it last time very quickly before we proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of Michelle speaking passionately about not including the $80 billion suggests that there was a disagreement or difference of opinion on whether to include it.


Passage number 173.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, because it involved a change from the previous $75 billion, and the concern was that there would be confusion.  I think now the question that Bill English mentioned in his presentation was that, at this point, reinserting it might create some confusion of a different type about what our plans are.  I put it in there because I do feel that we did strike this compromise some meetings ago.  President Bullard and I talked about the elimination of the unfortunate change in the rate of the pace of purchases at the last meeting.  But the majority of the Committee last time felt that it was not appropriate to include it just for communication clarity.  If there are others who want to change their views and want to reinsert, I’ll give you a chance, so let me know later at the end of the round.  Okay.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their own reasoning for including something in a previous meeting and mentioning that it was not agreed upon by the majority of the committee for communication clarity. There is no indication of disagreement or contention between the speaker and others in the passage.


Passage number 174.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "MR" as it is not possible to determine the presence of contention or disagreement without the actual content of the passage.


Passage number 175.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  We’re still falling well short on both parts of our dual mandate, and I expect that that situation will continue for quite some time.  Therefore, the current very accommodative stance of monetary policy remains entirely appropriate.  The recent oil supply shocks don’t fundamentally change this calculus.  This conclusion is illustrated by the very small funds rate responses to the oil and commodity price shocks reported in President Evans’s memo, as well as other research using alternative methods.  Of course, the success of this strategy is dependent crucially on maintaining well-anchored inflation expectations, and in the current circumstances, then, it’s important to note there are still no signs that the rise in headline inflation is spilling over in any significant degree to underlying price or wage inflation or into longer-run inflation expectations.  Of course, as many of you have already noted, we must watch these developments very closely and be ready to adjust policy as needed. I very much like the wording President Kocherlakota came up with.  I do have a slight tweak to that.  If you look to the phrase—let me see if I can read this right—“but it will pay close attention to the evolution of overall inflation and inflation expectations,” given that we’ve gotten rid of the “core” idea, I would suggest deleting the word “overall” there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Williams, expresses his support for alternative B and believes that the current accommodative stance of monetary policy is appropriate. He also agrees with President Kocherlakota's wording, suggesting only a slight tweak.


Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that’s a friendly amendment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement suggests agreement and support for the proposed amendment.


Passage number 177.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing ideas or opinions. It is not discussing a controversial topic or presenting different perspectives on a subject.


Passage number 178.
 WILLIAMS.  And finally, I am opposed to excessive fussiness myself, so I do not see the benefits, really, of the tapering.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not explicitly mention any disagreement or contention. It just states the personal opinion of the speaker.


Passage number 179.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage only mentions a person's name and a title without any context or information about their opinions or actions, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 181.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I am fine with the suggestion that President Williams made.  I think that’s good.  I do think, just to give the staff and others some food for thought, we also use the phrase in this statement several times, “underlying inflation rate”—is that a code word for “core”.  And I think as we try to move away from the language of “core,” thinking about how we use the phrase “underlying inflation” is something that I think we need to give some thought to in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser is expressing agreement with President Williams' suggestion and then raising a separate point for consideration.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So just one word on that, which is that in an inflation-targeting regime, we would be talking about medium-term objectives.  And that’s really what we have in mind here.  I think that “underlying” abstracts from the temporary fluctuations associated with commodities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 
There is disagreement in the passage because the speaker is introducing the idea of using "underlying" to measure inflation, while also stating that it abstracts from temporary fluctuations. This implies that there may be differing opinions on whether using "underlying" is the best approach in an inflation-targeting regime.


Passage number 183.
 MR. PLOSSER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions Mr. Plosser without indicating any contradicting or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 184.
  So we might want to think about moving toward language— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  One way to change that is we would move toward a medium-term type of description.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or arguments. It simply suggests the idea of moving towards a different type of language or description.


Passage number 185.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement that can be interpreted as contentious or provoking disagreement.


Passage number 186.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. However, as only "President Hoenig" is mentioned without any additional information, it is not possible to determine the context or specific details of the statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 187.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I think we have all noted around this table, the recovery continues to gain strength and increasingly appears to be sustainable, and there have been significant recent improvements in the labor conditions.  While we would all like to see stronger growth and lower unemployment, the fact remains that the economy is undergoing a major and necessary rebalancing that includes the deleveraging of consumers, businesses, and financial institutions.  Thus, having this kind of economic growth in that environment is, I think, an impressive thing.  Now, this process will take time, and maintaining a zero rate is as likely, in my opinion, to impede the process as it is to help it.  You heard around the table that we are seeing new leverage being introduced almost as we speak. I also want to comment on President Rosengren’s point, which I think is an important one and a good one, but I think he has it backwards.  Low rates are, in fact, in place and designed to increase asset values, and that’s what they’re doing.  I gave the example of agriculture, because it is immediate, I know it, but it is an example; there are other asset values that are increasing fairly significantly now using leverage.  And I think this increase, whether it’s an acquisition of a company to expand under very low interest rates that causes an appreciation in value, has to be taken into account.  So if you are going to now have supervision calibrate the movement in the asset value that your monetary policy was designed to increase, you are going to have to have your army stand pretty tall to do that. If you take, for example, this agriculture situation, we can go into a bank, and the loan-to-value ratio for the land has been priced up to 70 percent, which isn’t a bad number, and if you look at it with the prices and the cash flow you say, “Ah, that’s a great deal.  It should pay off.  Let’s stress test it.”  And you say, “Well, if you have 300 or 400 basis points, it’s too low, because those prices will come down.”  What do you tell the banker.  Raise capital.  Do you classify the loan.  No, because the cash flows are good, the asset value is there, and the appraisal is terrific.  The problem is, in that situation—and there may be others—you also have a GSE down the road who is making loans for agricultural land that are sweetheart deals.  So you tell the banker to get out of the way.  The problem is, the policy that we have taken on is designed to move asset values, and it’s working.  The problem is:  How long do you let it stay in place.  My point is that we need to move to a more balanced policy.  Specifically, we need to be, again, preparing the market for a rate increase soon, so that you don’t get the imbalances that a collapse, whether in agriculture or the high-yield market that we talked about earlier, where yields are at historical lows.  That is what we need to be thinking about. I see little need to continue purchasing longer-term Treasury securities.  Instead, I recommend the purchases end sooner rather than later, and at something less than the number that’s been tossed out there.  I also recommend that we begin to form an exit strategy as soon as next time, if not sooner, to stop reinvesting principal payments from our securities holdings and to allow the size of our balance sheet to begin to stabilize and shrink.  Also, I continue to recommend that we change the forward guidance on the targeted level of the federal funds rate, because this banker I’m talking to says, “You’ve got to let rates low for an exceptionally long period.” The point is that we are still in the process of crisis policy that’s keeping rates artificially low, moving asset values up, causing these banks and others in the market to take on increasing risk by design.  Supervision, as good as it may be, can’t offset or fine tune any better than monetary policy can fine tune.  And that’s what I’m really worried about.  I am just pointing out that our current highly accommodative monetary policy needs to be turned down—not made tight policy, but needs to be turned down—and the sooner the better, so that we don’t create a new set of financial imbalances and develop longer-term inflationary expectations, because if we wait until we know we have it, it’s too late.  If history has taught us anything, it has taught us that. So that’s where I am on this.  I know I am outside this Committee’s boundaries, but I really strongly feel we are on a path that has a whole new set of issues that is coming at us, not next year, but in the long run.  That’s why I’m also concerned about an intermediate type of discussion, when the long run is where we really are setting things up for future challenges. So that is my issue around asset values.  It is not just agriculture.  I think that’s important.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement or contention. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, argues that the current monetary policy should be turned down, while others at the table may have differing opinions. He believes that the current policy is causing banks and others in the market to take on increasing risk, which could lead to financial imbalances and longer-term inflationary expectations. He emphasizes the need to avoid creating future challenges by addressing the issues with the current policy sooner rather than later.


Passage number 188.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a brief expression of thanks and a salutation, and does not contain any topics or statements that could generate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 189.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, but I do have some suggestions on language, and I’d like to get to those in just a moment.  But first, I’d like to comment on why I think B is the correctly calibrated policy for the situation. I have a pretty mainstream view relative to those around the table regarding the most likely path of the economy.  I see the most probable path as continuing expansion at a moderate pace, continuing but gradual employment progress, and acceptably well-behaved and stable underlying trend inflation.  So that’s a mainstream view. What has changed in my assessment of the situation is the range of risks and plausible negative scenarios that would deviate significantly from a baseline scenario.  Analysis by my staff suggests that an immediate, large, and sustained-for-some-period rise of oil prices would push the economy close to recessionary territory.  At the same time, I take seriously the risk identified in the Tealbook alternative entitled “persistent rise in inflation.”  In that scenario, high and rising commodity prices lead to an unanchoring of medium- and longer-term inflation expectations.  I think these two negative but opposed risks are very roughly balanced, but if I had to rank order them today, I would give a little bit more immediacy and weighting to the higher inflation concern.  That said, I don’t think there is yet compelling evidence of a magnitude that requires a response that longer-term inflation expectations are becoming unanchored.  But I would note, as I did in the economic go-round, that the TIPS indicators are at the top end of the range we’ve been depicting as stable, and the recent Michigan survey involved a tick up of longer-term household inflation expectations. A firming of policy, as others have suggested, may be needed sooner than we would otherwise intend.  But I think any signaling of that change before we are more certain it is needed will create unnecessary volatility in asset prices.  For that reason, I would prefer not to change the current asset purchase program, and I oppose the tapering idea.  Nor would I change, at this point, the “extended period” funds rate guidance. So my basic thought is:  Stay the course for the time being.  With employment levels improving, but having still so far to go to reach the desirable and achievable position, I don’t favor a tightening action as in alternative C.  Likewise, because I see rising inflation borne of shifting expectations as a real risk, I don’t support alternative A.  So net-net, I think B is the right answer at this juncture for the economic circumstances and the array of plausible negative developments. Let me comment on statement language.  First, I like President Kocherlakota’s suggestions that refine the language in paragraph 2.  Regarding the characterization of inflation and commodity price rises, as I commented in the previous round, I think describing measures of underlying inflation—and per President Plosser’s recent question, I take that to mean, technically, core and trimmed mean PCE measures—as “subdued” somewhat misrepresents recent activity in those measures.  I am concerned that this language could make the Committee appear out of touch.  Over the past three months, all measures of inflation have risen, and for that reason, I prefer a description of measures of underlying inflation that says:  “Measures of underlying inflation, while firming recently, remain low.” In paragraph 4, I think we repeat the “subdued” language.  My concern with that repeat is, one, it’s redundant; and two, as I have just suggested, it’s not quite aligned with recent data movement and could serve to antagonize the public, conceivably, and ultimately undermine our credibility.  So in paragraph 4, I would simply suggest that we delete the language starting with “including,” so that the sentence reads:  “The Committee will maintain a target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period.”  My concern, Mr. Chairman, is around not only the use, but the repeat use of the word “subdued.”  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses their support for alternative B and provides explanations for their views and suggestions for language changes, but there does not appear to be any direct contention or disagreement with others.


Passage number 190.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  So looking at that for a second, has there been a significant movement in core up.  I don’t think on a 12-month basis that’s really the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is stating an opinion about the significant movement in core up on a 12-month basis.


Passage number 191.
 MR. LACKER.  The three-month rate rose to 1 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the three-month rate rising to 1 percent.


Passage number 192.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "President Plosser" is simply stating a title or position without any indication of conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 193.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes, just a suggestion.  I agree with President Lockhart about the “subdued” language—it makes me a little nervous.  Couldn’t we just say that “Inflation expectations have remained stable, and measures of underlying inflation have firmed”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply expressing agreement with President Lockhart's suggestion about the language used regarding inflation expectations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 194.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  How about “have remained low”.  How is that.  Would that work for you, President Lockhart.  I think the part about getting stronger and firming—I think that goes against what we are trying to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting an alternative phrase, "have remained low," which contradicts the previous statement about something getting stronger and firming up. This shows a difference in opinion or conflicting ideas about the message they are trying to convey.


Passage number 195.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Well, we want to say that they’re not falling anymore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 196.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s still a subdued trend, though.  It’s a trend, as opposed to a recent movement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement acknowledges that there is a trend, but it also suggests that the trend is not significant or prominent, using the word "subdued" to describe it.


Passage number 197.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, you don’t like the word “subdued.”  “Low” means low.  They’re low.  They’re not trending anymore.  We got rid of “trending downward.”  I wouldn’t change paragraph 4 very lightly, Dennis, because that’s such an important paragraph.  Would you be okay with changing “subdued” to “low” or “have remained low”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing word choices and seeking agreement on whether to change "subdued" to "low" or "have remained low."


Passage number 198.
 MR. LOCKHART.  This is at the end of paragraph 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement made by Mr. Lockhart.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Paragraph 1, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the actual passage provided, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the first paragraph. Additional context is required to evaluate the presence of dispute or discord.


Passage number 200.
 MR. LOCKHART.  “The measures of underlying inflation have remained low”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 201.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Is that okay.  What do you think.  Anyone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker poses a question asking for the reader's opinion and approval, indicating that there may be differing viewpoints or potential disagreement that needs to be addressed or resolved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 202.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Well, my concern is that the attention of many of our audiences is going to be on the last three months, not the trend, as Bill is suggesting, and that we are inviting a view that we are not in touch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lockhart expresses concern that the audience's attention will be on the last three months, while Bill suggests focusing on the trend. This difference in perspective indicates disagreement on what aspect should be emphasized.


Passage number 203.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, this is a question of describing the medium term, and we may want to think more about how we will explain our medium-term objectives in the future.  But for the time being, we’re talking about the “underlying trend,” which basically means indicators like trimmed means and so on that have not really moved much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the need for further consideration and explanation of medium-term objectives.


Passage number 204.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Maybe we could say, then, “The measures of trends of underlying inflation have remained low.”  So you emphasize the word “trends.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests a slight modification to the wording in order to place emphasis on the word "trends." This is a suggestion for clarification rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 205.
” MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. It only includes the introduction of Mr. Fisher and his acknowledgment of the chairman.


Passage number 206.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: A "yes" answer indicates that there is contention or disagreement present in the passage. However, the passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine the specific source of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 207.
 MR. FISHER.  I think I’m pretty hawkish on this issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their own opinion without any opposing views or conflicts being discussed.


Passage number 208.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without seeing the passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the text.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 209.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m very concerned about inflation.  I think to say “low” is even worse than saying “subdued,” and I prefer to keep the language as it is.  I’ll argue some other things when I have my intervention, but if we say “are low, the trends are staying low,” I think it undermines our credibility.  I think it’s a mistake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, expresses concern about inflation and disagrees with the idea of using the word "low" to describe it. He believes that using this language undermines credibility.


Passage number 210.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Why don’t we just put this in the inventory of stuff we are going to come back to at the end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply suggests putting the mentioned item in the inventory of things to revisit later.


Passage number 211.
   MR. PLOSSER.  Put it in the parking lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Put it in the parking lot" suggests that the speaker is suggesting to set aside a certain topic or issue to be discussed or addressed later.


Passage number 212.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Dennis, anything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Dennis, anything else" does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 213.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I’m finished.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply conveys appreciation and completion.


Passage number 214.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage consists of only one word, "Okay," and does not present any specific statement or claim that can be subject to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 215.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m sorry I jumped in, then.  I didn’t know I was going next.  A couple of things are evident from this conversation.  One is that there is a feeling at the table that the recovery is gaining momentum.  The second is that we’re obviously taking caution to express ourselves on inflation carefully.  The third is that President Rosengren’s statements are getting longer.  I view him as a model of efficient expression, and I’m not sure how to read that, President Rosengren, but I’m going to study the entrails to try to understand it.  And the fourth is, I’m delighted to hear President Lacker talk about how the average businessman or businesswoman thinks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is primarily an observation and reflection on the conversation that took place.


Passage number 216.
 MR. LACKER.  Took some imagination.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 217.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir.  Back to the subject matter.  I am against tapering.  If I felt that there was any risk that we might advocate tapering, or extending the program, then I would argue alternative C, because I would like to begin tapering now down to lower levels.  But I read the drift at the table, and I am encouraged by the likelihood that this experiment with this extra phase of LSAPs, whether you were for it or against it, as I was, is coming to an end.  And I can live with alternative B under that assumption. I’m sorry to do this, because I know President Tarullo is about to squirm out of his seat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 218.
 MR. TARULLO.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 219.
 MR. FISHER.  Governor Tarullo.  Well, maybe someday, “President” Tarullo.  One slight editorial suggestion—I apologize—and that is with regard to a suggestion made by President Plosser in writing.  Our mandate does not refer to the unemployment rate.  The suggestion I have is in the second paragraph.  Instead of what we have as a second sentence, I would say, “Although the level of unemployment has recently declined, it is still elevated.”  Take out the word “rate.”  This is a problem that we have to deal with.  We are talking about the level of employment or unemployment in our mandate.  I also don’t like the word “remains.”  “Remains” has a stickiness to it, and it sounds like we are reluctant.  But the fact is, it is still elevated, and so I would say, “Although the level of unemployment has recently declined,” which is a fact, “it is still elevated.”  Then you could go on to say, “The measure of underlying inflation”—I think President Kocherlakota’s suggestions are excellent. I do not believe we should put a pace of $80 billion a month into the statement.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply offering an editorial suggestion and expressing their opinion on certain wording choices.


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The last thing—repeat the last thing you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking the reader to repeat the last thing they said, without introducing any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 221.
 MR. FISHER.  Sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the rest of the passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 222.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I didn’t understand the last thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the speaker did not understand something, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 223.
 MR. FISHER.  I do not believe we should put the $80 billion a month in the statement.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their personal belief or opinion without addressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 224.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply includes expressions of gratitude and a statement acknowledging Governor Yellen.


Passage number 225.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B with the changes proposed by Presidents Kocherlakota and Williams.  I am comfortable with the stance of policy for now.  I favor completing our announced program of Treasury purchases and maintaining the “extended period” language. The outlook for economic growth has improved somewhat.  But regardless of how one reads the labor market, there is an awfully long road to travel to attain our maximum employment objective.  In addition, both headline and core inflation remain subdued, in spite of rising commodity prices.  I therefore believe we can be patient in withdrawing accommodation.  That said, recent commodity price increases do create inflationary risks.  And while past experience provides comfort, it does not guarantee future results.  We must certainly monitor incoming data carefully, and it is conceivable that we may need to respond.  Indeed, all along, our “extended period” pledge has been tied to economic conditions, including subdued inflation trends and stable inflation expectations. With respect to tapering, I see no particular need, given our past experience and Brian’s discussion, to taper our purchases as the program winds down.  On paragraph 3, therefore, my preference is to exclude the bracketed language.  Information on the pace of purchases would be needed if the Committee intended to vary the pace in coming months, but without tapering, I believe it would be more confusing to markets to include wording we omitted last time. Looking ahead, the risks to the outlook for both inflation and economic growth have, to my mind, increased considerably.  We need to be prepared to respond to whatever developments unfold in the days ahead.  So even as we return to planning for an eventual exit from our accommodative policy, I consider it important to remain prepared to provide additional stimulus should downside risks to the expansion materialize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It presents the speaker's views and preferences regarding monetary policy and acknowledges the possibility of needing to respond to future developments.


Passage number 226.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 227.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  I do believe the recovery is on firmer footing, but that belief is tempered by uncertainty about the effect of higher gas prices on consumer and business confidence, uncertainty about the effect of unrest in the MENA region, problems in peripheral Europe, and the horrors unfolding in Japan.  And it’s also tempered by the memory of our belief this time last year that the recovery was gaining momentum. I would applaud the changes offered by Presidents Kocherlakota and Williams, and I believe that they are more significant than simple wordsmithing.  I think one of the biggest difficulties we face in our communication and our credibility is the disconnect between a discussion of headline, underlying, trimmed, core inflation, and pass-throughs that takes place in this room and the conversations that take place among the general public and business people about the rising costs of gas, food, and health care.  So I think framing our discussion of inflation in terms of near term and medium term is probably easier for normal people to understand than any of these other measures. Second, to the pace of $80 billion a month, I think we learned at the last meeting that it creates confusion to make small changes to the amount often necessitated by technical factors.  And we now have evidence that the stock is more important than the flow.  I think a consistent communication of the total stock that we intend to purchase or, when the time comes, to sell across a definitive time frame will give an indication of the pace of sales without creating another item that we have to potentially adjust.  So I would not be in favor of adding that one.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker expresses their opinion and offers reasons for their preferred alternative, but there is no disagreement or argument.


Passage number 228.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 229.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B with Narayana’s first-degree amendment and John’s second-degree amendment.  I am sympathetic to Dennis’s comments on the language here, but I guess, Dennis, my reaction is, we’ve already added the two sentences in paragraph 2.  I favor the addition of the last clause, the “close attention” clause, to the second of those sentences for many of the reasons that you articulated.  On my theory that people pay attention to the changes in the statement as much as to what is in the statement itself, I think people’s attention will already be drawn some to the recent inflation question. On Richard’s suggestion, I am indifferent, Mr. Chairman, but I certainly have no problem saying, “Currently, unemployment remains elevated,” as opposed to “the unemployment rate.”  And I probably feel a little bit more about that now than I might have previously, precisely because it’s not at all clear to me what the unemployment rate is doing right now. That’s all.  Thank you.  Oh, and the $80 billion a month, I don’t have strong views on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their preferences for certain amendments and clarifies their position on certain statements, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention with anyone else's views.


Passage number 230.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions Governor Raskin without any indication of conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 231.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also support the action described in alternative B.  I am comfortable with the current stance of monetary policy and underscore the need for vigilance and care as we watch the current course of commodity prices and their potential for dislodging stable inflation expectations.  That said, the path to full recovery is prolonged by several risks.  One significant risk that has been underscored today is the extent to which slowdowns in consumer spending and continued weakness in housing markets raise concerns about the strength and durability of the recovery.  The run-up in energy costs, if it persists, also could weigh on household spending and on non-energy goods and services, and the turmoil in the Middle East and the disaster in Japan may exacerbate this effect.  This question alone suggests a high threshold for making an adjustment to the purchase program.  Unexpectedly discontinuing or reducing the current program at a time of heightened uncertainty regarding households’ abilities to absorb higher food and gas prices would prematurely inhibit the consumption component necessary for more-robust growth. I also support the President Kocherlakota changes to paragraph 2, as further amended by President Williams, and look forward to debate on changes proposed by President Lockhart and President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and the current stance of monetary policy. They also acknowledge the risks to the recovery, such as slowdowns in consumer spending and energy costs, but there is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 232.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. The phrase "Thank you" followed by "Vice Chairman" simply expresses gratitude towards the Vice Chairman without implying any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 233.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I talk about the choices for this meeting, I just want to talk briefly about the risks in terms of higher inflation expectations for our choices over the medium term. In the economic go-round, I raised my concerns that longer-term inflation expectations could become unhinged, and that would obviously be problematic in terms of inflation.  But I want to stress here that I also worry about the other side of the equation, that premature tightening could wrack a recovery that is still fragile.  In this regard, the U.S. experience in 1937 is quite instructive:  Commodity prices were rising quickly then, wholesale inflation was climbing noticeably, and even consumer prices were rising despite a tremendous amount of slack in the economy.  What happened in 1937 is that Federal Reserve officials changed their communication strategy and began emphasizing the risks of higher inflation, and they also raised reserve requirements.  What happened was that the U.S. economy quickly fell back into recession.  So we should be concerned about inflation expectations and the risks that could add to inflation, but we really should understand that it is a two-sided risk. With that said, for the time being, my preference is to be as patient as we can be and to work as hard as we can through our communications to try to keep inflation expectations well anchored.  Some of this we can control through our communications; some of it we can’t control.  But we should do the things we can do to keep inflation expectations well anchored by how we communicate with the market. In terms of today’s decision, I would support alternative B.  I think it accomplishes what we want to do.  It recognizes the improvement in the outlook.  It makes it clear that we do not expect commodity price pressures to feed through to underlying inflation.  And I think it makes no changes, as written, in terms of our policy message. There is no question in my mind at this point that we should complete our $600 billion Treasury purchase program, because it is helping to achieve our objectives.  I don’t think it’s necessary to taper purchases as we come to the end of the program.  I don’t think there’s any likely substantive benefit.  Market participants do not expect tapering.  So I think that putting it in would just create questions about what we are up to, as opposed to actually accomplishing anything constructive. I would not insert the “$80 billion a month” phrase for the same reasons that we didn’t insert it last time.  It would needlessly create uncertainty about why we put it back in. In terms of the other changes, I am happy with the Kocherlakota change and the Williams change.  As for President Fisher’s change—I’m perfectly comfortable living with “unemployment” as opposed to “unemployment rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own concerns and preferences, but there is no direct argument with anyone else.


Passage number 234.
”  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay, thank you all.  Well, as I said earlier, I don’t think this is the time to be making major changes in our policy, but I understand the concerns and issues that people have raised, and there are risks, I think, in both directions. I think that April will be a very important meeting.  It will be a meeting where I hope that we will be able to provide clarity to the markets on our future plans regarding purchases, at least, and hopefully we will make progress on exit strategy discussions as well.  So, again, that will be an important meeting. With respect to the statement, people have focused on alternative B, which, of course, I agree with.  In paragraph 2, there has been strong acceptance of President Kocherlakota’s amendment with the Williams addition, which I will read quickly:  “The recent increases in the prices of energy and other commodities are currently putting upward pressure on inflation.  The Committee expects these effects to be transient, but it will pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations.”  In general, I don’t like to make unnecessary changes, but I guess I am okay changing the “unemployment rate” to “unemployment,” if that makes people more comfortable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges concerns and issues raised by others but does not engage in any argument or debate.


Passage number 235.
  MR. PLOSSER.  Well, I suggested that in my memo earlier, so I think it’s a good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. MR. PLOSSER simply mentions that he had suggested something in his memo and expresses his opinion that it is a good idea. There is no opposing viewpoint or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 236.
 MR. EVANS.  Mr. Chairman, can I offer a comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Evans is simply seeking permission to make a comment.


Passage number 237.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "Okay" does not convey any form of contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges understanding or agreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 238.
 MR. EVANS.  This is a very serious change, and I’m not sure I understand it.  The language on the unemployment rate is very familiar; we all understand it.  We have spent a lot of time talking about what a natural rate of unemployment is, and we have talked about structural unemployment.  So we sort of understand 5, 5½ percent, whatever your favorite number is.  Now, with the new language, we are talking about the level of unemployment.  How many millions of people are unemployed today, and do we have an idea of how many million unemployed it will have to be so that it will no longer be “elevated,” but it will be “improving”.  What is the right number when we get to an acceptable level.  Is it zero million unemployed.  I just don’t know the answers to these questions, but with all of the time we spent trying to educate people on the natural rate, we might have to do that on the levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses confusion and uncertainty about the change in language regarding the level of unemployment. They question the new terminology and express frustration about not knowing the answers to their questions.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I think people would read that as “unemployment rate.”  But I’ll tell you what, we are going to take straw votes in just a minute on a couple of items.  That’s one of them.  The second one is another suggestion of President Plosser, to strike the word “somewhat” in the second line.  And the third is President Lockhart’s.  I’m trying to find a solution at the end of paragraph 1.  How about “and inflation trends remain low”.  Is that better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply discussing suggestions and seeking input on potential changes.


Passage number 240.
 MR. LOCKHART.  You are emphasizing the word “trends,” which is just a longer term than the last three months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lockhart is giving clarification or further explanation about the use of the word "trends" and its longer-term perspective compared to the last three months.


Passage number 241.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  As opposed to “underlying.”  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply providing a clarification or alternative perspective to the term "underlying."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 242.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I am not sure you have enough people supporting the view that the word “subdued” is a problem around the table.  So you should really go with the majority of the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement or contention regarding the word "subdued." Mr. Lockhart suggests that there may not be enough people supporting the view that the word is a problem, implying that there are differing opinions within the committee.


Passage number 243.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that’s what I plan to do.  [Laughter]  All right.  Let me ask, is there any further comment on “somewhat,” which slightly strengthens it.  Is there any objection to making that change.  Anyone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking input or feedback from others, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 244.
 MR. FISHER.  Which one is that, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 245.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Dropping the word “somewhat” in the second line—is that okay with you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is simply asking for the reader's opinion or preference on whether it is acceptable to remove the word "somewhat" in the second line.


Passage number 246.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m in favor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Fisher is in favor of something without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 247.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  All right.  We’ll do that.  The second proposal is to change, at the end of B1, “measures of underlying inflation have been subdued” to “and inflation trends have been low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the second proposal.


Passage number 248.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  “Trend” “low” is a funny construction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Trend" "low" is simply described as a funny construction, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas presented.


Passage number 249.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What’s the right construction. PARTICIPANT.  Moderate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions. It is simply a question followed by a one-word response.


Passage number 250.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the full passage provided, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 251.
  I’m not sure, but— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “But inflation trends are subdued”—would that be any better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about a topic and then asking a question to seek clarification or further information.


Passage number 252.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I think one of the efforts here is to convey the notion that we have expressed concern about falling inflation.  We are confusing rates and levels, and so, while it may be subdued, it has also stabilized in the sense that we are no longer getting more disinflation.  I guess that is the concept.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is explaining that although there may be concern about falling inflation, it has stabilized and is no longer decreasing further.


Passage number 253.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I was suggesting, “measures of underlying inflation remain low,” which suggests that they are low but not falling anymore.  That doesn’t help you, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining that their previous suggestion does not provide any assistance in the given context.


Passage number 254.
  MR. PLOSSER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions "MR. PLOSSER" without providing any additional information or context to determine any potential contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 255.
  I prefer “subdued” to “low,” but— MR. FISHER.  Yes, I do, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a preference for the word "subdued" over "low," while Mr. Fisher agrees and says, "Yes, I do, too." This indicates that there is contention between the individuals as they have different opinions on the matter.


Passage number 256.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it’s fine the way it’s written.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "I think it’s fine the way it’s written." It simply expresses a personal opinion without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 257.
 MR. LACKER.  We use the same language again in paragraph 2:  “measures of underlying inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply referring to the language used in paragraph 2.


Passage number 258.
”  You know, making that variation— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fine, fine.  Okay.  I’m worried about time.  With apologies, so the only change we’re making in B1 is to drop the word “somewhat” in the second line.  And, finally, with apologies to President Bullard, I didn’t hear much support for putting in the $80 billion.  So let’s strike that.  Again, with apologies.  Any further comments.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply informing others about some changes and apologizing for certain decisions.


Passage number 259.
 MR. LACKER.  Can I respectfully suggest we change the word “transient” to “transitory”.  It has a less ephemeral connotation, and it is I think a more broadly used term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker respectfully suggests a change in wording, but there is no opposition or argument from anyone else stated in the passage.


Passage number 260.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any English majors who care to comment on “transient” versus “transitory”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply inviting English majors to provide their opinion and insights on the usage of the words "transient" and "transitory." There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 261.
  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think “transitory” is a little better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement with no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 262.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  “Transitory” it is.  Anyone else.  Any comments.  Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for further comments or input from others.


Passage number 263.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I’m sorry.  What was the decision on “unemployment” versus the “unemployment rate” in the second sentence of paragraph 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or confirmation about a decision that has already been made.


Passage number 264.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We haven’t decided.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that a decision has not yet been made without expressing any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 265.
 MR. ENGLISH.  If I could just point out one thing there.  I think the intent when that sentence was originally written, which I think was following the October videoconference, was to point to the long-run projections in the SEP, which is why we picked up the unemployment rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation or clarification.


Passage number 266.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  It’s linked to the SEP.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply affirming that something is connected or linked to the SEP (whatever that may refer to) and confirming that the statement is correct.


Passage number 267.
 MR. ENGLISH.  So that would change if we made it “unemployment” rather than “unemployment rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a hypothetical situation and does not present any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 268.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we are going to talk in a few minutes about linking up our statement and our policy to the SEP more explicitly, and “unemployment rate” is what we forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that they will discuss aligning their statement and policy with the SEP and mentioning that they forecast the "unemployment rate."


Passage number 269.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I agree with President Evans.  This would be a major change and something we should do with tremendous contemplation and thought, not in the last three minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply expresses agreement and emphasizes the need for careful consideration before making a major change.


Passage number 270.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Again, with apologies to many good suggestions, we are making the changes that were suggested by President Kocherlakota with the Williams addition, and we are dropping the word “somewhat” in the second line.  If there are no further comments—Matt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging and accepting the suggestions made by President Kocherlakota and making changes accordingly. The mention of dropping the word "somewhat" suggests a willingness to make edits. There is also a request for any further comments, indicating openness to additional suggestions. Overall, the tone is cooperative and agreeable.


Passage number 271.
 MR. LUECKE.  This vote will cover alternative B on page 3 with the changes indicated by Chairman Bernanke, as well as the directive for alternative B on page 7 of the handout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 272.
  Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke  Yes President Evans  Yes President Fisher  Yes President Kocherlakota Yes President Plosser  Yes Governor Raskin  Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes Governor Yellen  Yes  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  We have an additional item on communication.  What I would like to recommend is that we go get some lunch, come back to the table, and have a brief discussion, if that would work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The listed individuals all agree with the recommendation of having lunch and having a brief discussion.


Passage number 273.
 [Lunch break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The last substantive item is a recommendation on communications from Governor Yellen’s subcommittee.  As you know, she is going to talk about the idea of having press conferences. I will be happy to answer questions, and so on, from my perspective as well, but I just want to say one thing before I turn the floor over to Janet, which is that I want to thank President Plosser and his colleagues for the good work they did on a numerical objective for inflation.  I just want to be clear that this discussion today is motivated by timing considerations.  It is not intended to be a substitute—I think, in fact, it will be a complement—for our discussion on the numerical objective, which Governor Yellen’s subcommittee will take up in due course and bring back to the Committee.  So let’s keep this discussion today separate from that, if we could, and see what progress we can make.  Let me turn this over to Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is thanking President Plosser and expressing their intention for the current discussion to be separate from a future discussion.


Passage number 274.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to begin with a few comments concerning the subcommittee’s rationale for moving ahead with press conferences.  And I’d like to then highlight a couple of aspects of the arrangements that we are recommending. When the subcommittee on communications was reconstituted last fall, a crucial element of our mission was to consider approaches for ensuring that the public understands both the consensus of the Committee and the diversity of views among individual participants.  One obvious pitfall of our existing communications framework is that after the end of each blackout period, the timing and sequencing of participants’ speeches and other external communications has been rather random.  And it’s become increasingly apparent that such a random ordering can contribute to public confusion about our monetary policy decisions. In considering how to redress this problem, we looked closely at the experience of other central banks, especially ones where monetary policy decisions are made by committees.  Although the communications practices of foreign central banks are diverse, we found it notable that press conferences are held by all of the major foreign central banks, and, indeed, by nearly all central banks in foreign industrial countries, the only exceptions being Australia, Denmark, Iceland, and the national central banks of the euro area.  Such press conferences are uniformly seen as an important and effective communications tool.  Moreover, for central banks like the ECB and the Bank of England, regular press conferences seem to have been particularly helpful recently in highlighting the consensus of the policy committee in a context where a diversity of views has been readily apparent to the public. In light of those considerations, the subcommittee recommends that the Chairman conduct quarterly press conferences in the afternoon after the conclusion of each two-day FOMC meeting.  The ECB, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Canada each conduct press conferences while the markets are open.  The purpose is to allow any news to be digested into market prices. Now, to accomplish this, we would need to issue the FOMC statement somewhat earlier after two-day meetings.  And, in particular, we would propose that the first day of each two-day meeting would start two hours earlier so that we could conclude by 11 a.m. on the second day, issue a statement at 1:15 p.m., and then begin the press briefings at 2:15 p.m. The approach recommended by the subcommittee would ensure that the Chairman is the first person on the Committee who communicates with the public after each two-day FOMC meeting.  As in each of his speeches and testimony on monetary policy, the Chairman would try to convey the sense of the Committee’s thinking at these press conferences while making note of the diversity of views, as appropriate.  Of course, given the dynamic and interactive nature of a press conference, it is important to recognize that the Chairman would need to have full ownership of the answers that he gives in Q&A, and we recommend that this same principle would apply to any prepared remarks that he would present at the start of each press conference. One significant benefit of initiating these press conferences is that there could be a corresponding shortening of the blackout period following each two-day FOMC meeting.  Needless to say, no Committee participant should be present at the press conference themselves, and FOMC participants should not have contact with media representatives afterward.  Moreover, the subcommittee recommends that all forms of external communications—that includes speeches, editorials, and media interviews—would be embargoed until the end of the postmeeting blackout period.  But the subcommittee thinks that a blackout period ending at noon Eastern Time on the day after two-day FOMC meetings would be appropriate.  Such an arrangement would help keep public attention focused on the FOMC meeting statement and the Chairman’s press conference for a full media cycle, including the TV news on Wednesday evening, as well as the newspapers on Thursday morning.  Under these arrangements, each of you would be completely free to communicate your own individual views on monetary policy starting on the Thursday afternoon after each two-day FOMC meeting.  I should also note that our subcommittee has not yet reached any conclusions about other potential changes in the blackout period, such as the timing of the blackout for one-day meetings.  Rather, any such recommendations will be brought forward for your consideration at a later date. Our subcommittee believes that press conferences could be particularly useful if the Chairman is able to make reference to the contours of the latest SEP projections in his opening remarks as well as in Q&A.  Such an approach would likely draw greater public attention to our economic outlook and could be helpful in explaining how the Committee’s policy strategy is informed by our longer-run projections for output growth and unemployment and our individual assessments of the mandate-consistent inflation rate.  And, in fact, by incorporating information from the SEP, we believe that these press conferences would significantly enhance FOMC communications regarding the Committee’s overarching policy framework as well as our specific policy decisions. Of course, to the extent that these press conferences draw greater public attention to the SEP, it will be helpful to keep in mind that the SEP itself is a communication tool that may well evolve somewhat over time.  For example, one fairly obvious limitation of the SEP is that it doesn’t include any information about our individual assessments regarding the appropriate path of policy, even though our projections for economic activity and inflation are contingent on these policy assessments.  The Chairman may wish to respond to any such questions by noting that potential enhancements to the SEP will be considered as part of the Committee’s ongoing efforts to enhance our public communications. Finally, the subcommittee recommends moving forward with these press conferences starting with the April FOMC meeting.  The April meeting is a two-day meeting.  It is the last meeting until October that will not be followed with Humphrey-Hawkins testimony.  That meeting may be particularly consequential, because the Committee will be deciding whether to complete the final phase of our $600 billion asset purchase program, and we may well be considering certain aspects of our policy strategy over horizons extending beyond the end of June. About 10 days ago we circulated—and I hope you have in front of you—a set of questions to guide our discussion now.  I am not proposing we have a full go-round, but it would be very helpful if you would make note of any specific concerns you might have about moving forward with this initiative, and if you would indicate whether you agree that the first such press conference should take place following the April FOMC meeting.  Let me stop there and, rather than have a full go-round, please feel free to make comments or pose questions to either of us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Ms. Yellen explaining the rationale and recommendations for holding press conferences after FOMC meetings.


Passage number 275.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me add quickly that I am very comfortable with this proposal.  I think the difference between the Fed and other central banks has become quite striking—every other central bank does have this method for communication. I am sure it is something we will learn about as we go; we’ll be learning by doing.  But I want to assure everybody that my objective is both to present the modal view—that is, the policy decision— quickly after the meeting, or at least quarterly—and to give some sense of what was discussed and what diversity of views there was.  So my goal would be to represent the views of the broad Committee. In terms of documents, my assumption is that they would have in advance the Committee’s statement, which we would continue to develop as we do now, and they would also have just the SEP numbers—not the full narrative description, but the numbers in the projections.  I would simply go over those numbers, and I would try to talk about the day’s policy decision.  I think a useful objective here is to try to put the policy decision in the context of the longer-term SEP, which then in turn will generate more interest in the SEP.  But let me stop there, and, again, either one of us can answer questions, or we would be eager to hear your comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their comfort and reassurance with a proposal, and providing an explanation of their goals and objectives.


Passage number 276.
 MR. HOENIG.  I have a question, and I do have a comment.  Governor Yellen, when you say “full ownership” of remarks and Q&A, what do you mean by that, in terms of the Chairman’s having full ownership of that.  In terms of, he is responsible for it, or in terms of, it reflects the full range of views.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a question and a comment from Mr. Hoenig.


Passage number 277.
 MS. YELLEN.  I guess what I mean is that if he makes some remarks, they are his remarks as opposed to something that he would need to have approved by the Committee.  The FOMC statement would remain, obviously, a full Committee statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, is explaining that if someone makes remarks, they would be their own personal remarks rather than something that would need approval from the Committee. She also states that the FOMC statement would still be a statement agreed upon by the full Committee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 278.
 MR. HOENIG.  Okay.  The second question that I have is around the idea that we are comparing ourselves with other central banks.  I may not have this right, but if I read it right, the United Kingdom doesn’t actually have a press conference after its meeting; it’s when it releases its projections.  So that’s different than what you’re suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Hoenig is questioning or challenging the suggestion made by someone else regarding comparing themselves with other central banks, specifically the United Kingdom's approach to press conferences and releasing projections.


Passage number 279.
 MS. YELLEN.  That is different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement by Ms. Yellen does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about something being different. Additional context is needed to determine if there is any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 280.
 MR. HOENIG.  And that is not unlike our Humphrey-Hawkins—I mean, in the sense that we put out our projections and respond to questions before Congress.  My other point is—and I’m a little uneasy about doing this, but—at the ECB, they don’t produce minutes, and they don’t have a vote.  So it’s a different model altogether than what we’re talking about here.  And my concern around that is, as we compare ourselves with them, we are not comparing the same things.  There’s a question of handling the difference in views.  We have a broad range of views, sometimes broader than others, and I know that the Chairman represents those, because he does the summaries very nicely.  But we do have minutes that are released, we do have a statement, and if we want to really have that incorporated, my question is:  Why don’t we concentrate on moving the minutes up more quickly, so that you have them out sooner.  And we also have transcripts that others don’t. This Chairman, I understand, would do it very well, but as you get the Chairman up there trying to represent very different views in this press conference, sometimes more different than others, the concern is that you get that out there clearly.  And then, a day later we’re out giving speeches, and if it doesn’t line up, we’re going to have some real problems.  What we’re going to do over time is be forced to the mean.  That is, you don’t want to get too far out of line, if you didn’t quite hear it that way.  And what people hear and do are sometimes quite a bit different. So those are some of the concerns I have about going forward with this.  And I apologize, I didn’t send notes in, because I got to this later than I wanted to.  But those are the things that occurred to me as I was reading this on the plane here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, expresses uneasiness about the current model of the ECB, which does not produce minutes or have a vote. He raises concerns about comparing the Federal Reserve's model with the ECB's, as they are not comparing the same things. Mr. Hoenig suggests that the Federal Reserve should focus on releasing minutes more quickly and ensuring that different views are accurately represented, as speeches given afterwards could cause confusion and problems if they don't align with the minutes.


Passage number 281.
 MS. YELLEN.  Dennis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only mentions the name "Dennis" without providing any context or indication of disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 282.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Janet, obviously, a press conference after four of our meetings a year really adds a great deal of clarification to what the Committee is thinking.  Did you discuss at all whether any change in the statement format would be required at those meetings or at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, suggests that a press conference after each of the four meetings would provide more clarity, while the other person, Janet, may disagree or have reservations about the effectiveness or necessity of changing the statement format.


Passage number 283.
 MS. YELLEN.  I don’t think we are envisioning any change in the way the statement would be crafted.  And we would be getting the statement out to the press an hour before the press conference begins, so that reporters have a chance to absorb it, and then ask intelligent questions at the press conference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there is no contention or disagreement. It explains that there is no change in how the statement would be crafted and that reporters will have time to absorb it and ask intelligent questions during the press conference.


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  To give an example, what the ECB does is they have a statement that the President reads, to start.  And it consists, as I understand it, of several paragraphs of general outlook material prepared by the staff in advance of the meeting, and then a policy paragraph, which is similar to our statement, and then it’s agreed upon by the Council.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 285.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I want to observe that before doing this, I would imagine we will be more inclined to change the statement when the Chairman is about to give a press conference, because he will be there to be able to explain it very quickly.  So it may actually free up the statement a little bit compared to what it is right now, where we are very hesitant to change the statement, because we’re always worried about how people will interpret it.  This would probably mitigate that issue a little bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the possibility of changing a statement and suggests that having the Chairman present during a press conference could facilitate a quicker explanation, potentially easing concerns about interpretation.


Passage number 286.
 MS. YELLEN.  Narayana.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 287.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m going to say two conflicting things.  On the one hand, I think—and this follows up on some stuff that Tom was mentioning as well—this is an institutional change, and it transcends any particular person who is the chair at this time.  I think that we all have a great deal of confidence in Chairman Bernanke’s ability and desire to communicate the broad cross-section of views.  But this is going to be an institutional change that will transcend this particular individual. On the other hand, I would say that—and, actually, this also follows on what Bill was saying—last August we had I think a one-day meeting, and at that meeting we made a change in policy in terms of reinvesting the MBSs.  There were good economic reasons for doing that, but it was a very confusing period.  I guess the question would be:  Did you give any thought to doing this after every meeting.  And the final thing I will say is that there are a lot of talented public affairs people around the system, and I, at least, feel like I can’t get my PA people involved right now in this because it is Class I FOMC; they aren’t Class I.  If there is a systematic way to get the PA community involved in our discussions of communication, I think that would be good for the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 288.
  MS. YELLEN.  I guess on the issue of what happens after one-day meetings, the thought here was to begin in a more controlled way with two-day meetings.  But there’s nothing in this proposal that ultimately would rule out having this after other meetings as well, but we certainly didn’t want to start there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 289.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I feel it’s distinguishing the meetings in an unusual way.  It’s not like we only make important decisions at two-day meetings that require a lot of clarification.  So if we are going to go down this path, I actually would suggest thinking about doing it every time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is expressing his opinion and suggesting a different approach, but there is no direct contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 290.
 MS. YELLEN.  The distinguishing feature of the two-day meetings is the economic projections and the ability that that would give the Chairman to explain our overall framework and put decisions into the context of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 291.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  But those June projections would still be available in August.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the availability of projections in August.


Passage number 292.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Michelle, what is the feasibility of ad hoc press conferences, if necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is simply asking Michelle about the feasibility of ad hoc press conferences, if necessary.


Passage number 293.
 MS. SMITH.  If you’ve got something really important to say, an ad hoc press conference will certainly get the attention of people you are trying to communicate with.  [Laughter]   The bar is high for an ad hoc sort of gathering.  Logistically, it’s possible, if there’s nothing that makes it impossible.  So you could do it.  The New York Fed would probably say that predictability of these sorts of things for market participants is preferred.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply explores the possibility of holding an ad hoc press conference.


Passage number 294.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It helps lower the temperature level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states a fact that something (presumably an action or method) helps lower the temperature level. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 295.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  I was just saying, in case of a situation like Narayana was talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply offering information in response to something that was previously discussed.


Passage number 296.
 MS. SMITH.  Certainly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. SMITH's response is affirmative and does not display any disagreement or tension.


Passage number 297.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Another issue that you might want to think about is feasibility.  The discussion today was such that we would not have been able to get a statement out at 1:15 p.m.  So for one-day meetings, if we are going to have a press conference at 2:15 p.m. and get a statement out at 1:15 p.m., we are going to be beginning at 7 a.m. or we are going to be beginning the evening before.  I think there is a question of, how quickly can the Committee get its business done.  And if we seriously are going to have press conferences after one-day meetings, I am just not sure there is time to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is raising a logistical issue and expressing uncertainty about whether there is enough time to have a press conference after a one-day meeting.


Passage number 298.
 MS. SMITH.  It might be helpful to mention that there are two basic models internationally.  There is the Bank of England/Bank of Canada model that has these sorts of things four times a year that happen with the release of their projections or their inflation report.  Then you have the ECB/Bank of Japan model, which is basically every meeting no matter what gets announced and on the same day. I think what has come out of this is more of a hybrid approach.  Not every time the Committee meets are you doing something that the world isn’t prepared to accept and to understand.  Sometimes it is.  Sometimes it’s more jarring; it needs some explaining.  I think one vulnerability here was exactly Narayana’s point, that you could have an important meeting at a time that doesn’t sync up well with your quarterly plan, in which case you could improvise.  You could decide to have the Chairman give a speech the next day or two days later and, really, we could pull that together.  That is certainly possible.  What you did back in the fall when you decided to embark on LSAPs was the Chairman had an op-ed in the Washington Post the next day.  You could improvise to get your message out on those times, but we are blazing a hybrid path between what the world central banks have got going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 299.
 MS. YELLEN.  Jeff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any information about MS. YELLEN's views or statements, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 300.
 MR. LACKER.  I wonder, given President Kocherlakota’s comment, whether there would be some hesitance to take actions in between press conference meetings, and I am not quite sure what the answer to that is, but I think it is worth considering. The other thing is, why 2:15 p.m..  Why not on the hour.  I have always wondered this about the statement.  Is there something magic in markets about quarter after.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity and asking questions.


Passage number 301.
 MR. TARULLO.  It’s the alignment to the constellations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a simple observation and does not imply any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 302.
 MR. LACKER.  Alignment to the stars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Alignment to the stars" is not a statement that can be agreed or disagreed upon.


Passage number 303.
  [Laughter] MS. YELLEN.  The answer, I guess, is that the bond markets close at three.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 304.
   MR. LACKER.  Oh, three o’clock, right, when the bond markets close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of a fact.


Passage number 305.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  As late as possible so that you could actually get it out before the bond markets close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is discussing the timing of something without presenting any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 306.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay, great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses agreement or satisfaction with the previous statement or situation.


Passage number 307.
 MS. YELLEN.  Sarah.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context that indicates any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a person's name, "Sarah," without any additional information.


Passage number 308.
 MS. RASKIN.  One question I have has to do with the scope of the rule, so to speak, and that is, I assume that the blackout period, although shortened, covers everybody, even individuals who may have dissented at the meeting; is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 309.
 MS. YELLEN.  Absolutely.  Everybody is covered.  It would be until noon the next day.  It covers everybody and all forms of communication on the economy or monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the coverage of communication on the economy or monetary policy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 310.
 MR. TARULLO.  This is probably a good moment to indicate that I think the subcommittee proposal is fine, a good idea, although some of these issues do bear a little bit of thinking.  I have to say, I am concerned about ending the blackout period sooner, and I’m concerned about it, I think, precisely because of the scenario Tom laid out, which is:  Ben gives the press conference, and then there are a bunch of people waiting for 12:01 p.m. the next day to go out and give their own gloss on what’s happened.  And I fear that the dominant play here may end up being defecting, in which case you get a lot of people doing it. I understand the notion of trying to give vent to different or dissenting voices, but I guess, because my observation has been that we have had plenty of dissent, and much of it public, and I’m not sure it has been particularly useful for the Committee as a whole, that maybe we want to rethink a little bit the acceleration of the end of the blackout period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo expresses concern about ending the blackout period sooner, while the subcommittee proposal thinks it is a good idea.


Passage number 311.
 MR. LOCKHART.  And as a practical matter, Michelle, can we produce a transcript that is in our hands in what would be, I guess, 22 hours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a question posed by Mr. Lockhart, seeking clarification on the feasibility of producing a transcript within a specific timeframe.


Passage number 312.
 MS. SMITH.  Yes, we could.  Our intent would be to have this webcasted live.  It would be covered live, and we would have redundancy on the transcript.  We have had brief conversations with the FOMC Secretariat about having the transcription service that puts the meeting transcript together also do that.  And our experience is that almost every time the Chairman is out in public, a transcript gets produced by the news services quickly, sometimes very quickly.  I e-mail it to you all pretty frequently.  Sometimes it has got some slight spelling errors in it, but we would clean that up and get it to you very quickly, and you would have a video.  The video of the entire event would live on our website.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their intent to have a webcast of an event and provide a transcript and video of the event.


Passage number 313.
 MS. YELLEN.  Charlie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 314.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’m generally very supportive of this.  I think transparency is a good thing, as a general rule.  I do share a little bit of the concerns about how this might work in different regimes with different Chairmen, and I don’t know that I know the answer to that problem, but I think it’s something to give some thought to. The other thing is, I want to pick up on an observation that Bill made, which I thought is very interesting.  I have often felt and expressed the view that our statements are very confining at times.  Our language is very confining, and I’ve often said I wish I could blow up the statement every meeting and write a new one so that we don’t feel so constrained about how we say things.  Bill’s observation was the thought that, well, might this be a mechanism where we can become more flexible in the way we write the statements, and I didn’t hear anybody else say anything about that.  I thought that is an intriguing idea, and I wonder what the subcommittee had thought about this or what other people might think about that.  It was just a reaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser expresses support for transparency and shares some concerns, but there is no indication of any disagreement or argument between individuals.


Passage number 315.
 MS. YELLEN.  My own sense is that’s entirely possible that we may come to view ourselves as having greater flexibility in the statement once the Chairman is just several hours later taking Q&A about our policy and commenting on it.  But it’s hard to predict exactly how that’s going to evolve over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their personal opinion and acknowledging the difficulty of predicting the future.


Passage number 316.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We could look at the ECB and some other models to see what they do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply suggesting that we could examine the practices of the ECB and other models in order to gain insights or ideas. There is no explicit indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 317.
 MS. SMITH.  As people probably know, the ECB issues a very terse statement.  Their policy statement is about one sentence long and just says what the council did.  Then in Trichet’s remarks at the press briefing, he does what you all do in your statement.  So, again, it’s a little bit of a hybrid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining the format of the ECB's policy statement and remarks at press briefings.


Passage number 318.
 MS. DUKE.  I would like to respond to Tom’s concerns and to say that I was probably the person on the subcommittee that was the most reluctant to come around to this idea for a lot of the concerns that you expressed.  I guess what I was struggling with is, we had a statement that was the Committee’s statement and then later on we had minutes that reflected what happened in the meeting.  So my question was:  If the Chairman is out there giving a press conference, where does that fit.  Is it a restatement of the statement or is it a preview of the minutes. And that’s where, I think, using the SEP is a good way not only to draw attention to them, but to look at it in a little bit different light, so that now I view both the statement and the minutes as a check on, if you will, a Chairman who wanted to go out and just put forth one point of view because both of those are going to actually come out as well as statements made by others.  So I think that weighs against the concern that this is out there for all regimes.  I mean, future Chairmen can go out and say whatever they want to, but it’s going to be in the context of these other communications that are still going to be out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a response to someone's concerns and the speaker explains their own thought process and eventual agreement with the idea being discussed.


Passage number 319.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  One quick logistical thing, which is, you want to have some way to confine the scope of questions.  You probably don’t want to be taking questions about debit interchange, for example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement is making a suggestion about a logistical matter, specifically about confining the scope of questions. It is not expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 320.
 MS. SMITH:  I’m happy to take any and all questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Smith is simply expressing her willingness to answer questions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 321.
 MR. HOENIG.  Betsy, and to Governor Tarullo’s point, one of the things that makes me a little bit uneasy is that you’re talking about the blackout period.  Well, the blackout period originally was because we didn’t announce anything, and you had to wait until markets figured it out, and so you didn’t want to get ahead of them.  Now we have the statement, which mitigates that need.  But now Governor Tarullo wants to extend the blackout period because the Chairman speaks, and we don’t want people contradicting it. I’m not sure that you’re allowing for the diversity of views you get out there.  And, you begin to say, well, we’re going to confuse people more because the Chairman spoke here, and now we’re going to have a speech that’s a day and a half later.  Those are things I think we ought to think through carefully because this is a regime change.  This is a big deal in terms of what we’re doing and how we are going to affect the dynamics of the Committee going forward.  Now, it’s more of that long-term concern that I have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Hoenig expresses unease about extending the blackout period and disagrees with Governor Tarullo's suggestion. He also mentions concerns about not allowing for diversity of views and raises questions about the potential for confusion and the impact on the dynamics of the Committee.


Passage number 322.
 MS. YELLEN.  Dennis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 323.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I think I heard Tom say, “extend the blackout period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 324.
” MR. HOENIG.  No, no.  I’m opposed to Governor Tarullo’s point to extend it.  I think it is inconsistent with why we originally had the blackout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, is opposed to Governor Tarullo's point of extending something and believes it is inconsistent with the original purpose. This suggests disagreement or contention between the two individuals.


Passage number 325.
 MR. LOCKHART.  But isn’t the practice today two days after the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a fact or a statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 326.
 MS. SMITH.  Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:  The passage simply states that Ms. Smith is correct, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 327.
 MR. LOCKHART.  So this would be shortening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement as it is a statement or question from Mr. Lockhart with no conflicting or opposing views mentioned.


Passage number 328.
 MS. SMITH.  The end of the workweek.  Through Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement about the end of the workweek.


Passage number 329.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Dan, do you want to make it longer than two days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lockhart is simply asking Dan if he wants to extend the duration of something to longer than two days.


Passage number 330.
 MR. TARULLO.  No.  I just want to keep it where it is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo expresses his desire to maintain the current state.


Passage number 331.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Keep it where it is now.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states an instruction or preference given by Mr. Lockhart without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting positions.


Passage number 332.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I think it’s easy to overestimate the problems caused for us by diverse views being expressed in public.  I have a clear sense that over the last 10 years, the sensitivity of financial market prices to any one individual Committee member’s statements, other than the Chairman of the Committee, has steadily declined, and I think that’s because we all speak more often about our views.  The answer to sensitivity to individual bits of information is sometimes more information.  That is to say, the more we’re all speaking, the less markets are moved by any one communication of ours. I’d strongly support this press conference, and I think there are going to be some subtleties about it that are going to emerge in practice.  I think we’re going to have to resist the urge to wait to do things at just these quarterly meetings.  I think when we want to do something, we’re going to have to have the courage to go ahead and do it.  I think noon the next day is the right balance.  I think it’s right to give clear airwaves to the Chairman, but I also think it wouldn’t be right to impose too much of a burden on him to communicate for several days on behalf of other people’s views.  I think his articulating faithfully the range of views is fine, but this outlet of people being able to contact other Committee members relieves some of the pressure on him to be very faithful about everyone’s views all the way around the table.  So I support this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, expresses his agreement and support for the press conference and the idea of Committee members being able to communicate their views more often. He also suggests that the Chairman should have some relief from communicating all the views and that the press conference provides an outlet for other Committee members to express their views.


Passage number 333.
 MR. TARULLO.  Janet, can I have a go at this again.  I’ve seen the very interesting study of the actual impact on markets of utterances by different members of the FOMC, and needless to say, having seen that study, I’m not worried about the impact on markets of utterances by different members of the FOMC. I guess what I am worried about, Jeff, in my view, at least—reinforced by conversations with members of the Congress, members of the media who have covered the Fed for a long time, and academics—is that the stature of and respect for the Committee as a whole has been adversely affected by a perception of not just good, solid policy disagreement within the confines of the meetings, but a sense that there’s a bit of a free-for-all, and there’s a bit of a competition for the airwaves.  I would have thought that the preferable outcome would be self-restraint by everybody, but that’s why I referred to game theory.  I think there are a lot of incentives to go in the other direction, and once somebody starts talking, then other people have the same incentive. In an ideal world, I think, you’d have a press conference by the Chairman, and then the dominant reaction of other members of the Committee would be, “Yeah, that was pretty fair, good,” and that’s it.  Then very occasionally somebody feels, “I really think that he or she missed something pretty fundamental that I think is important to say.”  What I fear, though, is that the afternoon after the press conference will become more Babel-like, so that’s the concern.  It’s not that people shouldn’t express their views.  They certainly should.  I do think that the way in which we have evolved, with no one intending it to be this way, is that by so much, so frequently, and in so many media expressing variant and idiosyncratic views, there’s been some damage to the institution as a whole.  That’s what I’m trying to get at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Tarullo expresses concern about the perception of the FOMC as a whole, but there doesn't seem to be any immediate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 334.
 MR. LACKER.  I don’t share the perception that the institution has been damaged, but this has been illuminating for me.  I think one could anticipate the press calling all of us for interviews for Thursday at 12:01.  I think it’s conceivable that some people will accept, and then something like that might emerge, and I think that’s something that maybe we should talk about and deliberate about.  I mean, I think the equilibrium we have now is that we don’t race to the end.  We wait for our regularly scheduled appointments with the public in order to say what we have to say, and that has some attraction, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Lacker is expressing his own perspective and suggesting a topic for discussion. There is no evident disagreement or contention.


Passage number 335.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There is a compromise.  By extending the blackout a little bit longer, through the end of Thursday, there’s a quiet day.  So the Chairman speaks, there’s a quiet day, and then on Friday people can speak.  Friday is not a great day to go out because you don’t get that much coverage as you go into the weekend.  So if people need to speak on Friday, they can.  So that might be a way of balancing those two things. I think it would be useful to have a little gap between the Chairman and other people because you don’t want to get into “he said/she said” kind of stuff.  So separating it by a full day might be helpful that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about a proposed compromise and suggests a way to balance different factors.


Passage number 336.
 MS. YELLEN.  It does sound helpful.  I note there are a lot of conferences; often our Banks have conferences on Fridays, so it has been a problem for people that we need to make speeches on the Friday after an FOMC.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a scheduling issue faced by the speaker.


Passage number 337.
 MR. LOCKHART.  That would be a nice benefit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It states a statement without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 338.
 MS. YELLEN.  I think it would be very useful to get a sense of the Committee on when to end the blackout period after these two-day meetings.  Betsy, do you want to weigh in on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Yellen is simply suggesting that it would be useful to hear the committee's opinions on when to end the blackout period after two-day meetings. Betsy is asked to express her thoughts on the matter.


Passage number 339.
 MS. DUKE.  I know we weren’t going to talk about the one-day meetings, but because the one-day meetings happen a day earlier, and this Friday thing has come up before, if we were going to end it on Thursday after the two-day meetings, would we also want to end it on Thursday after the one-day meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. Duke is simply proposing a question and seeking clarification or agreement from the others.


Passage number 340.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Why not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 341.
 MS. SMITH.  I think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I think so" indicates that the speaker agrees with or supports the previous statement or question.


Passage number 342.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That would be nice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "That would be nice" expresses a simple opinion or desire, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 343.
 MS. YELLEN.  Dennis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the given passage, there is no indication of any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by Ms. Yellen, and there is no mention of opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 344.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I go with Dan’s approach here.  I was very comfortable with two days after a meeting ending on Wednesday, which effectively means that you’re not saying anything until the following Monday, in most cases.  I am perfectly comfortable with that.  I don’t necessarily see a compelling need to get out very quickly, and I do think that it invites a lot of what we would consider to be more “short-termism” in the discussion.  So I’m okay with the current policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, expresses his agreement with Dan's approach and his comfort with the current policy. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 345.
 MS. YELLEN.  Other comments on this.  Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions that other comments are being sought.


Passage number 346.
 MR. BULLARD.  I think it’s a great idea, and I think we’re catching up with other central banks on this dimension.  So I think that’s very good.  I’m not sure I have strong views about the blackout.  I think we behave strangely after the meeting because most organizations, once they have something to say, they would send everybody out to go say it, and we don’t do that.  We let others spin ours.  We let financial markets spin what we have to say, and I don’t think that that’s a great thing to do.  This press conference will help mitigate that.  Also, just from scheduling, I like the Friday because a lot of times that’s where the conflict is.  But other than that, it won’t make any difference to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the idea of having a press conference and catching up with other central banks. They also note their lack of strong views about the blackout and only provide personal preference regarding scheduling.


Passage number 347.
 MS. YELLEN.  Charlie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The provided passage does not contain any explicit contentions or disagreements.


Passage number 348.
 MR. EVANS.  I agree with Jim in the sense that I think this is a great idea to have the press conferences.  It is good to get the Chairman out front with the right message.  If the blackout ended so that we could have a Friday conference, that would be great.  If push comes to shove, I guess I wouldn’t be horribly opposed to keeping the blackout period the way it is right now.  But I do think it would be of benefit; I don’t think that the risk is that great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, agrees with Jim and expresses support for having press conferences and potentially ending the blackout period. Although he mentions that he wouldn't be opposed to keeping the blackout period as it is, he believes that having press conferences would be beneficial and doesn't see much risk in doing so.


Passage number 349.
 MS. YELLEN.  Let’s see if we can get a consensus; let me try to get an overall sense of how people feel about the blackout period and when to end it.  In a way, I think Bill has come up with a nice compromise between the two things.  Let me put his proposal forward first, which is, the blackout period would run through Thursday.  On Friday, people would be free to go out and give speeches, and that addresses the issue of conferences on Fridays.  Hopefully, people would show self-restraint, though.  I do hope this isn’t going to become, “Oh, the Chairman got out there, so now we have to race to give interviews the moment the blackout ends.”  But let me try Bill’s compromise approach:  Blackout would go through Thursday.  By a show of hands, how do people feel about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MS. Yellen is trying to gather opinions on when to end the blackout period and presents a compromise proposal. There is no indication of disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 350.
 MR. FISHER.  Close of business or midnight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states two options without expressing a conflicting view.


Passage number 351.
 MR. LACKER.  Those are different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement or observation by someone named Mr. Lacker.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 352.
  [Laughter] MR. ROSENGREN.  What were going to be the formal choices that you have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "[Laughter]" suggests that there is some level of disagreement or difference of opinion regarding the formal choices that will be discussed.


Passage number 353.
 MS. YELLEN.  I was thinking of these three choices:  Thursday at noon is one choice; end of the day on Thursday—I guess, midnight—is the second choice; and current blackout time on Friday is the third choice.  Starting with the one in the middle, because it got considerable support.  [Show of hands]  How about the shorter blackout period, through Thursday at noon.  [Show of hands]  And the longer blackout period, our current practice going all the way through Friday.  [Show of hands]  So it looks to me like, Bill’s approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply describing a decision-making process and the different options being considered. There is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 354.
 MS. DUKE.  Richard, you didn’t vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Richard did not vote.


Passage number 355.
 MR. FISHER.  No, no.  I’m a member of the subcommittee.  I’m trying to not to interfere with the process.  [Laughter]  So, Tom, your argument is that we should end it at noon on Thursday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher acknowledges that he is a member of the subcommittee and is expressing his intention not to interfere with the process.


Passage number 356.
 MR. HOENIG.  Well, my argument is that the original blackout was there because we didn’t announce anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only states Mr. Hoenig's argument about the original blackout.


Passage number 357.
 MR. FISHER.  So we’re shortening the blackout period.  At least we got Friday out of this thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement about shortening the blackout period and expressing satisfaction at getting Friday out of it.


Passage number 358.
 MR. HOENIG.  That’s a positive.  [Laugher]  It’s not good enough, but it’s a positive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the situation is positive, but also states that it is not good enough, which does not necessarily indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 359.
 MS. YELLEN.  Okay.  So I guess I’m seeing considerable support for Vice Chairman Dudley’s suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. YELLEN is expressing agreement with Vice Chairman Dudley's suggestion.


Passage number 360.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 361.
 WILLIAMS.  Can I ask a clarifying question.  Is this just about the two-day meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification.


Passage number 362.
 MS. YELLEN.  Yes, this is just about the two-day meetings.  There’s no change that we’re proposing for the one-day meetings or beforehand, but that’s something our Subcommittee could also take up and might come back with further proposals concerning the blackouts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining that there are no proposed changes for the one-day meetings or beforehand, but the subcommittee might further address the blackouts.


Passage number 363.
 MR. FISHER.  I thought the proposal was—again, being a member of the subcommittee I want to be careful and listen—that even for the one-day meetings we’d end it for Friday as well.  Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 364.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine as there is no passage provided.


Passage number 365.
 WILLIAMS.  I think that’s what I was asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It seems to be a straightforward statement from the speaker.


Passage number 366.
 MR. EVANS.  I thought you started out the discussion saying we were only talking about the press conferences after the two-day meetings.  And you weren’t going to talk about anything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is simply clarifying the scope of the discussion.


Passage number 367.
  Now, you may have indicated something that was sympathetic toward that, but— MS. YELLEN.  Okay.  So I did start out by saying we’re only talking about the blackout after two-day meetings.  We have drifted into a discussion of why not shorten it after the one-day meetings, and the subcommittee really hasn’t discussed that, but it would be useful to have a sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the subcommittee may have a different view on shortening the blackout after one-day meetings, but there is no argument or disagreement happening.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 368.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Just a quick reaction.  I think it’s kind of silly to have them different.  It’s going to be hard for people to understand and hard for markets to understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The phrase "I think it's kind of silly to have them different" indicates that Mr. Plosser disagrees with the idea of having different things. This disagreement suggests a contention or difference of opinion.


Passage number 369.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It’s going to be hard for us to keep track.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a difficulty in keeping track of something.


Passage number 370.
  [Laughter] MR. PLOSSER.  Much less us keeping track.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is being made in a light-hearted manner, indicated by the use of "[Laughter]" before the remark.


Passage number 371.
 MS. YELLEN.  Suppose we said, for all meetings the blackout period goes through Thursday midnight. PARTICIPANTS.  Yes. It’s a good start.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants respond positively and agree with Ms. Yellen's suggestion, stating that it is a good start.


Passage number 372.
 MS. YELLEN.  Yes. PARTICIPANTS.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, both Ms. Yellen and the participants are in agreement as they both respond with "Yes" to a question or statement. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 373.
 MR. LOCKHART.  What was your question again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lockhart is simply asking for the question to be repeated.


Passage number 374.
 MS. YELLEN.  We just cut a day off the blackout period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states a fact that a day was cut off the blackout period.


Passage number 375.
 MR. LOCKHART.  So it’s the end of day Thursday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the day of the week.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 376.
 MS. YELLEN.  Right.  For all meetings, whether there’s a press conference or not.  So Friday, now, we’re proposing, is okay.  Anybody have a—Bill, you have a look of discomfort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Yellen is proposing Friday as a possible day for a meeting, but Bill has a look of discomfort, indicating he may disagree with the suggestion.


Passage number 377.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Well, there is an annoying complication.  Sometimes we push meetings back because there are meetings in Basel, for example, and people are traveling back, and so we have meetings on Wednesday—I think we have one coming up next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the scheduling of meetings.


Passage number 378.
 MR. LUECKE.  That’s right. PARTICIPANT.  Is that a one-day meeting or two-day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of information between Mr. Luecke and a participant.


Passage number 379.
 MR. LUECKE.  It’s a one-day actually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a statement without any opposing viewpoints or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 380.
 MR. ENGLISH.  It’s a one-day meeting on Wednesday.  Push the blackout back to Friday. PARTICIPANTS.  No, no, no.  Just leave it at Thursday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The participants are disagreeing with Mr. English's suggestion to push the blackout back to Friday and instead insist on keeping it on Thursday.


Passage number 381.
 MS. YELLEN.  Okay.  Fridays we’re free.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that Fridays are free.


Passage number 382.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Casual Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: Casual Friday is a term used to refer to the practice of allowing employees to dress less formally on Fridays. It does not involve contention or disagreement.


Passage number 383.
 MS. SMITH.  Can I mention something about that.  I would not recommend that we tout the end of our blackout period one day sooner as a dramatic increase in transparency.  It’s really just a practice that you all have adopted over the years; it’s not a hard rule.  So you might get laughed at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is offering a different opinion and suggesting not to present the end of the blackout period as a significant change in transparency. They are expressing their viewpoint but not arguing or disagreeing with anyone else.


Passage number 384.
 MR. LACKER.  You mean, you might get laughed at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply expressing the possibility of being laughed at.


Passage number 385.
 MS. SMITH.  I might get laughed at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. SMITH is expressing a concern about being laughed at, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 386.
  [Laughter] MS. YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of "[Laughter]" suggests a lighthearted moment, but it does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 387.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  If anyone has any questions or suggestions, please call me or Janet, and if necessary we can issue some kind of document and have a call or whatever we need to do.  We’ll be thinking about the format, but I’ve given you a general idea.  The goal of it basically, of course, is to try to increase the understanding of what we’re doing and, in particular, link it up to our longer-term approach.  So I’m hopeful it will work well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their willingness to address any questions or suggestions and expressing their hope that their approach will be successful.


Passage number 388.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So we should assume the April meeting starts at noon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is a straightforward statement of assuming the starting time of the April meeting.


Passage number 389.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So that was the plan.  April meeting, and we’ll keep you posted.  One implication is that if you have changes to projections, they have to be done by the end of the first day instead of the end of the second day.  All right.  If there’s nothing else on this topic, I want to remind you that the next meeting is April 26 and 27.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and reminders about a future meeting.


Passage number 390.
 MR. LACKER.  At noon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a quote, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


