Passage number 1.
Meeting of Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 18, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee washeld in the offices of the Board of Governors of the FederalReserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 18, 1980,at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. GuffeyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnMessrs. Baughman, Eastburn, Mayo, Timlen, andWilles, Alternate Members of the FederalOpen Market CommitteeMessrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of San Franciscoand Richmond, respectivelyMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Petersen, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Axilrod, EconomistMr. Holmes, Adviser for Market OperationsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis,Eisenmenger, Ettin, Henry. Keir,Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel, AssociateEconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for DomesticOperations, System Open Market AccountMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account3/18/80Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board ofGovernorsMessrs. Kalchbrenner and Prell 1/,Associate Directors, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board ofGovernorsMr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Divisionof International Finance, Board ofGovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, BankingSection, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Farar, Economist, Open MarketSecretariat, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open MarketSecretariat, Board of GovernorsMr. Forrestal, First Vice President,Federal Reserve Bank of AtlantaMessrs. Boehne, Brandt, Burns, Corrigan,Fousek, Keran, Parthemos, and Scheld,Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta,Dallas, New York, New York, SanFrancisco, Richmond, and Chicago,respectivelyMr. Danforth, Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of Minneapolis1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify Systemopen market transactions in foreign currencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply lists the individuals present at the meeting.


Passage number 2.
-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMarch 18, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The meeting can come to order, gentlemenand lady. We have a lot of business to dispose of at the start and Iwill try to find my agenda, if you will excuse me a moment. We havethe election of officers. First of all, we have the election of theChairman--I keep getting reminded that this position is not statutory--and we need a nomination.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any content or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the agenda for the meeting.


Passage number 3.
MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Chairman, after great soul-searching untillate last night, and contrary to the exhortations of many peoplearound this table, I have decided to nominate Paul Volcker as Chairmanof the FOMC.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Schultz has decided to nominate Paul Volcker as Chairman of the FOMC after considering various opinions.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more context. The phrase "Do we have a second" by itself does not provide enough information to infer any disagreement or contention. It could simply be a request for confirmation or agreement.


Passage number 5.
MR. PARTEE. Second. You saved him, Fred.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply acknowledging and stating a fact.


Passage number 6.
MR. SCHULTZ. Pressure will do it every time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that pressure can have an impact on something.


Passage number 7.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there an objection. I shouldn't put itthat way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no objection.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
MR. TIMLEN. I move that the nominations be closed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "I move that the nominations be closed" suggests that someone wants to end the process of accepting nominations, which may not be agreed upon by others who may still want to nominate someone. This indicates a disagreement or debate over whether the nominations should be closed or not.


Passage number 9.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We need a ViceChairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any objection or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the need for a Vice Chairman without any opposing views.


Passage number 10.
MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Chairman, I nominate Anthony Solomon asVice Chairman of the FOMC.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a nomination for the position of Vice Chairman of the FOMC.


Passage number 11.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This can't take effect until he takesoffice, so it would have to be dependent upon his April 1 inaugurationdate. Is there a second.SEVERAL. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply mentions that something cannot take effect until a certain date and then states that there are multiple people who agree with this idea.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection we will have Mr. Solomonbecome Vice Chairman upon his taking office. We have staff officersto select. As one of those staff officers, I would nominate Mr.Altmann to be Secretary. Perhaps Mr. Altmann will read the rest ofthe nominees.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting potential candidates for certain positions without any objections or disagreement being mentioned.


Passage number 13.
MR. ALTMANN. Fine.Assistant Secretary, Normand Bernard;General Counsel, Neal Petersen;Deputy General Counsel, James Oltmann;Assistant General Counsel, Robert Mannion;Economist, Stephen Axilrod;Adviser for Market Operations, Alan Holmes;Associate Economists from the Board:Edward Ettin;George Henry;Peter Keir;James Kichline;Edwin Truman; andJoseph Zeisel.3/18/80Associate Economists from the Reserve Banks:Anatol Balbach;John Davis;Richard Davis;Thomas Davis; andRobert Eisenmenger.That's the list, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a list of names of individuals in various positions.


Passage number 14.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Apart from the fact that we seem to have aplenitude of Davises--pardon me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 15.
MR. PARTEE. And no Managers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 16.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The selection of the Managers comes in alater agenda item. If there are no objections to those officers, theywill be appointed. Now we need a Federal Reserve Bank to executetransactions for the System Open Market Account. That hastraditionally, as you know, been the New York Bank. Do we have amotion to that effect.SEVERAL. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 17.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Now we need to selectthe Managers. The present Managers are Mr. Sternlight, DomesticOperations and Mr. Pardee, Foreign Operations. Do we have a motion to[reappointment them].SEVERAL. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Without objection" indicates that there is agreement among the group. The subsequent statement and question about reappointing the present Managers also receive several responses, indicating agreement or support.


Passage number 18.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection those appointments aremade. Now we need to approve the minutes of the last meeting. Do wehave a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Without objection those appointments are made" indicates that the appointments were made without any disagreement or opposition. The statement "Now we need to approve the minutes of the last meeting" simply introduces the next item on the agenda and does not suggest any disagreement. The question "Do we have a motion?" is a routine inquiry to proceed with the approval process.


Passage number 19.
MR. TIMLEN. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "So moved" indicates agreement or approval, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 20.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Do we have a second" is a simple question and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 21.
MS. TEETERS. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "MS. TEETERS" without any further context.


Passage number 22.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, the minutes areapproved. And I guess we are now to the report on foreign operationssince the last meeting, Mr. Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Without objection, the minutes are approved" indicates that there was unanimous agreement on the approval of the minutes. The statement "And I guess we are now to the report on foreign operations since the last meeting, Mr. Pardee" does not imply disagreement or contention either.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 23.
MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrase "Statement--see Appendix," which suggests that there is a conflicting point of view or different interpretation of the information contained in the appendix.


Passage number 24.
]MR. TIMLEN. Scott, you mentioned the possibility that someparties may be suffering major losses by reason of the decline in theprice of gold. Would that include any major commercial banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is a question directed at Scott, asking for clarification on a statement made earlier.


Passage number 25.
MR. PARDEE. Well, not U.S. banks. A few of them haveoperations in gold, but they are mainly merchandisers of gold in thatthey buy from either the IMF or out of European markets, or in thepast from the U.S. Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply providing information about the operations of U.S. banks in relation to gold.


Passage number 26.
MR. TIMLEN. [What about] European banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply introducing the topic of European banks without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 27.
-2-3/18/80MR. PARDEE. One or two European banks could be sitting onlosses. On the other hand, they are very well capitalized. I thinkthey can withstand such losses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents two facts - the possibility of European banks having losses and their strong capitalization. The speaker then states their belief that the banks can withstand those potential losses.


Passage number 28.
MR. WALLICH. Scott, you said that the fundamentals--inflation expectations, the current account, and so forth--were not infavor of the dollar. Do you see continuing strong pressure for thedollar to go up in the face of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there may be a difference in opinion regarding the current state of the dollar, there is no explicit contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 29.
MR. PARDEE. No, one of the reasons we repaid our debt soquickly was that there is the risk of a snapback. As I say, the onlything that is supporting us at the moment is really the interest ratedifferential. Market expectations toward the dollar are still verybearish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Pardee expressing his perspective on why they repaid their debt quickly and the current market expectations towards the dollar.


Passage number 30.
MR. WALLICH. The question I would like to raise more broadlyis, insofar as we do anything in the market at all, should we restrainthe dollar more than we have. We share with the Bundesbank in theproceeds of their support operation. In any event, if there is astrong movement, one can't do very much. But if the dollar goes up,say, three pfennigs in one day, wouldn't it be better to absorb someof that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is raising a question and expressing a possible alternative action.


Passage number 31.
MR. PARDEE. Well, the rise of the dollar has been almosttotally during the European hours, and the Bundesbank has beenprepared to in oneoperation or the other. By the time we come in, the market is prettylimp. We have been able to do small amounts. We haven't wanted to dotoo much for fear that the market psychology would turn against ussaying: "Aha, the United States is trying to drive the dollar downagain." So it's a very, very delicate question. On the other hand,the Bundesbank has had some of the same problems with the mark that wehad back last fall when the dollar was going down and we were havingtrouble stopping the slide, even though we were intervening in bigamounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the rise of the dollar and the actions taken by both the Federal Reserve and the Bundesbank in response.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 32.
MR. WALLICH. The market moves against the intervention iswhat you are saying. The dollar goes up in Frankfurt against theBundesbank intervention and doesn't go up in New York despite theabsence of intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is disagreeing with the idea that the market moves against intervention. He mentions that the dollar goes up in Frankfurt despite the Bundesbank intervention, but it doesn't go up in New York even without intervention. This suggests that he does not agree with the notion that intervention affects the market in the expected way.


Passage number 33.
MR. PARDEE. We have been prepared to operate a little, but[the dollar] has been pretty steady in New York.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not imply any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the dollar has been steady in New York.


Passage number 34.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to ratify the transactions sincethe last meeting. Do we have a motion. Second.SEVERAL. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a need to ratify transactions and asks for a motion and a second, which are then provided by several individuals. The overall tone suggests cooperation rather than disagreement.


Passage number 35.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Approved] without objection. You have arecommendation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "approved without objection" indicates that there was unanimous agreement or consensus.


Passage number 36.
MR. PARDEE. For once I don't have to recommend any swaprenewals. But I do have a rather complicated transaction to describe,so that I can be authorized to complete it. When the dollar came intodemand in late February, early March, the Bundesbank supplemented itsspot sales of dollars with forward sales of dollars against marks fordelivery in early May. The choice of dates was related to the3/18/80domestic liquidity situation in Germany. Mark liquidity was expectedto be more ample in early May than in early March, so the forwardsales of the dollar would help mop up some of that excess liquidity.The total was equivalent of marks. Since the Bundesbankwas sharing half of the mark proceeds of its spot sales of dollarswith us at the time, and we had no idea how long the dollar wouldremain in demand, we asked them if they might also share the proceedsof the forward sales. It took them several days to come back with ananswer; and when they did, they set some conditions that requiredconsultations on our side within the Federal Reserve and with theTreasury. In the meantime the dollar continued to rise and the Systemcontinued to make good progress in repaying swap debt. In view of theTreasury's need for marks to cover the Carter notes, we finallydecided to offer the forward marks to the Treasury, and the Treasuryagreed. In response, the Bundesbank raised no objection. But afterfurther review on their part, they insisted that the Federal Reserveas the central bank of the United States be the direct counterparty onthe forward contracts rather than the U.S. Treasury.Subject to your approval, the solution we have worked out isthat the System would enter into two sets of forward contracts: onewith the Bundesbank to obtain the marks directly from it, so that asthe central bank of the United States we are sharing in thatoperation; and the other between the Federal Reserve and the Treasuryto pass the marks directly on to the Exchange Stabilization Fund.These transactions would be at the same rates, so there is neitherprofit nor loss to the System. The reason I am laying this out to youis that the BundesbankAs Manager, it isdifficult for me to argue that these transactions would beExceptions have tobe expressly authorized by the Committee. Consequently, I amrequesting authority from the Committee to make an explicit exceptionto the rule so that we can complete the deal. The Treasury needs themarks since it still has a short position of $3.3 billion of marksunder the Carter notes. Since some of the Treasury's mark debt is ateven higher mark rates than those on these contracts, the costcomparisons are not excessively unfavorable to the Treasury.Moreover, should the System need to incur additional swap debt beforeMay, the Treasury is willing to cancel all or part of its purchasesfrom us so that we could use the marks in repayment. The transactionsare quite complicated but essentially mean that the U.S. authoritieswill gain an additional worth of marks to work withshould the occasion arise. That's my recommendation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply describing a transaction and making a recommendation.


Passage number 37.
MR. WALLICH. But at what cost.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement or asking a question, but there is no conflict or contradiction present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
MR. PARTEE. I take it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is likely disagreeing or challenging something. However, without more context, it is difficult to determine the specific disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 39.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. It simply mentions Chairman Volcker without any indication of debate or conflict.


Passage number 40.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 41.
MR. PARDEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. In the given passage, Mr. Pardee is expressing an opposing or differing opinion from someone else.


Passage number 42.
3/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.in today's markets,it's the Treasury who bears [the cost], and they want to bear it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 43.
MR. PARDEE. We don't know where the rate will be in May.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not know what the rate will be in May, without opposing or contradicting anything else.


Passage number 44.
MR. MAYO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 45.
 Why does the BundesbankMR. PARDEE. It's a matter of that nature, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. Pardee is answering a question about the reason behind the Bundesbank's actions. There is no contention or disagreement presented in this statement.


Passage number 46.
 They preferMR. PARTEE. Was the Treasury a party to the originalagreement, Scott. That is, did they agree that those forwards oughtto be sold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question to clarify whether the Treasury was involved in the original agreement.


Passage number 47.
MR. PARDEE. No, but they were the ones who suggested that weshould raise the question of this 50-50 sharing with the Bundesbank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Pardee is simply stating that the suggestion to raise the question of the 50-50 sharing with the Bundesbank came from someone else.


Passage number 48.
As soon as they heard about it, they were the ones who pressed theDesk to inquire whether the Germans would be prepared to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was the Bundesbank's decision to buy inthe first place; but as soon as the Treasury heard about it, theywanted [to participate].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply states the actions of different parties in relation to a specific event.


Passage number 49.
MR. PARDEE. There was no objection raised by Treasury, orfor that matter by the Federal Reserve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there was no objection raised by Treasury or the Federal Reserve, indicating agreement or lack of contention.


Passage number 50.
MR. WALLICH. Does that reflect the judgment of the Treasuryon the outlook for the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is asking about the Treasury's judgment on the outlook for the dollar.


Passage number 51.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All this discussion took place when [thetransaction] was at about the market rate. It's just that with thelapse of two or three weeks since the transaction took place it's nolonger the market rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the market rate changing over time.


Passage number 52.
MR. BLACK. Scott, at what rate do we get these marks back[from] the Treasury, if we need them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking for information.


Passage number 53.
MR. PARDEE. Well, I am sure the Treasury would insist on arate of around 175, 176. The average rate is 175-1/2 or thereabouts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Pardee, simply expresses his belief that the Treasury would insist on a rate of around 175 or 176, without any opposing viewpoints presented or discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we probably wouldn't want themback.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is a disagreement or contention implied in the passage because the phrase "I think we probably wouldn't want them back" suggests that the speaker has a different opinion or preference from someone else.


Passage number 55.
MR. PARDEE. No, if the situation arises, I will [undertake]a very complicated negotiation to avoid our getting stuck with them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It only mentions the speaker's intention to undertake a negotiation to avoid a certain outcome.


Passage number 56.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this seems more technical to me thanreal. The original transaction was at a market rate and what we aredoing is back-dating in some sense--not literally back-dating, butit's no longer at the market rate. The Treasury wants the marks andwe are a conduit. I don't see any big problem in this myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and explaining their perspective on the matter.


Passage number 57.
MR. WALLICH. I move we accept this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is an agreement or proposal to accept something without any opposing viewpoint or conflict being presented.


Passage number 58.
3/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there any real question about it. Ithink we just have to write the exception in such a way so that thecircumstances are clear as to the fact that this was not an off-markettransaction when it took place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the need to clarify the circumstances of a transaction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 59.
MR. MORRIS. And we're not committed to buy them back fromTreasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "And we're not committed to buy them back from Treasury" implies that there is a disagreement or opposition to the idea of buying the items back from Treasury.


Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't see that we should becommitted. I don't understand that part. I don't see where we wouldwant to buy them back. If we have to intervene on the other side, theTreasury can use the [mark] balances [it holds] and it would take theloss. I don't think we want to take them back at the off-market rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their perspective and lack of understanding about the subject matter. They are stating their doubts and questioning the reasoning behind certain actions.


Passage number 61.
MR. PARDEE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, there is only one speaker (Mr. Pardee) and his statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 62.
MR. PARTEE. This was a transaction that was initiated by theGermans and it automatically involved us to the extent of 50 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 63.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It didn't automatically. They've beengiving us 50 percent of their intervention at our request and thisfalls into that pattern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that something did not happen automatically and explains how someone has been giving 50 percent of their intervention at their request.


Passage number 64.
MR. PARTEE. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 65.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They originated the intervention but theyhave been giving us 50 percent, and they will give us 50 percent ofthis. It just happens to be a forward transaction which hasn't been[consummated] yet. It falls into the regular pattern, but what isdifferent about it is that it is a forward transaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the other party originated the intervention and will be giving them 50 percent of it, but the transaction has not been completed yet. They acknowledge that the transaction is different because it is a forward transaction.


Passage number 66.
MR. PARTEE. Forward, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 67.
MS. TEETERS. Do they regularly engage in forwardtransactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is asking about the regular engagement in forward transactions without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 68.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I believe they did it for liquidityreasons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is stating a personal belief or opinion that the action was taken for liquidity reasons. It does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 69.
MR. PARDEE. Yes, liquidity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a response or continuation of a previous statement or conversation.


Passage number 70.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They were doing a lot of intervention andthe effect was to drain liquidity. They didn't want to drain thatmuch liquidity at the time, so they did a forward. That's why theydid it, as I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a sequence of events and the reasons behind them, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 71.
MR. PARDEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage based solely on the given information "MR. PARDEE." Without any context or additional information, it is unclear what the passage refers to and whether there is any contention or disagreement involved.


Passage number 72.
 In fact they are nowCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think they have done any forwardtransactions recently. This was all during a limited period. Well,without objection we will provide that exception. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing information about a limited time period and suggesting a course of action without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 73.
MR. WINN. Paul, before you turn to that: What's our posturefor the month ahead in this area as the markets bubble.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a question being posed and a request for information.


Passage number 74.
-6-3/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think Mr. Pardee has described ourpresent posture. We would certainly buy some marks, to the extentthat the mark is at these levels and to the extent that it is strongin New York. But as he points out, it hasn't been terribly strong inNew York. The Bundesbank has agreed to share with us theirintervention, but we will pass it on to the Treasury at this pointsince we are out of debt and the Treasury is under water by whateverthe number is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only presents an explanation of the current posture and plans related to purchasing marks and sharing intervention with the Treasury.


Passage number 75.
MR. PARDEE. $3.3 billion. Yes, we can continue; and theyare continuing to share.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they can continue and that they are continuing to share.


Passage number 76.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any mark balances now. We havea few mark balances, don't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and then affirming it with a statement.


Passage number 77.
MR. PARDEE. Yes, $100 million worth of marks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Pardee simply states a fact.


Passage number 78.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Essentially, we will pass along our shareof their intervention to the Treasury until the Treasury getsbalanced. If the dollar remains that strong and indeed we do anyintervention in New York, we will pass that on to the Treasury, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the process of passing along their share of intervention to the Treasury, regardless of whether the dollar remains strong or intervention takes place in New York.


Passage number 79.
MR. PARDEE. Yes, everything. The problem will remain if thedollar comes under selling pressure. I think we are going to have togive quite a bit of ground before we start operating very vigorouslyin defense of the dollar because the Bundesbank certainly won't helpus for a long ways down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Pardee's belief that there will be a need to give ground and operate vigorously in defense of the dollar, but that the Bundesbank (the central bank of Germany) may not initially provide assistance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 80.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a great concern in Europegenerally about their currencies depreciating because of the internalinflationary repercussions, and everybody wants their currencies toappreciate at this point. I think it's only that our interest rateshave prevailed here at the moment. But the danger is that they willraise their interest rates, which is one consideration we had in mindin handling our discount rate the way we did--not to give them such astrong signal for raising their interest rates. I am not sure we aregoing to avoid it anyway, but it was quite clear when I was over therelast week that they were not looking forward with any joy to anincrease in the U.S. discount rate. They felt it would force them toraise their rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the depreciation of European currencies and the possibility of other countries raising their interest rates. They mention that the decision regarding the U.S. discount rate may not prevent other countries from raising their rates, and that those countries are not looking forward to an increase in the U.S. discount rate. This implies a disagreement or differing opinions on the impact of interest rate changes.


Passage number 81.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Shall I proceed, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply asking the chairman for permission to proceed.


Passage number 82.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The question does not provide a passage or any context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 83.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement given by Mr. Sternlight does not suggest any disagreement or contention. It is a neutral statement without any conflicting opinions or contradictory ideas.


Passage number 84.
]MR. MORRIS. Peter, would you have been able to come closerto the total reserve path if we had contemporaneous accounting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question and does not express any disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 85.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I really don't think it would have mattereda great deal, President Morris. I have not regarded the laggedaccounting as a significant impediment to achieving the [path], aslong as we are able to make the kinds of adjustments we make in thenonborrowed path to bring speedier adjustments to the growth of theaggregates. I don't think it matters a great deal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is expressing his opinion that lagged accounting is not a significant impediment to achieving the [path]. He does not state or argue against any opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 86.
3/18/80MR. MORRIS. Isn't it true that the one-week bulge in themoney supply practically made it impossible for you to hit the totalreserve path in the last three weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 87.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, even with contemporaneous accounting,we are going to get bulges at times; and if we didn't provide thereserves, [the reserve needs] would be met at the discount window.The banks would have to borrow, or would have to do something, to getthe reserves to meet their requirements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about how bulges in accounting could require reserves and how banks might need to borrow to meet their reserve requirements.


Passage number 88.
MR. PARTEE. You do have to be prepared to change yournonborrowed path frequently, I take it, as these borrowings numberscome out in ways that are unexpected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 89.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, agrees with the statement.


Passage number 90.
MR. PARTEE. There will be a lot more of that in the future,too, Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply states that there will be more of something in the future.


Passage number 91.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Certainly so, given the new look at thediscount window.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It only mentions a new look at the discount window, without indicating conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions.


Passage number 92.
MS. TEETERS. But, Chuck, how do you know which way it'sgoing. If we are making an adjustment in the nonborrowed, borrowingsgo up. It's hard to see which one comes first here. If we lower thenonborrowed path, that almost dictates an increase in the borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is seeking clarification and expressing uncertainty about the order of events.


Passage number 93.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that certainly is true. But I think we doit by looking at total reserves, too--by seeing what's happening intotal reserves relative to our path. What I worry about is that theremay be a number of necessitous borrowers. There may be a lot ofnonmember borrowers who will come in once this bill passes. So wecould have a surge in borrowing, which is not really a reservebalancing decision but just a portfolio balancing decision on the partof those institutions, that we would need to adjust for in ournonborrowed [path].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 94.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no question that if new borrowerscome in for emergency reasons or because they are new, we will have tomake an adjustment to allow for that. But I think this elasticity inthe borrowing numbers is very bothersome whether we are oncontemporaneous or lagged accounting. The contemporaneous might help.When are we going to have our report, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a potential adjustment in borrowing numbers and expressing a concern about the elasticity of those numbers. The statement about contemporaneous accounting helping is an opinion or suggestion rather than a disagreement with someone else.


Passage number 95.
MR. AXILROD. Well, at any time. Following the previous FOMCdiscussion, we looked up all our old work on the various proposalsthat the Presidents put forward. And we'd be prepared to bring theissue of lagged reserve accounting plus some of those other issuesbefore the Board at any time. If the Board were going to consider it,I would suggest that it be done in such a way that if any change weremade, it could go into effect when the new [law] goes into effect--that is, six months from the time of [its enactment]. So, in thattime frame--within a couple of months or earlier--we would certainlybe prepared to bring something to the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is simply discussing the possibility of bringing up certain proposals before the Board and suggests a timeline for when any changes could go into effect.


Passage number 96.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to be prepared to have adiscussion of that at our next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there will be a discussion at the next meeting, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 97.
3/18/80MR. AXILROD. Do you mean on the other measures in additionto the lagged reserve accounting that the Committee has alreadydiscussed or just--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking for clarification.


Passage number 98.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is simply asking for information or clarification.


Passage number 99.
MR. AXILROD. Well, lagged reserve accounting, staggeredreserve settlements, and a few other things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions different accounting and settlement methods without expressing any conflicting opinions or contrasting views.


Passage number 100.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are going to be prepared with all ofthis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement about being prepared.


Passage number 101.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we could be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing a response without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 102.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's try to do that. I think it's amajor hazard to introduce something that is going to be as difficultas this for the banks to handle on top of all this other stuff that wehave been giving them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing concern about introducing something difficult for banks to handle.


Passage number 103.
MR. AXILROD. My only point was that if the Board and theCommittee wanted to do away with lagged reserve accounting, the timeto do away with it is when the whole new reserve system goes intoeffect, [when it is] applicable to other institutions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod providing his perspective on when to do away with lagged reserve accounting.


Passage number 104.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand that consideration. Mr.Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any information that would indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker understands a certain consideration, without expressing any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 105.
MR. ROOS. I think my question was probably answered, Mr.Chairman. As I understand this process, every day you have a totalreserve path target in mind, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and confirming their understanding of a process.


Passage number 106.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I would say that what we have in mind fromday to day is more of a nonborrowed objective. Although as Idescribed, in certain circumstances, such as when we get a bulge ofborrowing over the weekend that may have been caused by banksanticipating a discount rate action, it seems sensible to come inbelow, let's say, a nonborrowed interim objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that their primary focus is on a nonborrowed objective, but there may be certain circumstances where they deviate from that objective.


Passage number 107.
MR. ROOS. But the figure on borrowings is available to youon a [daily basis].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roos is stating a fact about the availability of the figure on borrowings on a daily basis.


Passage number 108.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Oh, I get a tentative figure every day, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply confirming that they receive a tentative figure every day.


Passage number 109.
MR. ROOS. So, if you have a total reserve figure in mind andyou know what the borrowings are, can't the adjustment almostautomatically be made on the nonborrowed side to give you the total.If you know borrowings and if you know what total reserves should be,then can't you simply adjust the nonborrowed part of this to give youthe total reserves you want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or question seeking clarification about a potential method of adjusting nonborrowed reserves to reach a desired total reserves figure.


Passage number 110.
MR. PARTEE. That's where the lag comes in. We have to meetthe [required] reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply explaining that meeting the required reserves causes a lag.


Passage number 111.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We know the required reserves; we can'tchange the required reserves for that particular week. And therequired reserves govern the total reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating a fact about required reserves and their role in governing total reserves.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 112.
3/18/80MR. ROOS. I recognize that. But if we offset, or if wedon't supply the required reserves, what happens. Do we have toaccommodate the needs of the banks. Or could we not stick by ourtotal reserve target, and if they are short, they would have toscramble to adjust their operations to what we want to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning whether the banks should be accommodated with their needs or if they should adjust their operations to meet the total reserve target set by someone else. This suggests a disagreement about whether the banks should have autonomy in their operations or if they should conform to a central authority's requirements.


Passage number 113.
MR. STERNLIGHT. If we don't provide the reserves innonborrowed form, they will have to get the reserves either throughborrowings or be deficient in their reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that if reserves are not provided in nonborrowed form, they will have to be obtained through borrowings or the reserves will be deficient. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 114.
MR. ROOS. Is that a bad thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Is that a bad thing" is a question seeking clarification or an opinion, rather than indicating a disagreement.


Passage number 115.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it depends on what degree of pressurewe want to impose on them at that moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that the decision on how much pressure to impose on someone depends on the circumstances or objectives.


Passage number 116.
MR. ROOS. Are we fearful that interest rates will [rise].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be determined by examining the statement "Are we fearful that interest rates will rise." It is a question that does not express or imply any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 117.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The Committee has set bounds on the fundsrate. If total reserves were the overriding objective, bar nothing,then we could drive interest rates up to just about any point, I wouldthink.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a hypothetical scenario where interest rates could be increased without limitation if total reserves were the only objective.


Passage number 118.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And even then we can't affect totalreserves. The banks are just going to borrow. What we can affect ishow much they borrow in any particular week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the inability to affect total reserves and the focus on influencing the amount of borrowing by banks in a specific week.


Passage number 119.
MR. WALLICH. But we can affect the degree of pressure theyare under so that they will start making adjustments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 120.
MR. ROOS. Well, we do want to do that, don't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation or agreement with their statement.


Passage number 121.
MR. WALLICH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement by Mr. Wallich, and there is no indication of contention or disagreement within his statement.


Passage number 122.
MR. STERNLIGHT. And we did that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "we" (presumably the speaker and someone else) did something, without any indication of disagreement or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 123.
MR. PARTEE. I think we get an arithmetic impossibility iftotal reserves are set and we change nonborrowed reserves for everydollar change that occurs in borrowings to try to go along a path wehave in mind for total reserves. It makes it impossible for thebanking system to balance, given the fact that we have a two-week lagon deposits. And they would be in violation of the law.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The individual, Mr. Partee, is pointing out a potential issue or disagreement with the proposed approach of changing nonborrowed reserves for every dollar change in borrowings. He argues that this approach would make it impossible for the banking system to balance, given the two-week lag in deposits, and suggests that it would be a violation of the law.


Passage number 124.
MR. WALLICH. Well, they can [have a] reserve deficiency fora week, for a little bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 125.
MR. PARTEE. But it's not very big.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 126.
MR. BLACK. The important point really is the one you made awhile ago, Chuck, about the need for reassessing the nonborrowedreserve target more frequently. I was on the call and I sensed thatwe really ought to be doing that; we did speed it up last month, but Iwould like to see even more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black expressing his agreement with the need for reassessing the nonborrowed reserve target more frequently.


Passage number 127.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 128.
MR. BALLES. [Unintelligible] keep the level of borrowedreserves at about what we would hope to have it. And to the surpriseof most, if not all of us, the necessity of frequent adjustments just-10-3/18/80didn't come along for a long time. It looks as if perhaps Februarymight have been the month when it could have been used. The question,as you look back in a little post-mortem, Peter, is whether it wouldhave made any difference. Would it have helped the cause, so tospeak, in preventing total reserves from getting too big, if we haddone what we thought we would have to do on that October 6 game plan,which is to put the discount rate up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is reflecting on past events and considering whether a certain action would have made a difference.


Passage number 129.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, of course, the discount rate was movedin the middle of February along with the Desk taking measures toimpose greater reserve restraint. There was a certain amount ofpressure that emerged almost automatically out of the process just byour sticking to our nonborrowed path when the banks were demandingadditional reserves. That automatically imposed some increased needfor borrowing. And then a further downward adjustment was made in thenonborrowed path to increase the degree of pressure, and at about thesame time the discount rate was raised. So by forcing the banks toborrow--I think it was around $1.8 billion--at an even higher discountrate, we put still greater upward pressure [on rates]. What we got,as I described, was a very substantial move in short-term rates of 3or 4 percentage points over a few weeks. And I think it got somebanks feeling that they were staring very hard at the possibility of acrunch and the prospect of just not being able to fund themselves. Soin that sense the program is working; it has [produced] very realrestraint for the banking system. I don't know that bigger moves orearlier moves in the discount rate would have done anything more thanwas being done [through our operations]. I don't know that we shouldhave [done] more because I think we were imposing quite a bit ofrestraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is explaining the actions taken by the central bank and their impact on short-term rates. He expresses his belief that the measures taken were effective in imposing restraint on the banking system.


Passage number 130.
MR. BALLES. One other question, Mr. Chairman. I would liketo ask Steve something in this case, in conjunction with the Bluebookalternatives. Steve, would it be reasonable or even feasible for thestaff to attempt to estimate a level of the discount rate that wouldbe consistent with the money growth targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked by Mr. Balles to Steve, seeking his opinion on whether it would be reasonable or feasible for the staff to estimate a level of the discount rate.


Passage number 131.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I share much of what Mr. Sternlight says.If you want to estimate an interest rate that would produce theseresults--I was hoping this method would get away from that a little--it seems to me that, if anything, it would be more like the federalfunds rate. In essence, if you look over a long enough time period,it doesn't matter very much what part of the total reserves issupplied by nonborrowed reserves and what part is borrowed. Whatreally matters for determining the money supply is the amount ofreserves, the total base out there to support money in some multipliersense. And over a long enough period, it can't really matter whetherthat's through nonborrowed reserves or borrowed reserves. In the veryshort run because of this mix, with required reserves fixed, it doesmatter because it affects the behavior of the funds rate given thediscount rate. But if we put in a high discount rate, then for anygiven total reserves we would have less borrowed reserves and morenonborrowed. If our estimate of the discount rate is low, we'd havethe reverse situation. So, while we could do that, we would simply bechanging the mix between nonborrowed and borrowed reserves for anygiven level of total reserves that would support the money supply. Idon't think that would be very helpful to you; we would be glad to doit, of course. I think in February the alternatives before theCommittee were: making an adjustment in the funds rate fast by-11-3/18/80raising the discount rate; making it more moderately by graduallylowering the nonborrowed path; or making it even more moderately bykeeping the nonborrowed path and letting a gentle rise in borrowingtake place instead of a rapid rise. What was actually done was tohave a small rise in the discount rate and a reduction in thenonborrowed path, which was somewhere in between all thosealternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply explaining different options and the effects of those options on the money supply.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
MR. BALLES. Well, if I could, I'd just raise one more point.In asking my own staff to review what went on during that Februaryperiod, it seemed pretty clear to us that the staff here and in NewYork had done a fine job of guessing what the multiplier was going tobe, what the total reserves should be, and what the nonborrowed pathshould be. There was very fine work on that. Yet the net outcome wasthat total reserves got out of hand on the up side for a while. WhatI am trying to get to the bottom of, with the benefit of hindsight, ishow you and Peter now think that could be headed off in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is suggesting that the staff did a good job of predicting certain economic factors, but there was an issue with total reserves getting out of hand. He is seeking to understand how this issue can be prevented in the future. This implies that there may be disagreement or differing opinions on how to address this problem.


Passage number 133.
MR. AXILROD. Well, our views are probably marginallydifferent. A difference is that I might allege that we could hit thetotal reserve path week to week. I don't think it's very important todo it, but we could without lagged reserve accounting. But we'd haveto have very large movements in the federal funds rate because we'dhave to force the banks, within the statement week, to adjust theirdeposits to the total reserves we'd put out there. We'd have to forcethem to do it. Without lagged reserve accounting that is possible.With lagged reserve accounting, that could also occur. If we allowenough pressure on the funds rate, they could make the adjustments indeposits but we just won't see it in total reserves until two weekslater. So within a very short-run period it would look as if we weremissing our total reserves; but actually we'd be getting adjustmentsin deposits that would be [evident] in required reserves two weekslater and we'd really not be off very badly. We would just be overpath for a while and then we'd be back on path. That's the essence ofwhat Mr. Sternlight is saying and I wouldn't quarrel with thatparticular statement. Indeed, the money supply is coming back ontarget now, or seemingly so, if March turns out as we are projectingit. There has been a rapid response to the rise in the funds ratethat has occurred, just as happened in October, which may be acoincidence or it may be that the lags [in response to changes in] thefunds rate are not six months [but are closer to] one day. It's hardto believe the latter but something like that has happened for twosuccessive periods. I am not sure whether I have answered thequestion, but I think I at least came close to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a discussion of differences in views and agreement between Mr. Axilrod and Mr. Sternlight.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 134.
MR. MORRIS. May I ask Steve a question. The advocates ofcontemporaneous reserve accounting argue that there would be lessvolatility in the funds rate than under lagged accounting. Do yousubscribe to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement or contention between the speaker who supports the idea of contemporaneous reserve accounting and Mr. Morris, who may not agree with it. Mr. Morris's response to the question would provide more clarity.


Passage number 135.
MR. AXILROD. Oh no, I think there would be quite a bit more,for one reason. The one [internal] reason is that Mr. Sternlightreally won't be "able"--and I put the word in quotes because I don'tmean that he's really managing the funds rate--to adapt his operationsas readily because in the current week he won't know requiredreserves. [Suppose] this week we're going to provide $100 in totalreserves. Given the fluctuations in deposits that occur from week toweek, we really won't know whether the required reserves in the week-12-3/18/80relative to the $100 in total reserves would be $20 or $90. If theyturn out to be $20, Mr. Sternlight is going to find that as he puts innonborrowed reserves, there are going to be huge declines in borrowingand huge declines in the federal funds rate. And he's not going tohave any alternative but to chase those borrowings down and put inmore nonborrowed. Because of the volatility of deposits week to week,I think we'd be certain to get more fluctuations in the federal fundsrate. However, with the system we're now operating on, where he knowsrequired reserves and we make adjustments on an average path for afour-week period, we make those adjustments so that we [take intoaccount] the required reserve pattern that we know for certain overthe two weeks ahead. And we tend to make the borrowings the same ineach of those weeks. So we let nonborrowed reserves vary with thedeposits while tending to hold the borrowing stable in an average pathfor a four-week period. I know that sounds like gobbledygook, but itis what we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the reasons why there would be more fluctuations in the federal funds rate if the current system is changed.


Passage number 136.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This question cannot be answered as the passage is not provided.


Passage number 137.
MR. WALLICH. I wonder if I may ask two questions. The firstone is to Steve. Steve, on contemporaneous reserve accounting, howmuch of a change in deposits would you need in order to sweat out $1of reserve deficiency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question to Steve.


Passage number 138.
MR. AXILROD. I am not sure I get the gist of your question,Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod simply expresses uncertainty about understanding the question.


Passage number 139.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends on what the multiplier is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply states that the outcome is dependent on the value of the multiplier, without expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 140.
MR. AXILROD. The multiplier on demand deposits at the momentis roughly 6. So if we took put in $1 of reserves, we ought to get $6more, roughly, in demand deposits. But that is not certain; if we putin reserves, they may end up in currency or anywhere else for thatmatter. But that's the multiplier on demand deposits; it's a lothigher on time deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the multiplier on demand deposits and time deposits, without expressing any contrasting viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 141.
MR. WALLICH. The point I am trying to get at is: Isn't theadditional adjustment you get from contemporaneous reserve accountingrelatively small. You need a very large movement in deposits in orderto overcome a small deficiency or surplus of reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply trying to understand and clarify the impact of contemporaneous reserve accounting on reserves and deposits.


Passage number 142.
MR. AXILROD. Contemporaneous reserve accounting, as nearlyas I can tell, does only two things for you. First, it absolutely canremove interest rates in some sense from your consideration. If youbelieved that there was a multiplier that the staff could predict, youcould set total reserves; you'd have to chase borrowing up and downbut you could come closer to hitting that total reserve target in agiven week. Lord knows what interest rates you'd have, but you mighthave the money supply. So the interest rates would be forced toadjust to the reserves. We wouldn't be doing what we do now, which insome sense is to make adjustments in nonborrowed reserves todeliberately force more interest rate pressure on the system. Thesystem would evolve its own interest rate pressure either up or downas we put in the total reserves. So contemporaneous would do that foryou; it would remove some little element of prediction we still haveas to what interest rates we want to see in order to achieve the moneysupply [objectives]. That element is left in lagged reserveaccounting. The other thing it does, of course, is to speed up the-13-3/18/80response by 2 weeks. The latter isn't all that important presumablybecause 2 weeks out of 52 weeks is not any big deal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the benefits of contemporaneous reserve accounting.


Passage number 143.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only mentions "MR. WALLICH" without providing any information or context to suggest any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 144.
 And you can anticipate it anyway but--MR. AXILROD. What it really does, in my mind, is to removethe necessity of making judgments about where you want interest ratesto be. But that's a judgment the Committee may not want to remove.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 145.
MR. PARTEE. We'd have to be willing to let the interestrates go anywhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating that in order to achieve a certain outcome (letting interest rates go anywhere), a certain condition (willingness) is required.


Passage number 146.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will have to have an exhaustivediscussion of these questions when we put contemporaneous reserveaccounting squarely on the table, so perhaps we shouldn't waste toomuch time now. I don't think we are going to change [our procedures]at this meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is suggesting the need for a thorough discussion of certain questions related to reserve accounting, but also suggests not spending too much time on it during the current meeting as there is no expectation of changing procedures.


Passage number 147.
MR. WALLICH. May I ask my other question. Peter, whatdetermines your decision to buy coupons. You mentioned that youbought nearly $1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a question and a statement about buying coupons.


Passage number 148.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we were in the midst of a period ofsizable reserve provision and it was a judgment that we should divideup that purchase. We anticipated the need to provide for an outrightincrease in the portfolio of some $1-1/2 billion. It seemedappropriate to do the bulk of it in the bill area, but we had notbought any coupon issues for a few months and just in accord with thepast dispersion of our buying it seemed appropriate to do some portionof it in coupons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a decision that was made based on their judgment and past buying patterns.


Passage number 149.
MR. WALLICH. Would you have done about the same had the bondmarket been different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question asking for an opinion or response.


Passage number 150.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We want to keep in mind that we don't wantto buy at a time when issues are very scarce and we'd have a sharpimpact on prices. Certainly the fact that the coupons were availablewould make some marginal difference in our decisions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and discussing the potential impact of that fact on their decision-making.


Passage number 151.
MR. WALLICH. Yes, so you were stabilizing the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Yes, so you were stabilizing the market" indicates agreement or confirmation of a previous statement.


Passage number 152.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We did a bum job of stabilizing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by someone named Mr. Sternlight regarding a poor job done in stabilizing something.


Passage number 153.
MR. PARTEE. Unsuccessful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 155.
MR. GUFFEY. I would like to ask what may be the samequestion John Balles asked but in a little different way. Had weraised the discount rate early in March, having in mind that throughthe period total reserves would be over [path] by about $700 millionplus, would you not [conclude] that we'd have come closer to the totalreserve path and that the adjustment would have been a bit quicker. Iguess the alternate question is: What would you have projected forinterest rates. Would they have been any higher absent theanticipation [of a discount rate move] that was going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 156.
-14-3/18/80MR. AXILROD. If you had taken a further upward discount rateaction from 13 percent, say, to 15 percent, I would have predicted afaster adjustment of the money supply only if that rise in thediscount rate also meant that you were going to permit the federalfunds rate to rise substantially. If you weren't going to permit thefederal funds rate to rise substantially, I would assume that thatupward adjustment in the discount rate would merely have meant thattotal reserves would be the same over time but with less borrowing andmore nonborrowed. But if you had permitted the funds rate to rise, Iwould assume banks would have tightened loan terms and maybe sold offsome assets, resulting in lower bank credit, lower money growth, lessrequired reserves and, therefore, less total reserves down the lineseveral weeks later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 157.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope we can proceed here with somedispatch. Mr. Eastburn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses a desire for efficiency and promptness in their actions.


Passage number 158.
MR. EASTBURN. I have just an informational question. Steve,some time ago there was discussion about having some papers on thefunction of the discount mechanism, the rate and so on. We now have anew situation with the surcharge and also the likelihood that we'll bemaking loans to other institutions--in a couple of weeks, possibly.In that connection, what are your plans on this background material.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for information and discussing the need for background material in relation to new situations.


Passage number 159.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I have seen first drafts and, in somecases second drafts, of a sizable number of papers. Of course, theBoard's decisions have in a sense "prejudiced" some of theconclusions. [Secretary's note: These decisions involving specialreserve and other measures were made in conjunction with thePresident's anti-inflation program announced on March 14, 1980.] Wewere proceeding with our study and the analysis on a schedule that gotinterrupted because of other work. We were trying to get somematerials before the Committee at this meeting. Whether we can do soat the next meeting or if it will be after that I am not certain, inview of what is going on. But we are on course. We weren't includingemergency borrowing in that study because that is taken care of inother ways. This was really a study of how the discount window mightbest interact with the present reserve [supplying] methods.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about their study and the factors that have affected its progress.


Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 161.
MR. WINN. Peter, on the unsuccessful unwinding of some ofthese GNMA futures with the failure of a firm or two: Do you see anymore problems ahead on that score with [more of those marketinstruments] reaching maturity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about potential future problems with certain market instruments.


Passage number 162.
MR. STERNLIGHT. In a way, I have been surprised, given theextent of rate moves in the market, that there haven't been moreproblems cropping up in the GNMA area. It may be that they had enoughof a scare last October when there were fears of problems in the GNMAmarket. From that point on, I have had the impression that activityhas been curtailed in those GNMA futures. Some of the regulators havegotten after their constituents--the S&Ls and credit unions and banksto some degree--to warn them about undertaking investment activitiesthat may not be suitable to their investment objectives. But, at thesame time, I can't rule out the possibility that some of thoseproblems could crop up again. I don't have a sense of any pendingdisaster there, but there could be some more [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 163.
-15-3/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say on these questions ondiscount rates--I didn't hear the last answer Mr. Axilrod gave--that Iam not sure it makes a great deal of difference whether we move thediscount rate or not, except for its signalling influence, which mighthave been considerable. That's because we could adjust theborrowings, presumably, to achieve the same result. The reason thediscount rate was not moved--let's be clear about it--is that we werewaiting for this program, and it seemed inappropriate to raise thediscount rate when the Administration was trying to negotiate thesepending changes. The judgment was either right or wrong; but it was ajudgment we made. It certainly would have been disruptive to thatprocess if the discount rate had been raised in the middle of it whenwe said we'd have a coordinated announcement. Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's uncertainty about the importance of moving the discount rate and explaining the rationale for not raising it at that particular time.


Passage number 164.
MR. ALTMANN. Ratification.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions "ratification," which refers to the formal approval or acceptance of something.


Passage number 165.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, we need the ratification of domesticoperations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not address or discuss any specific contentions or disagreements. It simply states a need for the ratification of domestic operations.


Passage number 166.
MS. TEETERS. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. "So moved" is a phrase typically used in meetings or discussions to indicate agreement or support for a certain motion or action.


Passage number 167.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Second.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is incomplete and doesn't provide any context or information to suggest any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 168.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they are ratified. Mr.Kichline next and then I think we will go straight to Mr. Axilrod. Wecan then have the Committee discussion in which I would like to get asmuch flavor as you propose to give in the limited time we have of whatis going on out there in the financial markets and in the bankingsystem. We get all sorts of complaints about the availability of farmcredit or small business credit or mortgage credit. It is very hardto judge, I think, [the degree] of total restraint we have and thekinds of problems, institutional and otherwise, that are arising. Themore flavor on that we can have, the better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 169.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without knowing the specific statement in the appendix, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 170.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 171.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In order to accurately determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage, the full statement is required.


Passage number 172.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In connection with that distinction--thewillingness or need of banks to borrow at the discount window--I thinkit is important that we all reiterate publicly or otherwise the factthat this change in the discount rate procedures does not imply anygreater willingness on our part to tolerate borrowing. I think yourdiscount officers ought to make that point to borrowing banks ratherexplicitly. We don't know how they will react. One can argue iteither way. But any tendency for them to think that the window isopen because the rate, at least the surcharge, is closer to the marketrate, should be discouraged or we will get a perverse reaction fromthis action. I think a little more than usual calling to borrowingbanks may be justified under the circumstances to point out to themrather directly that this is no invitation to borrow.Let me just say in connection with setting the stage herethat the Chase Manhattan Bank said it is raising its prime rate to 19-16-3/18/80percent today. At the same time it is instituting a small businessbase rate which remains at 18-1/4 percent, effective immediately.They used some language [in their announcement] indicating that theythink this is consistent with the philosophy of [the measures]announced by the Federal Reserve. They said they have some special[concern] for small businesses and they're acting to ease the strainsthat small companies face in borrowing money. The special rateapplies to companies with assets of $1-1/2 million or below and bankloans of $1/2 million or below. With total bank loans of $1/2million, that implies that a company is borrowing one-third of itstotal assets. The bank said the small business rate would apply toseveral thousand of its smaller customers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the actions and statements of the Chase Manhattan Bank in relation to the Federal Reserve's measures.


Passage number 173.
MR. ROOS. They've ignored the farmers, haven't they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Roos, is stating a fact that the farmers have been ignored. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 174.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They don't have a lot of farmers inManhattan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is a straightforward statement of fact.


Passage number 175.
MR. SCHULTZ. There may be more farmers in Manhattan, though,fairly soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a possibility or likelihood.


Passage number 176.
MR. TIMLEN. With their $10,000 tractors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This statement is a simple statement of fact. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can have a general go-around withcomments. But apart from the general business situation, any commentsthat you have about how far this restraint has gone and how far itneeds to go and what the special problems are, as I said, would bevery welcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that comments are welcome, without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 178.
MR. SCHULTZ. May I ask Steve a couple of questions first.Steve, I'm a little confused about the relationship between M2 and theother aggregates [in the Bluebook alternatives]. First of all let meask this question: Is the relationship between the new M2 and GNPpretty similar to the relationship between the old M2 and GNP thatpeople often looked at. I'll get that answer first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question being asked for clarification.


Passage number 179.
MR. AXILROD. My memory is that we have ended up with asomewhat better relationship. I had better not answer; my memory is alittle off on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, acknowledges that his memory is not accurate and thus declines to answer the question.


Passage number 180.
MR. SCHULTZ. For the second more important question, let'slook at alternative B. The implied rates of growth for February toJune for M-1A and M-1B were lowered by 1-1/4 points from the growthrates for December to June, but the growth rate for M2 has only beenlowered by 3/4 point from 7-3/4 to 7 percent. Now, given the newactions, with the likely impact on money market funds, are we to[understand] that you believe there will be strong growth in MMCs and2-1/2 year certificates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 181.
 How do you get that strong--MR. AXILROD. It may turn out that we seriouslyunderestimated the growth that would occur in money market funds overthe first two months of the year. So there was a much biggerexpansion in M2 than the Committee, in effect, wanted at that time.We have assumed that growth in money market funds would drop from hereon to a rate just slightly above what it was late last year. However,that was without taking into account the latest 15 percent marginalreserve requirement on those funds. Taking that into account, wewould think that their growth would continue but at a much slower-17-3/18/80rate. Using a rule of thumb that Governor Partee introduced to thestaff many years ago--and it's been difficult to find a [better] one--I would say that something like 50 percent of that money would go intoM2 type deposits and another 50 percent would go into large CDs andTreasury bills that are not in M2 but are either in M3 or liquidassets. I don't think that's too bad a view because roughly 50percent of the liabilities of funds are due to institutions andanother 50 percent to individuals. So I would expect that, ifanything, the 7 percent M2 figure you are referring to may be a shadestronger than might develop in light of the program. But I wouldn'texpect the difference to be large. That's as far as we've been ableto go [in our analysis].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement providing analysis and predictions about the growth of money market funds and its impact on M2 and M3.


Passage number 182.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand these inter-relationshipscorrectly, the December-to-June figure you show has a monthly base,but if it were on a quarterly base the way the yearly target is, theimplied 4th quarter to 2nd quarter figure for M-1A in alternative B,for instance, would be 5-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement explaining a calculation or comparison.


Passage number 183.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact.


Passage number 184.
 Those rates are on--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's somewhat above the midpoint [of ourlong-term range].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact and provides further clarification.


Passage number 185.
MR. AXILROD. That's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod simply affirms that the previous statement is correct.


Passage number 186.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And even alternative C is above themidpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a neutral observation stating that alternative C is above the midpoint. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 187.
MR. AXILROD. Slightly, that's right. That would be 5percent, just given the way the quarterly averages work out relativeto these monthly patterns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is simply providing information and stating a fact about how the quarterly averages work in relation to monthly patterns.


Passage number 188.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve, even with alternative C, growthwould end up in the second quarter as a whole running slightly abovethe middle of our range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents a fact or observation about the potential growth in the second quarter.


Passage number 189.
MR. PARTEE. But well within the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 190.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well within, but above the middle of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a location within a certain range without expressing any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 191.
MR. AXILROD. That assumes a very strong April, so we get themoney in early in the [quarter]. If it didn't work out that way, itwould be a little lower, I would think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod is simply expressing a hypothetical scenario based on a certain assumption.


Passage number 192.
MR. PARTEE. Well, the April growth rate is only 8 percent inalternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement evident in the given passage. The statement simply presents a fact or statistic without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 193.
MR. AXILROD. I mean it is strong relative to the othermonths. But if [that pattern were] reversed, it would lower thequarterly average growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement discussing the strength or weakness of the quarterly growth relative to other months.


Passage number 194.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 195.
MR. EASTBURN. Just a quick technical question. It seems tome that April is rather critical to the decision we make today and Iam trying to get a fix on your feeling about the probability of those-18-3/18/80numbers. Your estimates and the New York staff's estimates, I gather,are somewhat different on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a technical question and a request for clarification.


Passage number 196.
MR. AXILROD. I think the direction is the same; it's themagnitudes that are different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is simply stating that the direction is the same but the magnitudes are different.


Passage number 197.
MR. STERNLIGHT. New York has a stronger estimate for April,partly because of the tax refunds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a fact about New York's estimate for April being stronger, partly due to tax refunds.


Passage number 198.
MR. EASTBURN. It's quite a bit stronger, isn't it. Is thatthe basis for the strong April in both cases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Eastburn is making a statement and asking a question, but there is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 199.
MR. AXILROD. We did not put in any specific estimate for taxrefunds because we haven't observed them having an effect yet in lateFebruary or early March when they began. If we put one in, we wouldadd only a couple of percentage points, roughly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the speaker did not put in a specific estimate for tax refunds because they have not observed them having an effect yet. There is no disagreement or contention expressed in this statement.


Passage number 200.
MR. EASTBURN. And New York has them in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Eastburn is simply stating a fact about New York having "them" without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 201.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, that's part of the difference; I reallydon't know if that's the whole difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge rather than engaging in a disagreement with someone else.


Passage number 202.
MR. TIMLEN. But [the difference] is very substantial, Peter,in April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of disagreement or contention. It is merely describing a conversation between Mr. Timlen and Peter without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 203.
 Dave, New York's [estimate] is about twice what the--MR. EASTBURN. Yes, there's a very big difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. In the response from Mr. Eastburn, he states that there is a very big difference, indicating disagreement with Dave's statement.


Passage number 204.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The overall difference is about 8 percentagepoints but my impression was that the tax refunds accounted for about3 or 4 percentage points of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or impression shared by Mr. Sternlight.


Passage number 205.
MR. EASTBURN. Steve, could you say anything about yourfeeling of confidence in that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a request for someone to share their feelings of confidence.


Passage number 206.
MR. AXILROD. I was hoping not to. I consider this asreasonable an estimate as a group of human beings working togethermight come to. I didn't give you the specifics, but it assumesroughly a $1 billion increase in M1 in the week of the 19th, which isthe week we're in, another $2-1/2 billion in the week of the 26th, andthen very little increase thereafter. But that gives us a high Aprilfigure because from February to the end of March M1 will haveincreased 12 percent, roughly, and that gets into the April figure. Iwouldn't doubt, given our GNP projections, that we're going to have asecond-quarter rate of growth close to what we've estimated here onaverage, something like 4-3/4 percent. Whether it's going to comewith a large April or a large May or a large June, or whether it willbe an even distribution among those months, I really can't be verycertain. It would be misleading to say that I feel extremely certainabout this; I don't. But I don't think it's unreasonable. It wouldbe what a reasonable set of people would come to at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is discussing his estimate for the increase in M1 and the projected rate of growth. He acknowledges that he cannot be certain about the specific distribution of the increase across months, but he believes that his estimate is reasonable based on the information available.


Passage number 207.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's fair to say, in the light ofhistory, that there is no feeling of certainty about any of thesenumbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents a subjective opinion about the lack of certainty surrounding certain numbers in history. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 208.
MS. TEETERS. It's my understanding that a refund will feeddirectly into the money supply. Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is seeking clarification or confirmation of information.


Passage number 209.
-19-3/18/80MR. AXILROD. Well, there will be checks received byconsumers. The uncertainty is what people will do with them. Willthey deposit them directly in their savings and time accounts--inwhich case it will go into M2--or will they put them in their demandaccounts. And if they put them in demand accounts, will they holdthem for one or two days. In that case it will have some effect onM1 but a very small one. That is the reasoning [underlying ourestimate]. If people put the funds into demand accounts, we wouldn'texpect them to stay there long. Why would people want to hold moredemand deposits. So, they would either transfer the funds to anotherasset, such as a money market fund or a T-bill or something, or startspending them. In that case, any little upward effect would begincoming down in May and June and July. The only evidence we've reallyhad was on the tax rebate program where checks were sent out to peopleas a tax rebate; those very clearly had a discernable money supplyeffect. On these kinds of refunds, we don't have the experience thatwould enable us to be very certain about [the effect].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily explaining the uncertainty around what people will do with the checks they receive and how it will affect different measures of the money supply.


Passage number 210.
 So, we arewaiting for something to happen; we haven't seen it yet and we may notsee it this whole--MS. TEETERS. Well, suppose the refund is real and it occurs.Is that enough to knock us off of our money path growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents a statement and then a question.


Passage number 211.
MR. AXILROD. Well, as we said last time and this time also,we think the effect in the three months of March, April, and May mightbe on the order of 1 to 3 percentage points [unintelligible] and thenunwinding to that extent in June and July and piddling out in August.That's our estimate of what might happen. But we haven't deliberatelyput that in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply stating his team's estimate without any conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 212.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a big seasonal in April to takecare of this in a normal way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward suggestion or directive to handle a big seasonal task in April in a normal manner.


Passage number 213.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, but the refunds this year are estimated tobe about $12 billion above the average of the last two or three years.So it's more than normal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply presents information about the estimated refunds being higher than the average of the last few years.


Passage number 214.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the normal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a question asking for information about what is considered normal. There is no stated disagreement or contention.


Passage number 215.
MS. TEETERS. They are estimating about $46 billion, I think,so $33 billion or so must be normal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is simply stating an estimate and providing her own interpretation of what would be considered a normal amount.


Passage number 216.
MR. AXILROD. I don't remember the exact number. I don'tknow whether Darwin [Beck] has it. Well, this year we're estimatingthe individual tax refunds to be somewhere on the order of $48billion. In 1979, total refunds were $36 billion. Reading back, inrecent years they were, in billions of dollars, 36, 34, 31, and 29.So you can see that it's a quantum jump this year on the order of $12billion. In March of the previous four years the refunds were around$9-1/2 to $10 billion; this year they will be around $13.7 billion,according to these estimates. So it's a jump of $4 billion in Marchand roughly $3 to $4 billion in April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply presenting numerical data and estimates.


Passage number 217.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who would like to make some generalcomments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for someone to make general comments, and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 218.
MR. WILLES. I would just like to respond to the one questionyou raised about farm credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 219.
-20-3/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, respond more generally, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage "20-3/18/80" does not contain any words or statements that can be analyzed for contention or disagreement. It appears to be a numerical expression or a date. As such, it does not provide any context for an argument or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 220.
MR. WILLES. We have recently done a survey of our countrybanks and they tell us they are as tight as a drum, and the farmerstell us [the banks] are as tight as a drum. Yet we have very few ofthe country banks trying to pass on those loans to the city banks,which are not tight as a drum. When we get behind that, [we findthat] they're passing them off like crazy to the PCAs and so on, butthey're reluctant to pass them off to their city correspondents simplybecause the price is so high. So it's not really a question ofavailability in the normal sense, but a question of theirunwillingness at least to this point to try to pass those higher rateson to their farm customers who are used to substantially lower rates.Now, I don't like the implication of that, in terms of the directionwe seem to be going, which is to give preference to small businesses.But I think that is the real issue in their mind. It's not that themoney is not there; it's just that they're unwilling, so far at least,to contract for the higher price.The only other comment I would make is that, like manyothers, I was disappointed in the movement in the President's programfor fiscal 1980. That puts a little extra burden on [monetary policy]for this year. Therefore, to the extent that we do err, I think we'regoing to have to err on the tighter side rather than the easier side.For fiscal 1981, I favor the reverse of that. If the deficit infiscal 1980 is around $35 to $40 billion and then in fact [the budget]really does get balanced in fiscal 1981, that's a $35 to $40 billion[swing] in one year. That strikes me as a little larger than we'venormally accommodated and unnecessarily runs the risk of aggravatingwhatever recession we're in. It's too bad [the effects] weren'tevened out a little, with a little more in '80 and a little less in'81. I think that has implications for us in terms of how hard wepress during the next few months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions about the availability of loans and the direction of policy. They mention disappointment in the President's program and express their preference for a different approach to fiscal policy. However, there is no argument or disagreement with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 221.
MR. SCHULTZ. On a cash basis, isn't the budget going to bein some surplus between April 1 and the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question posed by MR. SCHULTZ.


Passage number 222.
MR. MAYO. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states "Mr. Mayo. Yes," which does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward response without any conflicting elements.


Passage number 223.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but it normally has a big seasonal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement about a seasonal occurrence that typically has a noticeable impact.


Passage number 224.
MR. SCHULTZ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided to analyze and determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 225.
 I understand that, but just on a cash basis--MR. MAYO. May I piggyback on Mark's comments for a minute.On your agriculture point, Mark, I wasn't sure I followed you. Is itthat the banks are not making loans at close to the prime rate but arefalling further below. Is that what you're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on a previous point made by another person.


Passage number 226.
MR. WILLES. Well, the country banks have loaned out abouteverything they have. But typically, now, given the current primerate, the loans are at below prime, and they're reluctant to passthose on to the city banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a fact about how country banks have loaned out most of their funds at below prime rates and are hesitant to transfer those rates to city banks.


Passage number 227.
MR. MAYO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 228.
 Well, the city banks won't buy them except at adiscount--MR. WILLES. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Our passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both speakers seem to be in agreement that city banks will only buy the products at a discount.


Passage number 229.
-21-3/18/80MR. MAYO. --is what you're saying. We have that sameexperience, and the banks in our area are very tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is just a statement of agreement and shared experience.


Passage number 230.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The country banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not reveal any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "the country banks" without expressing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 231.
MR. MAYO. Yes, the country banks. There is some complaint,too, on the way the Farm Credit Agency credits enter into this. Someof that is not credit we're trying to discourage, like Farmers HomeAdministration per se. The more Farmers Home Administration does, theless of that type of credit the commercial banks will do, and they arerestive about that even though they are tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It explains that there is some complaint about the way Farm Credit Agency credits enter into the situation, but there is no indication of disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 232.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage doesn't provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It just mentions "Mr. Morris" without any further context or information.


Passage number 233.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, our staff has about the sameeconomic forecast as the Board's staff. I have a gut feeling that ifthe forecast is wrong, the result is likely to be a deeper recession.I am thinking primarily in terms of the financial strains that thesystem will be under. I think we've all been amazed at thewillingness of consumers and businessmen to take on loans at extremelyhigh rates. And it seems to me the counterpart of this is that we maygo into a recession [with] an awful lot of strains that are likely tolead to a deeper recession. One sector in particular that is showinggreat strains even in a forward moving economy is the savings banks;the situation in New England is getting critical. I was a littleshocked yesterday to find out that they may be in a position to haveordinary access to the discount window within as little as two weeks.If that's the case, we have an awful lot of issues to resolve. As youknow, in the past we have not loaned to organizations that wereclearly insolvent. The fact is that all the savings banks in NewEngland probably are insolvent if their assets are valued at currentmarket rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 234.
MR. PARTEE. That's true of many banks, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage suggests a general agreement or acknowledgment of a fact. There is no indication of disagreement or contentiousness.


Passage number 235.
MR. MORRIS. It's true of banks, too, but it's much more thecase with the savings banks, particularly in New England where theaverage yield on their portfolios is very much lower than on the WestCoast. That's because (a) we've been a slow growing region; and (b)New Englanders don't change their houses as frequently as people inCalifornia do. That has led to a very old and very low yieldingportfolio. So, not only do they have liquidity problems but they havevery serious earnings problems. Most of the savings banks in NewEngland will probably show a deficit in earnings this year. There areother complications. There is this new dual rate which was set up todeal with large commercial banks. I think that is perfectly fine, inlight of the fact that that's where the growth of credit has been mostpronounced. But some of the most seriously troubled savings banks inNew England have assets in excess of $500 million. And the questionis: Do we want to charge them the premium rate. Another problem isthat most of the savings banks in New England are not insured by theFDIC. We have a state fund which amounts to about $250 million. Whatdo we do when that fund is approaching its limits. We're going tohave an awful lot of issues in this whole area of lending to thriftinstitutions coming down on us very soon that will need to beaddressed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of facts and observations about the savings banks in New England and their earnings problems. The speaker also raises some questions and concerns but does not engage in any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 236.
-22-3/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you conclude from all this for ourcurrent posture. Tighter, easier, unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is asking for a conclusion based on the information provided.


Passage number 237.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I think our current posture is doing thejob. I would advocate the alternative B approach. I don't see wherethe situation now requires a tighter posture. We have to evaluatewhat needs to be done. And I think we're going to see, as the staffis forecasting, a major collapse in housing in the next few months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of Mr. Morris expressing his opinion and advocating for a particular approach.


Passage number 238.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without providing the passage itself.


Passage number 239.
MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I haven't talked to [any businesscontacts] since Friday, except to that group of bankers who were hereyesterday. But I must say that through Thursday of last week,businessmen, and by that I mean mostly industrialists, were stilltelling us in New York that they have great confidence in 1980 being apretty good year--maybe not a record year but a pretty good year.It's true that the money market banks and the medium size and largeregional banks have all been approached for, and have granted, loancommitments. And I know a few of them are very uncomfortable aboutmeeting those commitments. In upstate New York some of the countrybanks have been expressing a great deal of concern about the effect ofthe current level of interest rates on local small businessmen. Ithink local small businessmen are not unlike the farmers in theMidwest. There are stories that automobile dealers are just closingtheir businesses because they can't finance their inventories; ratherthan go bankrupt, they retire. We have the impression thatinventories are generally modest, although for some small retailersthey are pretty minimal. I have the impression that in New York Cityretail sales are pretty good, but that may not be the case outside ofthe city. We've had some indications that in the first two months ofthe year there have been price increases, particularly by the largegrocery chains. Some people explain that as the reason for all thecoupons we're getting in our Sunday newspapers. In effect, it'sgiving back the anticipatory price increase.We also have in our area the same grave concerns that Frankhas in Massachusetts and New England generally. Our thrifts are invery bad shape. Three of the ten largest mutual savings banks in NewYork were in the red for 1979, and probably more will be in the redfor 1980. It is disintermediation on the one side and terribleearnings on the other side. My own feeling is that if the consumerhadn't been running out of gas before last Friday, he certainly hashad his accelerator taken away from him as of Friday. On the otherhand, though, we're hearing that some companies are accelerating thetiming of their annual wage increases. For example, if an annualreview was to be in July or August, they're bringing it forward. Sothe consumer may have a little extra money in his pocket. The Boardstaff's projections of the outlook for the next 15 months seem prettyreasonable. In all the circumstances, my thought is that we shouldhang in there, which is probably what "B" does. That would be my ideaof hanging in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing his own thoughts and impressions on various topics, but there is no indication of different perspectives or conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal, what wisdom do you bring usfrom Atlanta in your first presence here. Welcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 241.
MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, sir. It's nice to be here at thisinteresting time. Shifting to another part of the country, Mr.-23-3/18/80Chairman, the Atlanta District shows a remarkable reversal inattitudes concerning the economic outlook, it seems to me. Just amonth ago our directors and businessmen generally were virtuallydiscounting any recession, even a mild one this year. But in amonth's time that sentiment has changed remarkably, as I say. Theynow almost uniformly see a recession developing and perhaps a deeperrecession developing later this year. That even comes from our SouthFlorida directors who had been reporting very, very bullish conditionsright through last Friday. These sentiments, of course, were voicedbefore the President's program and the Federal Reserve program. It'sinteresting to note that this change is attitudinal and not based onany real change in basic economic conditions. Conditions in theDistrict generally are about the same as they were, although, ofcourse, we have had some softness in real estate sales andconstruction activity and a slowing in retail sales. That has beenreflected, too, in a less rapid run-up in bank credit than in otherparts of the country. But the perception of the future is that we'rein for a very difficult time. Our business people and directors seeautomobile dealers, farmers, small business people, and thrifts beinghurt pretty badly and I think there is a real fear at this point of acredit crunch coming along. While I don't have any data, and my staffhasn't given me any data about small banks, I have an intuitivefeeling that some of the small banks in the District are probably inmuch the same condition as savings and loans, although perhaps not tothe same degree. My personal feeling, after hearing all of this frompeople around the District, is that the pessimism is perhaps a littleoverdone. Recession, in my judgment, would not be all that bad if weare going to get prices under control.In terms of policy, it seems to me that we've got to get themonetary aggregates under control. February was perhaps a one-monthaberration, but there was a run-up in the aggregates. That, togetherwith negative market reaction to the President's program, is reallygoing to fuel inflationary expectations. Indeed, as has been remarkedhere, with energy costs increasing in the short term we could have anincrease in inflation. That is bound to cause consumers to lackconfidence in what has been done by the Administration, and we couldhave an increase in inflationary expectations with the obviousresults. So my judgment, Mr. Chairman, which is a little differentfrom the staff's at the Atlanta Bank, is to err on the side of greaterrestraint. While alternative B seems to me a viable alternative,whereas I would not consider alternative A to be viable, my preferencewould be to go for something along the lines of alternative C todemonstrate in the near term to the markets that we're going tocontinue with this program of restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply presents their observation of a change in attitudes towards the economic outlook and shares their personal opinion on the matter.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any text provided. Please provide more information for an accurate assessment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 243.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we are in general agreement withwhat the staff has [projected]. If we were to shade it a little, we'dshade it along the lines that Frank Morris described because of theunrest we see in financial markets, along with weaker housing and alsoprobably weakness in investment, all of which we think may be morethan the staff is estimating. I would add one other caveat and thatis the feeling on our part that the international situation may beweaker than is generally being assumed. So we would shade theforecast toward a little deeper decline than the staff has indicated.By the same token, we would expect perhaps a more rapid recovery. The-24-3/18/80staff is actually showing no growth in real GNP between the fourthquarter of '80 and the fourth quarter of '81, and we think [GNPgrowth] will probably be positive.On the policy side, it seems to me that the best thing wecould do is to continue the policy we've been following. I think yousaid it all, and very well, yesterday before those bankers when youstressed that the backbone of our policy still remains our efforts tocontrol the aggregates. Not everyone heard you yesterday; there maybe some general doubt that we'll do that and some expectation thatwe'll back away. So, one could make a case for going with alternativeC. But it seems to me that alternative B is strong enough tounderscore our determination. The rates of growth in the aggregatesfor the last part of that six-month period are substantially belowwhat we actually had in the first three months, or think we had in thefirst three months. They are below our targets, so "B" seems to us tobe the best of the alternatives.So far as the federal funds range is concerned, I wouldprefer to drop the top and also the bottom of that range. I think weare now to the point where we can do that. I would not want to raisethe lower end, a possible alternative suggested in the Bluebook, sinceI would like us to be in a position to let rates come down prettyfast, if they do tend to do that in the face of a controlled set ofgrowth rates in the aggregates. I am sure that the Committee is notgoing to agree to abandoning that range; against that background,11-1/2 to 18 percent looks about right to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black expresses his agreement with the staff's projections but also provides caveats and concerns that he believes may result in a deeper decline than what the staff has indicated. He also suggests a more rapid recovery and expresses his preference for alternative B over alternative C. Additionally, he disagrees with the suggested alternative of raising the lower end of the federal funds range and instead suggests dropping both the top and bottom of the range.


Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to provide the explanation you're looking for.


Passage number 245.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, the crosscurrents are so extremethat it's difficult to sort them out and get a fix, particularly withlast weekend's adjustments not being factored into many people'sthinking. Three or four things, I think, are interesting. One isthat we turned off commercial construction--that is, apartment houses,office buildings, and so forth--completely in October, and it turnedback on in an unbelievable fashion in January and early February.We've turned it off again, I think, really in the last couple ofweeks; there are just no deals being made. But the profits picturethat is coming through on the deals that have been made are so unrealthat it's almost unbelievable. With the acceleration of rents andwith [builders'] fixed costs not moving up, the flows back to profitsare very, very high. That's particularly true where tax reliefoccurred, in California and Texas and places like that. In spite ofincreased operating expenses the profits picture is almostunbelievable. So, if we get any stability in [interest rates], myguess is that those [activities] will explode on us again as buildingpicks up.The second thing I'd report is that the major chemicalcompanies are showing profits in the first months of the year, andI've seen figures for month-to-month developments. While these areworldwide operations and one can't sort it out [for individualcountries], it was interesting to me that the price increases fromJanuary of last year to January of this year were over 30 percent.Now, I don't know how the price increases were divided up worldwide,but these are pretty substantial price changes. They have those[changes] built right into June--this was before last Friday--so-25-3/18/80there's a big move in some of these factors. And their earnings areunbelievable.While building has phased down and the automobile industry isstaying a bit soft, [businesses] in our area are reportingunbelievable orders and profits expectations. Our railroad people arereporting really quite good operating results, much better than theyhad projected. And this is across the line, [even] with the downwardpush occurring in their automobile business. Our banks are showing amixed picture. Many of them are pretty well loaned up and are notseeing too much demand because of rates in agriculture and some otherareas. On the other hand, they are not seeing any problem withrespect to delinquencies or slow pays or any of the normal [signs] onesees on that score. We had, of course, in the last couple of weeksthis tremendous drive to increase commitments. Their customers weretold that lines of credit wouldn't be honored and they had to convertthose into revolving notes. So there was a tremendous scramble tooffset the anticipated [government credit] control system by suchthings as price increases and wage increases and also by an explosion,really, in lines of credit. They were taking to their boards demandsfor loans that were 5 to 6 times their normally weekly increase.We really don't know what the outlook is because we don'tknow how people will adjust; it's a crude guess that we're making. Inview of your statement yesterday and other concerns, I am veryconcerned about the [potential] April bulge, which could be muchlarger than is shown here. And unless we react to that, our owncredibility is going to be questioned even though [we expect the bulgeto unwind]. We can't say "Oh well, it's going to go down in May andJune, so we'll get back on target." I have a feeling that we have torespond to current developments. While the targets of "B" seem to meappropriate, in order to make those targets I'd like to raise thatfunds rate range by 2 points, let's say, to 13-1/2 to 20 percent, togive the Desk [the flexibility to respond], if necessary, if we getthis kind of bulge. I don't want to raise it just to raise it. Butunless we respond to the increase, which could be quite large in thisperiod, we're going to have a real credibility problem.I am impressed with those who watch the Desk. They will tellyou exactly what the intervention points were; they don't see anychange in terms of our intervention points which [they say areapparent] to the market. People, in spite of all the changes, arereading [our operations] as if we were operating under the oldguidelines. While their perceptions are wrong, they still areperceptions; and we're dealing with perceptions as people interpretwhat we're doing and how they will react.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no evident contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing various observations and concerns about different sectors of the economy.


Passage number 246.
MR. PARTEE. We're certainly not dealing in eighths anymore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the situation has changed from dealing in eighths.


Passage number 247.
MR. WINN. I know, but it's amazing to me that they can tellyou what hour we intervened and at what rate. That hasn't changed.But I am really concerned about this April bulge and how it will beinterpreted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 248.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 249.
MR. BALLES. At times like this, Mr. Chairman, regionaldifferences do show up rather starkly. West of the Rockies there are-26-3/18/80precious few signs of any present or impending recession, particularlyas our directors view [the situation]. With the obvious exception ofhousing and autos, things seem to be moving along at a very rapidrate. There is continued strength in consumer spending; it's almosthard to believe. I believe much of that still reflects a "buy it nowbefore it gets more expensive" approach. Labor demand in defense-related industries and high technology industries such as electronicsand aerospace is contributing to continued strength in employment inthe District. Loan demand remains strong at banks and, despite therecent flooding in California, agriculture all around the West seemsto be in pretty good shape. I think the difference between West ofthe Rockies and what Mark was reporting probably stems from thepredominance of large branch systems around the West. I know that inCalifornia our three largest banks are among the three largestagricultural lenders anywhere in the country. And, of course, a goodpart of that lending is to agri-business, but they take reasonablygood care of the smaller farmers as well--to the extent that we havesome of those around the West, and we do. Demand for lumber you'dthink would be falling out of bed because of housing, and yet exportsto the Pacific Basin area have made up a good part of that. So, inshort, while this may not be applicable to the national scene, ourdirectors just don't see any signs of recession in our part of thecountry nor do they believe one is ahead for the regional economy.With regard to the national scene, it's obviously a different picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their observations and the views of their directors about the economic situation in their region. They acknowledge that there may be differences between their region and the national scene, but there is no argument or dispute presented.


Passage number 250.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your area covers a not insignificant partof the national scene.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement simply means that the area being discussed is an important part of the national scene. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 251.
MR. BALLES. True. Well, with regard to the Bluebookalternatives, I can't really add much to what has already been said.All things considered, I would agree with much of what Willis Winnmentioned: One more month like February and our credibility is goingto be in bad shape. We recently had the first of the ABA/FRBseminars, which originally was supposed to cover the subject ofregulation under that plan that you encouraged us to get into. Wehad, I thought, a very good meeting. We had a number of people fromthe Board as principal speakers, some of the division directors andalso Governor Wallich as a principal speaker on monetary policy. Wegot quite a bit of flak as I remember, Henry. There was quite a bitof skepticism expressed in that audience about whether we were goingto stick to our announced target of ongoing restraint because of whatthose February numbers were showing--and they were aware of them bythen--on the money supply. Another month like that would reallyundermine our credibility a great deal, so I share Willis' view aboutdoing something about the April bulge if we can. And I think weprobably should. In general, however, I would go along with the specsin alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with what has already been said and shares the same views as Willis Winn.


Passage number 252.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to have a coffee breaknow, but let's make it short.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion about having a coffee break and suggests that it should be a short one.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 253.
[Coffee break]MR. EASTBURN. I have to address myself to conditions beforelast Friday. At that time businessmen in our area were generallyfeeling pretty good about current business, but I suspect that'schanging. My own guess is that we are going to have a recession of atleast the magnitude of the Greenbook projections and perhaps deeper.-27-3/18/80In view of that, my inclination was to go with alternative B. Buthaving listened to Steve about the April bulge, I do have a concernabout that, which tilts me toward "C." Perhaps there is some way ofgoing with "B" and watching closely to see what happens and movinglater on in the period or of striking a halfway point between "B" and"C." That's about where I would come out at the present time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially leans towards alternative B, but after listening to Steve's thoughts on the April bulge, the speaker expresses some concern and leans towards alternative C instead. This indicates a divergence in opinion or disagreement between the speaker and Steve.


Passage number 254.
MS. TEETERS. Do we have the technical capability ofoffsetting that refund.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question and does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 255.
MR. AXILROD. Well, there is some funds rate that would doit. But I would quickly mention that there is no certainty that [theprojected] bulge is going to appear. We took 5 percentage points outof the seasonal factor this year relative to last year; andcumulatively that seasonal factor has been adjusted over the past twoor three years to take 15 percentage points at an annual rate out ofApril growth. So, it's not absolutely certain that the bulge is goingto appear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the uncertainty and factors that may affect the appearance of a "bulge."


Passage number 256.
MR. EASTBURN. I am interpreting this as the best estimate onthe part of reasonable people of what's going to happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states an interpretation made by Mr. Eastburn.


Passage number 257.
MR. AXILROD. Exactly. I just want to be covered both ways.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their desire to have coverage in both ways.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 258.
MR. PARTEE. If you look at page 7 [of the Bluebook], Dave,which shows the monthly profile: In alternative B, for example, Aprilhas a growth rate of 8.6 percent for M-1A and May has two dashes,which I assume means 0, and June has 2.8 percent growth. Somethingcould be taken out of April and put it into May as far as the path isconcerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that something could be taken out of April and put into May as far as the path is concerned, implying a disagreement or contention about the allocation of resources or priorities.


Passage number 259.
MR. EASTBURN. Yes. I am sure that is true. And in ordinaryconditions, I wouldn't care. We could certainly tolerate thesenumbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with the previous statement and adding their own perspective.


Passage number 260.
 But the point, which has already been made, is that thecredibility of the System in that short period of time--MR. PARTEE. My point was simply that we wouldn't necessarilyhave to move to alternative C; we could change the profile ofalternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the credibility of the system within a short period of time and acknowledging a previous point made. It does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 261.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't generate a response without a passage.


Passage number 262.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The agriculturalsector has been reasonably well covered in the comments made by MarkWilles and Bob Mayo. Our banks supplying credit to the agriculturalsector are very tight with respect to loan/deposit ratios. Butcontrary to what Mark suggested, we have found that the country banksare facing up to their problem and raising their interest rates toagricultural borrowers. They have no outlet for the loans even atthese higher rates, however, because the correspondent banks are notprepared to pick them up, even at a discount, at the rates the creditis being extended. [Cattlemen] are withdrawing from filling thefeedlots again as they turn their present stock, which implies lessmeat in the future I suppose. Secondly, as we go into the plantingseason, a period of high agricultural [loan] demand, there is a bit ofa safety valve, if you will. There is still a lot of grain in thehands of the producers, which can be sold at the lower prices nowprevailing. That would suggest that there will be a considerable-28-3/18/80squeeze on farm profits in the period ahead. But I don't think therestraint program will have a great impact on the agricultural sectorimmediately. The grain embargo probably will have as great an impactas the restraint program. What I am really trying to say is thatthere are tough times ahead in the agricultural sector.Turning to policy, Dave Eastburn captured my concern verywell. In the Bluebook we are looking at a 4-month period instead ofthe usual 2-month period or even a quarter. It seems to me thatcredibility of the Federal Reserve System may be the more importantaspect, at least of near-term policy. The potential bulge in April ispart of the problem. I'd hate to go back to the [procedures used]prior to October 6 and focus on interest rates. But I think it'sextremely important--for international and domestic reasons,inflationary anticipation, and other things--that we not permit [thefunds] rate to come down very far in the next month or two. As aresult, "B" looks very reasonable to me. I would be inclined to movea little closer to "C" because of the potential for interest ratemovements if indeed the demand for money begins to ease somewhatbecause of the lower projection of growth. And as I understand it,the restraint program may depress that another half percent over theyear. How that will roll into the [next] two months, I don't know.So, "B" would be reasonable and I would be inclined to move a littletoward "C" if that were the sense of the Committee. I would also setthe federal funds range by raising the lower end and reestablishingthe 4 percent spread, thus coming out with a 14 to 18 percent rangewith the anticipation that interest rates would remain in the upperhalf of that range for at least the next 60 days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 263.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided. Could you please provide the passage?


Passage number 264.
MR. ROOS. Well, [Mr. Guffey and I] are both from Missouri,and my approach to [policy] will underscore the great diversity ofthinking that occurs in the great state of Missouri, Mr. Chairman.Very briefly, the general condition of the economy as we see it is afairly level one with the exception of the building and real estateareas and automobile sales and manufacturing, which are obviouslyquite weak. Just last week we had a group of savings and loan peoplein for lunch, and they reported very severe trouble, as your savingsbank people are experiencing, Frank. Our agricultural loan demandcontinues strong. Basically, we haven't sensed any significantweakening in the last few weeks.With regard to policy, I would favor alternative B. I wouldresist like the plague any narrowing of the fed funds range. Ifanything, I would favor a widening of it; I certainly wouldn't seekthat, but I would oppose a narrowing of it. With regard to thismatter of credibility, I wonder if it isn't incumbent upon all of usto go out of our way in the weeks and months ahead to explain what weare trying to do and have our staffs at their various speaking[engagements] concentrate on explaining it, too. I think there is ageneral lack of knowledge. Within this room there is the capabilityof telling people: Don't look at the weekly figures; don't even lookat the monthly figures. I don't think we have to be slaves to thisproblem of credibility. We should be missionaries and salespeople tothe greatest extent possible and explain how we are trying to operatenow. Anyway, that's the gist of my point of view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's perspective and ideas.


Passage number 265.
-29-3/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage given is a date and a name and does not contain any information that can be contested or disagreed upon.


Passage number 266.
MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I would only add on the agriculturalside that I think some of the trauma accompanying the announcement ofthe grain embargo has subsided. There is a much calmer approach tothe problem and a little more Federal government credibility than[earlier] in the farm community, although they are still somewhatskeptical. We are, of course, in a very poor position on autos andhousing throughout our District. But capital goods are still runningquite strong. This is typical of what one might call "this stage ofthe cycle." I feel more comfortable than I did last month with theGreenbook [forecast], yet I would not be surprised if we got down to aminus 5 percent quarter [for GNP] before this forthcoming recession isover. I think we are getting closer, much closer, to the peaks thatwe keep visualizing and postponing, and we could easily have a creditcrunch--though I don't know how best to define that--perhaps in thenext 4 to 6 weeks.Having said that, I would be happy enough with "B," but Iwould tilt also a little toward "C," agreeing with what Dave had tosay. On the federal funds range, though, I would just leave the[lower limit of] 11-1/2 percent. It has no real significance now andI wouldn't want to see us push that up at this point. It restrictsour image of flexibility when it gets published. Instead, I wouldjust go to the 20 percent on the up side and be done with it,recognizing that that would give us cover for an interim period,rather than have to go back frequently to jiggle it up another half orone percentage point. I don't see any objection to going to the 20percent, given the rate structure we have today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their thoughts and observations about various economic issues, but there is no contradictory or conflicting information presented.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 268.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, generally I go along with thestaff forecast. It seems to me that the new anti-inflationary programwill have the effect of making the coming recession deeper than itmight have been and might even bring it on sooner. If I have anyskepticism at all [about the Greenbook forecast], it's in the area ofthe timing of the recession. The economy appears to be continuingstrong, or relatively so. If I read the Redbook correctly, most ofthe businessmen around the country report remarkable equanimity in theface of the economic situation; they just don't seem to be excessivelyconcerned about--or, in any case, feel confident that they can dealwith--whatever is down the road. It's pretty difficult to findevidence of weakness in the economy aside from housing and autos; onehas to look pretty hard. One has to look behind the industrialproduction figures to see that there would have been a decline inindustrial production had production of autos and parts not risen.Also one has to note that capacity utilization in the primaryprocessing industries and materials-producing industries has declined.And, of course, the average workweek has declined somewhat. These areabout the only signs I see of any emerging weakness.So, I feel that our posture at the present time is aboutright, with the appropriate tautness in financial markets. I don'tthink alternatives B and C leave us much to choose between. Actually,[for M1] the difference between them amounts to about $900 million atthe end of June, and that doesn't strike me as being very much moneyout of the total money supply. So, it doesn't really matter too much-30-3/18/80to me whether we choose alternative B or C. If we choose alternativeB, it appears that we will have a slightly larger volume of moneystarting in April and a less substantial rate of increase in the thirdand fourth quarters. On the other hand, if we choose alternative C,we will have a lower rate of increase in the second quarter and ahigher rate of increase in the third and fourth quarters. Given thecurrent situation, it would seem to me better on balance to leanharder in the second quarter and increase the restraint then; thatwill [show through] in the third quarter and allow for a slightlyhigher rate of increase in those quarters when we expect the recessionto hit. Alternative C would probably be more consistent with thatscenario than alternative B, but I have to repeat that really itdoesn't make a great deal of difference. On the funds rate, for now Iwould favor a ceiling of about 18 percent, but I am prepared to raisethe ceiling if market conditions [warrant].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice disagrees with the staff forecast and believes that the new anti-inflationary program may deepen the recession and bring it on sooner. He also questions the timing of the recession and argues that there is not enough evidence of weakness in the economy aside from housing and autos. He further suggests that alternative C may be more consistent with the scenario of a forthcoming recession.


Passage number 269.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions Governor Wallich without providing any additional information, making it impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 270.
MR. WALLICH. It's very difficult to tell what effects ourpolicies are having. These high interest rates may hit some borrowersvery hard but they don't seem to hit others at all, and the net effectone can't predict. I see that Charlie Schultz, after the President'sprogram was announced, predicted a 2-1/2 percent rise in GNP for 1981,so he doesn't seem to think that this has a very powerful impact. Iam particularly concerned about the inflation forecast. I view theforecasts of both our staff and the Administration as wildlyoptimistic. The very slight recession that we are anticipating isvery unlikely to make that kind of dent in the inflation rate. Ofcourse, we have a history of always underestimating the rate ofinflation.I am aware of the repercussions of a firm policy at savingsbanks, small commercial banks, and elsewhere. As these [problems]come toward us, we have to be prepared to meet them, and I think weshould meet them in a liberal way--stretch our powers as far as theycan reasonably be stretched. But we should not be obsessed by theconcern that the recession may last a little longer or even be alittle deeper. As I look back over our record, I am impressed that wenever stopped fighting recession. We moved imperceptibly fromfighting the last recession and its consequences into worrying aboutthe next recession. And that recession concern essentially hasdominated our thinking and has brought us now to 15 percent inflation.It's a situation with very poor options, but I lean toward the firmerones. That is, I lean toward "C." The market has not been impressedby our policy package except abroad. The bond market hasn't respondedvery much. Short-term rates are actually down. I think there is areal danger that if we now give the impression that we are about torelax our general credit restraint behind a shield of selective creditcontrols, we will get the worst of both worlds. We'll get theselective controls not working--I have not been very enthusiasticabout them anyway--but we should do what we can not to disavow themcompletely. That is best done by not throwing any burden on them andby holding to a firm general control. I think it's important at thistime not to convey the impression that the regular discount rate,which wasn't changed, is the discount rate and that essentially wehave taken evasive action in trying to avoid raising the discountrate. We should so operate on nonborrowed reserves that there is a-31-3/18/80good amount of borrowing at the surcharge so that the rate acquiressome credibility.Finally, I share the concern about the April bulge. If wehave taken 15 percent out through the seasonal adjustment, there mustbe a lot of money out there--in reality, people don't draw checks onseasonally adjusted checking accounts--and that may have its effect.So in addition to "C" generally, I would like to see a funds range of14 to 20 percent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, expresses disagreement and concern with the policies being implemented, particularly regarding interest rates and inflation forecasts. He leans towards a firmer policy and expresses skepticism about the effectiveness of selective credit controls.


Passage number 271.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 272.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that our postureof restraint had begun to bite before this past weekend. [If it was]biting before this past weekend, presumably it will bite a little morenow. I have to admit I've held such views on several earlieroccasions, so I don't know how much weight to put on my current view.We did hear reports last week, however, of several real estatedevelopers being cut off by large banks in our District. Our recentsurvey of the agricultural credit situation does not reveal thetightness that has been reported elsewhere in the country. And I dohave the impression that our farmers are among those who are carryingexcessive inventories at the present time, largely in the interest ofdeferring income tax liabilities.I don't know to what extent the Greenbook projections assumethat the capacity of people to adjust to an inflationary environmentis behind us or to what extent it might still be ahead us. In my areaI see indications of a good deal of capacity to adjust further. Someof this, of course, flows from the firm linkage that seems to havedeveloped between that area and foreign sources of funds forinvestment. Just to indicate the extreme to which this seems to begoing: I am told that at the present time builders in our majorcenters who complete expensive houses which they don't sell promptlyto local purchasers sell them to foreign buyers who then furnish themand rent them out. And this is a means of investing funds atobviously very low rates of return currently for the purpose ofgetting into real estate, in this instance in fairly modest-sizepackages. There are a lot of small business firms being sold toforeigners as well, all the way from the family-size motel to thefamily-size manufacturing firm. That seems to be going on yet at arapid pace. I note that the oil drillers have been in Washingtonrecently; they have about as much reason for being here at the presenttime as the farmers had a year ago and two years ago. The number ofactive rigs is at a 23-year high; the increase during the past monthwas almost spectacular and the increase over the past year was alsovery strong.So, the signals are mixed. As I say, it seems that credit isbiting but activity is still very strong and the outlook is strong. Ithink there's also a good deal of capacity yet on the part ofindividuals to adjust the management of their financial situation tocontinued expectations of inflation. Possibly one indication of thisis the alacrity with which they are willing to give up accumulatedinterest on CDs for the purpose of turning them in and getting a newone which will carry a higher yield. This has resulted in actuallines of people at banks in some recent weeks when the new rateannounced was significantly higher than the rates on outstanding CDs.-32-3/18/80As to monetary policy, the "C" proposal seems preferabletoday, primarily for the reasons that Steve Axilrod outlined in hisoral remarks. Others have commented along that line. That's all Ihave to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 273.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 274.
MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I am in favor of alternative "B."Even [with "B"] the rate of growth [for M-1A] in the period from Aprilto June would be dropping to almost half of what it was in the firsttwo months of the year; even compared with the first three months,it's very low. If we go to alternative "C," we're going to be cuttinggrowth relative to the first three months in half, and that implies tome a very stringent credit market. If people think they've hadstringency these [past several] months, it's only going to get worseif we go to the more stringent specifications. I will be very brief:I support alternative "B" as it now stands with the 11-1/2 to 18percent range on the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In the passage, the speaker expresses their opinion on alternative "B" and the potential implications of alternative "C." However, there is no clear contention or disagreement presented. The speaker is simply stating their preference and providing reasoning for it.


Passage number 275.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions the name "Governor Partee" without providing any specific context or information about their actions or positions.


Passage number 276.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know what's going to happen to theeconomy. Perhaps I am associating with people who are in difficultsituations and have become very pessimistic, and it may be affectingme. So, I may be more pessimistic than I ought to be. I would pointout that the projection seems to me very, very sensitive to the savingrate. The projection shows no increase in the saving rate in thesecond quarter and, therefore, the second quarter continues to be nota bad quarter. If in fact the saving rate should increase in thesecond quarter, it would be a bad quarter for the economy. And thatcould happen. On the other hand, the projection has sizable increasesin the saving rate in the third and fourth quarters, and those are thequarters of major recessionary movement. Whether those increasesoccur or don't occur will affect the character of that pattern. So,we still have the uncertainty that has been with us for some time, andthat is: What is motivating people and how might [their behavior] bechanging.I do feel that everything that has happened in the last monthhas increased liquidity preference. The rise in rates, which was verysharp and very noticeable, and the cutting off of credit cards tocertain low income groups, even before the President's program, havebeen played up in a major way in the local press here in Washington.The feeling that one might need to rely on one's resources more and onother people's resources less in the period ahead leads to an increasein liquidity preference, which would tend to give us rather largermoney numbers, generally speaking, relative to GNP than was the casebefore. I also think that the relationship between M1, or narrow cashbalances, and the real economy is changing adversely. That is, ittakes more and more M1 in order to get a particular real income; or weget less and less real outcome for the same M1 we had before becauseof [higher] cash balances, to the extent that people are buying morewith cash and not using gasoline credit cards and so forth. Thecredit lines that have been extended, many of which may call forcompensating balances, and the fact that we are forecasting more andmore inflation, mean either that a given M1 is going to carry with ita higher interest rate or lower real activity, or both. And I thinkboth is probably the case.-33-3/18/80So it seems to me that it's just the wrong time to bedeparting from the notion of a rather normative, reasonable increasein the monetary aggregates. I would very much resist moving to alower aggregate path like alternative C. If we get the recession,Emmett, which I believe we will, I think we'll find that the demandfor money in the second half of the year will be low enough so thatour problem won't be so much the upper end of our range but keepinggrowth within the lower end of our range.That brings me to one more point, which is that I would hateto have somebody ask me what I was doing during the crash and have toremark that I was defending our credibility. The people who say let'skeep those interest rates up there, regardless of what happens, arereally walking into a major trap for the economy and for the FederalReserve. I very much want to disassociate myself from that. I wouldgo with alternative B. I would adjust that path and slice a littleoff April and put it into May. I think that has the same effect, ifthere is a bulge in April, as going with alternative C. I amsympathetic to the idea that we need more room in the funds rate rangebecause there is a very good chance of a big bulge, and the Managerought to be able to move if there is a bulge. If there is no bulge, Iwouldn't expect him to move. Therefore, I rather like the idea of a14 to 20 percent range on the funds rate which, with the rate now atabout 16-1/2 to 17 percent, means we have some room on both the upside and the down side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions about the state of the economy and their preferred course of action.


Passage number 277.
MR. RICE. Could I just ask a question. Isn't it true, if westick to the 4-3/4 percent annual rate of growth under alternative B,that we are going to have to reduce the rate of growth later in theyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question being asked by Mr. Rice.


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: There is contention in the passage because there is a disagreement or conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 279.
MR. PARTEE. A little, but that will be easy to do becausethere is a much lesser demand for money in a recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee about the lesser demand for money in a recession, stating that it will be easy to do something (presumably to meet the lesser demand for money).


Passage number 280.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Assuming we have a recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a hypothetical situation of having a recession. It does not express any disagreement or contention about the assumption.


Passage number 281.
MR. PARTEE. That's all this is really saying--how far one isgoing to let interest rates decline in the second half of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating what the passage is saying without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 282.
MR. RICE. But we are setting the timing of the recessionrather precisely, it seems to me. And I am not too sure that we'regoing to get it starting in the second quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses skepticism or uncertainty about the timing of the recession starting in the second quarter.


Passage number 283.
MR. PARTEE. Well, your suggestion will certainly help assurethat we'll get it because if we cut the path in the immediate periodto come, I would guess we're talking about 25 percent interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee expressing his belief that cutting the path in the immediate period would result in 25 percent interest rates.


Passage number 284.
And I think that--MR. RICE. Well, we're really just talking about a fewhundred million dollars [of added M1 growth].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement providing information about the amount of added M1 growth.


Passage number 285.
MR. PARTEE. That's all right; it's a very hard thing tobring about. It involves more in M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing understanding and acknowledging the difficulty of bringing about something.


Passage number 286.
MR. RICE. You're absolutely right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement made by Mr. Rice.


Passage number 287.
-34-3/18/80MR. PARTEE. It's quite a lot on the margin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage appears to be a simple reference to a certain date and person ("34-3/18/80" and "MR. PARTEE") without any clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 288.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention involving Governor Schultz.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 289.
MR. SCHULTZ. I doubt that we can get out of this situationwithout a recession, and I think the unkindest thing we can do is todrag this on. It seems to me that the greatest pain can come if welet it go on and on and our financial institutions really do begin togo under. Small businesses and others can stand a lot of pain forshort periods of time but if this keeps dragging on, they will be indeep trouble. I would worry very much about a big bulge in April. Iam not strongly influenced by alternative B or C; somewhere in thatarea would suit me fine. I would like to see the upper end of thefederal funds range raised to 20 percent. My feeling is that we oughtto be very resistant to a big bulge in April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz expresses doubt and concern about the situation, stating that dragging it on could result in the collapse of financial institutions and deep trouble for small businesses. He also suggests an increase in the federal funds range, indicating a different perspective or proposed solution compared to others who may be considering alternative plans.


Passage number 290.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make a few observations thatoccurred to me in listening to all this. First of all, it's clearthat the economy is fairly level, so any month we look at thesefigures we're going to find some things down and some things up. Whatthat means for the future isn't very clear. There's considerablestrength and resiliency over broad areas of the economy or it wouldn'tbe holding level or a bit on the up side in the face of a decline inhousing and a decline in autos and some other industries. What standsout to me is that we haven't any room to grow here, given the declinesin productivity and other pressures on the economy. And if we triedto stimulate growth very much, we really would have no chance ofdealing with the inflationary psychology; we'd in fact face a blow-offon the inflation side if we don't already have a blow-off.Secondly, in my opinion--and everybody can be his ownpsychologist--at this point we don't have many believers in the viewthat inflation is about to ease off or, indeed, that the economy isabout to fall out of bed. There is more nervousness than there usedto be and some people are beginning to question whether they shouldn'tchange their views. It was characterized for me in talking to somefarmers from Iowa the other day, and I think their attitudes areprobably similar to [those held by people in] other sectors of theeconomy. A couple of them sitting near me said that they had boughtsome land last year at prices they considered exorbitant but theybought it confidently with the thought that prices would be even moreexorbitant this year. And they are wondering whether they made a goodbuy. In fact, they're beginning to wonder whether they could sell itor should sell it, but they haven't seen any evidence of a decline inland prices up until now. They were getting worried but they hadn'tseen anything. I suspect that a lot of industrialists are thinkingthe same thing in their own way. The fiscal policy program--and Ithink it has been underestimated a bit in the public press for avariety of reasons, political and otherwise--I certainly don't thinkwas strong enough to change these attitudes in any significant way.It may be to the contrary in the feeling that if anything is going tobe done, it's going to be done through the credit policy side.So far as the outlook is concerned, it seems murky to me. Ihear all these fears of recession and I even share them. But if youask me analytically whether they are any more certain now than theywere a year ago when we began hearing the same things, I don't know.I am pretty well convinced that it's going to start some time and that-35-3/18/80there's a risk, when it starts, that it may be greater than anybody isprojecting. But I thought that a year ago, too. Just when it willreally start, who knows. I know we--all of us, I think--havemisjudged the timing again and again. I share the thoughts that somepeople have expressed, most recently Governor Schultz, that we betterget this over with in terms of minimizing the total pain over a periodof time. I am worried about those financial institutions, and theworst thing that can happen to them is [for us to] fail to do the joband get the interest rate turn fairly soon. But the way to get theinterest rate turned is not by hastening it prematurely. If we haveanother false start, we'll be in considerable trouble even though thatclearly runs the risk of overkill. That risk is greater in itsinverse logic than if it's not killed at all; we'll be faced with thesame dilemma later on.In that connection, in getting out of our dilemma as best wecan, I put considerable emphasis on one aspect of the voluntaryprogram, which is to get banks to begin saying "no" on some loans andnot to put all the pressure on raising the prime rate. If the loandemands come home to roost [and they take the latter approach], itwill exert pressures throughout the money market as they go out andtry to finance the loan increase. If we accomplish nothing else inthe next few weeks--and I think the time is very short--if we can getthat message to the banks and they can get the message to theircustomers, we have some chance of at least moderating the short-runinterest rate pressures. I don't think we have a chance ofdissipating them but we do of moderating them and getting some elementof rationing in the area of the market where it does not now exist,namely among the bigger business borrowers. I would urge you to movepromptly on that voluntary program and get the questionnaires out andto begin on occasion, or maybe more than on occasion, a consultativeprocess with the banks, particularly the biggest banks in your areavery promptly.We have the April problem that has been referred to, and allof these things incline me toward resolving doubts in the direction ofgreater tightness in the very short run rather than the opposite. Theworst thing we could do is to indicate some backing off at this pointwhen we have an announced anti-inflation program. We have politicalsupport and understanding for what we have been doing. People don'texpect it to be too easy. There is an understanding that a lot ofburden has been placed on credit policy, and there's a willingness tobe supportive for the moment in that connection. I would not give allthat much weight to the degree of support we're going to get if thisis dragged out indefinitely and we have to go through this processonce again.Where that leaves me in terms of "B" and "C"--I don't thinkanybody mentioned "A"--is that at this particular juncture I find thefocus a little long, frankly, for me to come to any great convictionbetween "B" and "C." I share much of Governor Rice's feelings aboutthose alternatives. I do attach some significance to the fact that ifwe took "B" literally, while the numbers as presented on page 6 of theBluebook look low, [they imply] running above our annual targets inthe way we calculate those targets. If we were going to be at themidpoint of the annual target, it would require a considerable declinein the second half of the year from the 5-1/4 percent quarterly growth-36-3/18/80pattern implied by "B;" and even "C" is above the midpoint of theannual target for M-1A. You are shaking your head "no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any evident contention or disagreement. It is mostly the speaker's observations and thoughts on various economic issues.


Passage number 291.
"MS. TEETERS. "C" would mean 4-1/4 percent per quarter forthe rest of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a percentage (4-1/4 percent per quarter) for the rest of the year without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 292.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "C" is 5 percent for the first twoquarters, as I have calculated it, and the midpoint [of our annualtarget] is 4-3/4 percent. It comes close to the midpoint but is alittle above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating the calculated figures and mentioning that it is slightly above the midpoint, without indicating any conflicting views or opposing opinions.


Passage number 293.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, because February is behind us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact that February is behind them without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 294.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, there's no question that we haverecorded a high number for February, which has contributed to thatresult. But we have recorded it. But again, I [wouldn't] worry toomuch about where this comes out within a range of 1/4 or 1/2 or even3/4 percentage point on a February-to-June number, since all of thosedifferences are within our normal range of error anyway. That doesn'texcite me terribly at this point. Other people may have differentshadings but whether we're looking at "B" or "C" or something inbetween in the four-month time perspective, I believe it catches thespirit of what a number of people are saying anyway, to say that inthe next month or so--certainly before we next meet--we should beleaning toward taking our chances on being certain to be near thosenumbers in that very short-run period. I am not saying we canguarantee that we will be within those ranges at any expense ofinterest rates or anything else. But when we're making up the pathsand deciding what the level of borrowing should be or whatever, weought to be resolving doubts and making sure March is as low asprojected and April is no greater than projected or that both of themare lower than projected because that's where our principalvulnerability lies--in this two-month period. If April is anywherenear as strong as the New York figures suggest, we'll be above the "B"alternative. I feel quite certain that we at least ought to beleaning in the other direction, and reasonably hard, during these nextsix weeks or so. We don't want to give the market a false signal ifthe money supply comes in very low for a couple of weeks that we arerelaxing too quickly during this immediate time frame, when we've justannounced these new programs and there is the kind of feeling in thecountry that I think exists. There is plenty of time before June totake account of any shortfalls we might have in the money supply ifthat happy event should occur in the very immediate future. I don'tknow what the March data are going to show. If March came in underMr. Axilrod's projections and we were facing--in terms of our seat-of-the-pants judgment or the pit of our stomach or whatever--the kind ofbulge that is projected for April, we ought to be delighted with a lowMarch figure. So, I am suggesting that we lean in that direction.And whether we come out between "B" and "C" over a four-monthperspective concerns me less than [that we take] this posture I havesuggested before the next meeting. We could reconcile my longer-termconcerns by making it someplace between "B" and "C" but in the end Icould probably tolerate either. But I do feel rather strongly aboutnot giving any false signals in the very short run at the risk of anyoverkill that might be implied by that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a particular course of action, but there is no opposing viewpoint or debate present.


Passage number 295.
MS. TEETERS. Would you consider taking a shorter period oftime--in other words, setting a target for March through May.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question about considering a shorter period of time and setting a target for March through May.


Passage number 296.
-37-3/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I could, but it's probably going to take alot of arithmetic here. As I say, we're going to be meeting again ina month and we can fine-tune the quarter further then. So that reallyconcerns me less than an understanding about what our posture shouldbe in the next month and how we will reconcile all the doubts anderrors and fluctuations in figures that we're going to have duringthat time period. Whether it's expressed as aiming at "C" or beingextremely resistant to anything above "B" doesn't concern me so muchbecause I don't think those differences are great. I would put moneyin the bank if that happy day arose at the end of March or early Apriland the bulge that is being projected did not appear in that extremeform.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 297.
MR. WILLES. What would you do to the funds range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It only mentions Mr. Willes and asks about his plans for the funds range.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't feel terribly strongly aboutthat because we obviously have a very flexible technique for changingthat range if the occasion arises. But in the spirit of what I amsaying, if the Committee wanted to raise it--particularly the upperend--such a decision would reflect the attitude I am talking about. Idon't know whether we'd have to use [the full range] or not, andthere's no implication that we'd go out and use it because it's there.I don't have any particular expectations that the rate would have to[reach that upper limit] or that [raising the limit] carries anyconnotation at all that we will aim at it. I do think that we shouldresolve the doubts on the borrowing number by putting it a littlehigher rather than a little lower. And in that connection, I am notquite sure where we are specifically. I have lost track of thisrecently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses uncertainty and does not feel strongly about raising the upper limit, suggesting a potential disagreement with the Committee's potential decision to raise it.


Passage number 299.
 I know borrowings are running over $3 billion on an averagebasis, but you were talking about a $2-1/2 billion figure as--MR. AXILROD. We have suggested a borrowing assumption of$2-1/2 billion on "B" and about $2-3/4 billion under "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. In this conversation, one person is confirming the borrowing amount as $3 billion on average, while the other person is mentioning a slightly lower figure of $2-1/2 billion. However, there is no explicit disagreement or argument.


Passage number 300.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the right number is, butassuming you judged those two correctly, I would be inclined to usethe higher number. I am talking about the very short run for thestaff's initial planning. Now, if the money supply came in lower, youwould reduce it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different numbers and the speaker's inclination towards using the higher number.


Passage number 301.
MR. AXILROD. The higher number would be more consistent withthe behavior of borrowing in the last two weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a fact about the behavior of borrowing in the last two weeks and does not mention any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 302.
 We're having a hardtime interpreting whether demand or technical problems--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the market is confused at themoment, understandably, about what all these recent actions mean. Oneinterpretation is that we would deliberately try to ease pressures onthe money market. [Market participants] are looking for thesubstitute in this voluntary program. There's another interpretationthat says that's not true. The former interpretation would not behelpful at this particular point in time, although in a general sensewhat we're aiming at is partly to avoid the extremes, perhaps, of afurther jack up [in interest rates]. That's a little different fromsaying we're aiming to ease from where we are or [unintelligible] ofeasing from where we are. But I have a concern that if things wentthe wrong way and if people were not over this psychological humpabout inflation--which I don't think they are, although we may bebeginning to shake people a little--and they relapsed and thought we-38-3/18/80were easing, that would involve the greatest chance that we'd get acontinued big loan demand, which would drive up the prime rate andgive us higher rates. I think we're in a perverse situation here. Ifthose commitments are ever drawn upon, the banks are going to bepanicky and they're going to be putting their rates way up to protectthemselves.So you can have something concrete to shoot at--and let mejust say again that the least of my concerns is precisely whether it's"B" or "C" over a full four-month period--and to capture slightly theflavor of what I am saying, let me suggest the following: For M-1A,use 2-3/4 percent for the February-to-June number; put the funds rangeat 14 to 20 percent, say, which again is no goal to shoot at obviouslyin either direction, but I'm trying to pick up the flavor of what hasbeen said around the table; and aim at $2.7 or $2-3/4 billion orsomething like that in borrowings in the very short run. And for thisimmediate period, and I am talking about a few weeks here, let'sreconcile doubts in the path-building--which are plenty, given theperformance of borrowings recently--on the side of being happier aboutan undershoot of the present projections for March and April than anovershoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is disagreement or contention in this passage as different interpretations about the actions and goals of the market are presented. Some believe that the aim is to ease pressures on the money market, while others argue that is not true. This difference in interpretation and the concern about loan demand and interest rates contribute to the contention in the passage.


Passage number 303.
MR. PARTEE. Where are borrowings. Where were they lastweek, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for the location of borrowings, followed by a request for information about their whereabouts.


Passage number 304.
MR. AXILROD. Around $3.4 billion. And they're averaging$3.1 billion thus far this week and were $1.9 billion yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing factual information about the amount of money and the averages.


Passage number 305.
MR. PARTEE. With quite a lot of excess reserves out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple statement of fact without any contradictory or conflicting information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 306.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It's worth keeping in mind that one reasonborrowing has been high was the anticipation of something happening inthe discount rate. Something did happen and there's a much greateruncertainty factor than usual, given the whole surcharge situationnow. I think there is more need for flexibility in whateverunderstanding the Committee reaches on that borrowing level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The mention of "more need for flexibility" suggests that Mr. Sternlight's opinion differs from others, implying a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 307.
MR. WALLICH. If borrowings were, let's say, in the $2-1/2 to$3 billion range, what part do you think would be at the 13 percentrate and what part at 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question about the distribution of borrowings at different interest rates.


Passage number 308.
MR. AXILROD. I don't know. But I actually went back to[estimate what that breakdown would have been in] the fourth quarterof '79. And if actual borrowing [and its distribution] hadn't changedbecause of the surcharge--it would have, but if it hadn't--it turnsout that of the average daily borrowing of $1.8 billion in thatquarter, $1.2 billion would have been at the surcharge. So, about 2/3of it would have been at the surcharge rate. But what it actuallywill be over the next four weeks, I really have no idea. It has beena little higher than I would have suspected. If these banks try toavoid [paying the high rate] by not borrowing and we put in a targetof $2-1/2 or $2-3/4 billion, that ought to put upward pressure on thefunds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about borrowing rates and expressing uncertainty about future rates.


Passage number 309.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I missed a little of this. Any of theborrowing figures we're talking about now are below the recent level,which raises a little question, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that they missed some information and expressing uncertainty about a question that arises from the borrowing figures being discussed.


Passage number 310.
-39-3/18/80MR. MORRIS. I think that's appropriate, Paul. My guess isthat the big banks will back away from the window and try to preservetheir flexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and making a prediction about the actions of the big banks.


Passage number 311.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we just don't know. I think that'spossible. But it's implicit in this that we start at what is a lowerlevel of borrowing than we have had just recently. And if the moneysupply figures were coming in a little high relative to theprojections we now have, we might raise [the borrowing level] a bit.I guess that's the implication of what we're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the possibility of adjusting the borrowing level based on the money supply figures, but there is no conflicting opinion presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 312.
MR. AXILROD. I was assuming, Mr. Chairman, that one of theimplications was that the Committee didn't want to be as accommodativein April as we had in [the Bluebook] and that for whatever path theCommittee decides we might lower both March and April and shift alittle of that into May and June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The implication is that the Committee does not want to be as accommodative in April as they were in the Bluebook. The speaker suggests shifting some of the accommodation from March and April into May and June.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 313.
MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I object strongly to raising thefloor on the funds range. I have a feeling that when we hit therecession we're going to hit it very suddenly and that we may verywell get into a credit crunch. It seems to me that it would be wiseto keep the wide band and as [much] flexibility as possible. It alsogoes with my long-range feeling that we do want to have a very widerange on the federal funds rate and let the market determine the ratesover time. We have broadened the federal funds range, and I thinkthat was a move in the right direction. I don't mind going to [aceiling of] 20 percent, but I don't particularly want to raise thefloor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters strongly objects to raising the floor on the funds range, while others may have a different opinion.


Passage number 314.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I find it very difficult to conceive thatwe're going to get to the lower end of the range before the nextmeeting anyway. This is probably the least important number we putdown. And from that [perspective], it doesn't bother me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and attitude towards a certain number without any engagement in a disagreement or argument.


Passage number 315.
MS. TEETERS. I agree with that, but the idea of keeping therange wide in case we do get into a crisis situation appeals to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea of keeping the range wide in case of a crisis situation.


Passage number 316.
MR. PARTEE. It does seem to me, though, Nancy, [given that]we have raised the discount rate since the last meeting, that toaccept that floor, which is slightly below the 12 percent discountrate [unintelligible]. Operationally, one has to figure that bankswould first pay off the borrowings before the [funds rate] went lower.So, logically, there is a basis for a one point increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing his opinion and rationale for a potential increase in the discount rate.


Passage number 317.
MS. TEETERS. I still think the wider the range, the better,because we really don't know what we will be getting into in the nexttwo or three months. And the possibility of a credit crunch is outthere; it's not an impossibility at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement of opinion by Ms. Teeters, expressing her belief that having a wider range is better due to the uncertainty of future circumstances and the possibility of a credit crunch.


Passage number 318.
MR. PARTEE. It's quite probable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The statement made by Mr. Partee is presented as a general observation or assumption without any opposing viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 319.
MR. WALLICH. That would press the upper end, not the lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is simply stating a potential outcome or possibility.


Passage number 320.
MS. TEETERS. It depends on what happens afterwards, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement expressing a conditional perspective.


Passage number 321.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we're talking about the visuals ofwhat is announced a month from now and I can't convince myself thatthis is an absolutely crucial decision. One could argue that raising-40-3/18/80the funds range is consistent and reinforces the notion that we're notbacking off. On the other hand, if we don't change it, it can beinterpreted as an indefinite widening of the range.Well, we have a small mechanical problem. It is small in onesense; I don't know that it affects anything. The staff has writtenthe directive tentatively to include a growth range for the wholefirst half of the year, which makes it even less sensitive to whatwe're talking about in the next month or two. I don't know whetherthat's a good way to word it or not. The only problem with wording itfor the second quarter--and we can all convert this into a second-quarter growth rate--is that we don't know exactly what the [first-quarter] base is at this point. The equivalent of what I suggested,which is 2-3/4 percent for 4 months, would be about 4-3/8 percent forthe first half. And that begins to look a little too fine. We couldsay 4-1/4 percent. The last published target we had was 4-1/2 percentfor the first quarter, which I take it we will exceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is mainly discussing different perspectives and considerations regarding a decision, but there is no argument or conflicting opinions presented.


Passage number 322.
MR. PARTEE. Make it 4-1/2 percent for the half-year then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a specific interest rate of 4-1/2 percent for the half-year.


Passage number 323.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can put in 4-1/2 percent for the half-year, which is right on "B." It doesn't capture the flavor that Ithought [we might want to convey] of putting it a little below that.But in very round numbers, it's not very different. When we get downto the point of how to express it within a 1/4 of a point, it'sdifficult. The 4-1/2 percent certainly implies no change. It impliesa lower growth rate in the second quarter than in the first, givenwhat we know at the moment. It's a little easier than I suggested,but I suppose we could take care of that by some language which saysthat at least for the moment--I am talking about the period to thenext meeting--we want to be sure not to exceed [that growth rate].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is discussing the decision to use a 4-1/2 percent growth rate and considering the implications of that choice. There is no mention of conflicting opinions or differing viewpoints.


Passage number 324.
MR. AXILROD. I think in October or sometime the language--not the number--was something like "4-1/2 percent or a little less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 325.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, maybe we can use that language. Ithink it captures what I am trying to say, maybe better than I saidit. Well, let me review the bidding here. Suppose we put thedirective the way it is written [in the Bluebook] and talk about theentire half-year [target as] 4-1/2 percent or a little less. For thefunds rate range, we would move the upper end to 20 percent. On thelower end there's obviously a difference of opinion, which is going tobe resolved. And in terms of the projections given to us, we willlean to being within those projections for the March-April period insetting the nonborrowed path target, interpreted as $2-3/4 billion ofborrowings right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different options and considering the best way to phrase their directive.


Passage number 326.
MR. WALLICH. That looks low to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply expressing his opinion that the given value looks low to him.


Passage number 327.
MS. TEETERS. Which one. The borrowings, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple exchange of dialogue between two individuals. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 328.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Based upon the very recent experience, itdoes look a little low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that something looks a little low based on recent experience. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 329.
MR. PARTEE. Well, the very recent experience, yesterday, was$1.9 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of a recent experience.


Passage number 330.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any context or information about any arguments or disagreement.


Passage number 331.
 I am not sure one day's borrowing is---41-3/18/80MR. PARTEE. Except that it was the first day after thesurcharge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 332.
MR. MORRIS. We just don't know how the big banks are goingto react to this dual rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 333.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know we don't. I think we'd have to saythat if we start off there and that level of borrowing appears--thoughit's never this clear--to be accompanied by a falling federal fundsrate and an indication of higher money supply growth, we'd raise [theborrowing level].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their understanding of a situation and suggesting a course of action based on that understanding. There are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 334.
MR. WALLICH. But there would be almost no borrowing at thehigher rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a fact without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 335.
MS. TEETERS. We don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that "we don't know" about something.


Passage number 336.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think we're capable of deciding this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee simply expresses his personal belief without engaging in a dispute or argument.


Passage number 337.
MR. TIMLEN. They will be borrowing at the higher rate whenthe funds rate is at 18 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about borrowing at a higher rate when the funds rate is at 18 percent.


Passage number 338.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I am trying to get is some flavor.We have to make a decision as to where to put [the initial borrowingassumption]. I'd be perfectly happy to put it higher and resolve thedoubt that way in the first round. In any event [the staff] needs toknow what we're aiming for. I am saying that for the March-Aprilfigure together we'd be unhappy if [money growth] were not at thatrate and we'd rather tolerate a shortfall. Having said that, there'sno promise we're going to confine [money growth] to that rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit contention or disagreement. It simply discusses different possibilities and preferences.


Passage number 339.
MS. TEETERS. Then you can't really confine the borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: This passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a statement made by Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 340.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't mean to confine it. All Iam looking for is some assumption to go on. If you want to forgetabout that, we'll solve it otherwise on the understanding that we'reaiming for 4-1/2 percent or a little less [M-1A growth] for the firsthalf of the year. Now that brings us basically to "B" or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting different options and suggesting a specific target for the first half of the year.


Passage number 341.
MR. TIMLEN. Do you want to define "little".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question being asked.


Passage number 342.
MR. PARTEE. Well, less than, say, minus 1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a straightforward statement or response without opposition.


Passage number 343.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not talking about minus tenths.SPEAKER(.). Governor Partee, that's a reduction ad absurdum.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement and referencing Governor Partee, but there is no contradicting or opposing viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 344.
MR. PARTEE. No, but I don't think we want [money growth] tobomb in the next few months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Partee expresses his opinion by stating that he does not want money growth to "bomb" in the next few months. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 345.
 And I can't accept more or less than--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, nobody's talking about more or lessbeing minus ten. We'll resolve these doubts on the side of lessrather than more. And if that gets translated into the March-Aprilnumber as projected, we'd be happy to come in lower than higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the preference for a lower number rather than a higher one.


Passage number 346.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, just to be clear: At the momentwe're projecting 4.6 percent [as the average M-1A growth for March andApril], and we'd target on that if nothing else were said. In light-42-3/18/80of this discussion, I would propose that we tend to even it out [overthe four-month period ahead]. That is, we'd target on something like3 percent or a little higher in March-April which would mean May-Junewould be around 3 percent or thereabouts; the two periods would beroughly even. March would be low and April high, but pressed downrelative to what we show now, depending on what the data we gettomorrow look like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of the speaker's proposed course of action.


Passage number 347.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it simply identifies the person in a neutral and factual manner.


Passage number 348.
 I resist a little the precision that'simplied that we can make it 2 percent less than an uncertainprojection that--MR. AXILROD. Oh, no; I was talking about what we'd targeton, not what we'd achieve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 349.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's one way of putting it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Well, that's one way of putting it" is not expressing disagreement or contention. It is a neutral statement that implies there are multiple perspectives or interpretations of a situation.


Passage number 350.
MR. SCHULTZ. If you did it that way, that would show realresistance to that April bulge, if it occurs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states a hypothetical scenario without any conflicting opinions or contrasting ideas.


Passage number 351.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. We would be targeting on [a smaller]bulge. If it started coming in even as high as we have projected,we'd begin resisting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states a response indicating that resistance would be initiated if a certain situation occurs.


Passage number 352.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we should kid ourselves,either. If the New York projections turned out to be right and therewere enormous upward pressure [in April], I don't think we're sayingwe would raise the federal funds rate to 25 percent in order to get[money growth] down to the plus 6 percent [upper limit of our long-term range for M-1A].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing a hypothetical situation, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 353.
MR. SCHULTZ. We're not saying that, are we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is simply questioning a statement or assumption made by someone else.


Passage number 354.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we're saying that. I justwanted to [clarify that].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and seeking clarification.


Passage number 355.
MR. PARTEE. The funds rate would not go over 20 percent, atleast not without a meeting. What happened to Richmond's projections.Is Richmond no longer in the projection business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there may be a bit of sarcasm in the speaker's tone, there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply questioning the accuracy or reliability of Richmond's projections.


Passage number 356.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the full passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 357.
 We began to have as many misses as the Board'sstaff, so--MR. PARTEE. So you gave it up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that they started experiencing as many misses as the Board's staff, and then Mr. Partee comments that they gave it up. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 358.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is correct to say, as of nowanyway, that we're not going to resist the April bulge, whatever itis, beyond a federal funds rate of 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion on the matter, stating that they believe it is appropriate to not resist the April bulge beyond a federal funds rate of 20 percent.


Passage number 359.
MR. SCHULTZ. Unless we have a meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in the given passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Schultz about the need for a meeting. There is no conflicting opinion or debate mentioned.


Passage number 360.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how to interpret the silence,but maybe we ought to have a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty about how to interpret the silence and suggests the idea of having a vote to resolve the situation. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine if there is any underlying disagreement between individuals.


Passage number 361.
MR. PARTEE. On what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: is going on in a neighborhood during the holiday season, I would say yes. There is disagreement expressed through the words "On what," suggesting that the speaker is questioning or seeking clarification on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 362.
MR. TIMLEN. A little less than "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Timlen's statement is not being challenged or contradicted by anyone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 363.
"-43-3/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The directive will be expressed as 4-1/2percent for the first half of the year or "a little less," if you wantthat modifier in there. On the funds range, there's some uncertaintyhere, but I take it the upper end is 20 percent. And I don't know[about the lower end]. You don't want a change at all, Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The uncertainty regarding the funds range and the lack of knowledge about the lower end suggests a lack of agreement or conflicting information.


Passage number 364.
MS. TEETERS. I'd like to keep it at 11-1/2 percent. I justthink it's a good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements or indications of disagreement or contention. The speaker simply states their preference and belief without any conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 365.
MR. SCHULTZ. I like the broader range, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz expresses agreement with the statement about preferring a broader range.


Passage number 366.
 There's someslight--MR. ROOS. I'd like to keep the 11-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "There's some slight--MR. ROOS. I'd like to keep the 11-1/2" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It appears to be a statement or response from Mr. Roos.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just see what the consensus is.[One option is that] we don't move the lower end but put the upper endat 20 percent. And that would be all that appears in the directivefor this discussion, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for the consensus and proposing a potential option.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 368.
MR. ALTMANN. Right. [The range shown in the directive]would be 11-1/2 to 20 percent, if that's what you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "if that's what you mean" suggests that there may be a misunderstanding or different interpretation of what was previously mentioned.


Passage number 369.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose the M-1B that is consistentwould be 5 percent or a little less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that suggests a personal opinion or speculation about the percentage of consistency for a certain M-1B (which is not specified in the passage).


Passage number 370.
MS. TEETERS. Don't you think "somewhat less" is a littlemore dignified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. TEETERS simply asks the opinion of the other person, without expressing any disagreement or imposing her own point of view.


Passage number 371.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Somewhat less." Operationally weunderstand that. And there would be some language in the discussionto reflect--though I'd hardly put it in these terms--that we want totake particular care not to exceed that rate in the period immediatelyahead. To remain within [the six-month target] is roughly the way tosay it, I guess, as the March-April average would work out. We won'tput the borrowing [assumption] in the directive, but you understandwhat the implications are for that. So, the precise specificationsare only the first two numbers, but there will be discussion [in thepolicy record] about the importance, during the period immediatelyahead, of resisting an increase in the money supply beyond this six-month target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the need to not exceed a certain rate in the period ahead and there is no opposition or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 372.
MR. AXILROD. I just want to be sure what that means, Mr.Chairman. The average March-April rate of growth between "B" and "C"is about 4-1/2 percent. I was not going to build a path on that buton a lower rate of growth and then shift some of it into the May-Juneperiod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact and clarifying information about the rate of growth. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 373.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 374.
MR. AXILROD. It's about 4-1/2 percent--between "B" and "C"--for March-April. Now, we only know 5 days in March for sure, so Marchin some sense is an unknown. What I think is consistent with theCommittee's discussion--I want to be sure of this--is that rather thanthe 4-1/2 percent for March-April and about 1 percent for May-June[implied in the Bluebook], I should shift some of that growth intoMay-June. So you would be resisting at a lower rate of growth inMarch-April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. In the passage, Mr. Axilrod is suggesting shifting some of the growth from March-April to May-June. This implies that there is a disagreement or contention about the rate of growth in March-April between Mr. Axilrod and the Committee.


Passage number 375.
-44-3/18/80MS. TEETERS. How much lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply appears to be a date and a name with no indication of any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 376.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we can take care of that inthe discussion. I was just trying to avoid some wording that reliedupon an internal projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a solution to a potential issue and explaining their initial intention.


Passage number 377.
MR. AXILROD. I understand. I just want to be sure that whatwe're planning to do is clear to the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply seeking clarification and confirmation.


Passage number 378.
MS. TEETERS. But how much lower in March and April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is simply asking a question without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 379.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I think we'd have to wait until we lookat the numbers and Mr. Sternlight and I have a chance to chew it over.But one thought would be simply to make March-April 3 percent and May-June 3 percent in round terms and even it out. We generally tend touse an even [pattern] if we can. It doesn't seem likely that growthin March and April will be even, but maybe for the two months itwouldn't be unreasonable to target it that way. Then if March turnednegative at minus 1 percent, say, April could be plus 7 percent. Thatwould be an example. Or if March turned out to be plus 2 percent,then the April [path] would drop down to a plus 4 percent rate orsomething like that. It may not be that even; it will depend on whatit looks like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different options and ideas for how to distribute percentages in a given timeframe.


Passage number 380.
MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, in light of Mr. Pardee's commentthat the only thing that is keeping the dollar strong in foreignexchange markets is the level of interest rates in this country, Ihave some difficulties in not moving up the floor [on the funds raterange], as a few people have suggested, to 14 percent. A 14 to 20percent range at least is a 6 percentage point spread as compared withthe 4-point range we started with. That 14 to 20 percent would be mypreference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal preference for increasing the floor on the funds rate range.


Passage number 381.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That seems to be the only element on whichthere may be some substantial disagreement. Do you want to vote onthe other parts and leave that open or vote on the whole thing. Let'sdo it the other way around and see how many Committee members want tomove to a 14 percent [lower limit] as proposed. That seems ratherreasonable to me. Let's look at two choices at this point: Move itto 14 percent or leave it where it is. Who wants to leave it where itis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any clear contention or disagreement. It is discussing different options and suggesting a voting process to determine the preferred choice.


Passage number 382.
MR. ALTMANN. Four, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing a response or statement from Mr. Altmann.


Passage number 383.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who wants to move it to 14.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply asks who wants to move 'it' to 14 without any opposing viewpoints or conflict being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 384.
MR. ALTMANN. Five.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And I didn't vote. I assume we have oneor two [who didn't express a preference].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they did not vote and assumes that there are one or two others who also did not express a preference.


Passage number 386.
MR. ALTMANN. Only one. There are only 11 members.SEVERAL. I don't think it's critical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Altmann states a fact, and the response from Several does not contradict or argue against it.


Passage number 387.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, do we have a consensus at 13percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no mention of any disagreement or contention in the passage. The sentence simply states a percentage without any indication of conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 388.
-45-3/18/80MR. RICE. It isn't how high we raise it; it's whether weneed to move it at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It states a belief or opinion about the importance of considering whether we need to move something rather than how high we raise it. It does not present conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 389.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only consists of the name "Mr. Partee."


Passage number 390.
 I would prefer 13 over--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a personal preference for choosing 13 over someone referred to as Chairman Volcker.


Passage number 391.
 Let me just try 13 and see whether that--MR. TIMLEN. As opposed to 11-1/2, I'll vote for 13.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting trying the number 13 and expressing their preference for it over the previous option of 11-1/2.


Passage number 392.
MR. PARTEE. You want it as high as you can get it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "You want it as high as you can get it" is a statement made by Mr. Party, without any opposing views or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 393.
MR. TIMLEN. [Unintelligible] because it's not high enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It is difficult to understand the exact context or tone of the statement, but there is no explicit disagreement conveyed.


Passage number 394.
MR. ALTMANN. I think that's five.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Altmann.


Passage number 395.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I just don't know the strength ofconviction of the various sides here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply expressing uncertainty about the level of conviction held by different sides in a discussion or argument. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 396.
 But if we make a Solomonicjudgment--MR. PARTEE. How many people will vote for anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement.


Passage number 397.
MR. SCHULTZ. The [decision] certainly should not rise orfall on this issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the decision should not be determined by the mentioned issue.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 398.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just try the 4-1/2 percent for sixmonths and the formal specification of 13 to 20 percent, which has themerit of being a compromise if nothing else. Is that generallyacceptable. Okay, let's vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "which has the merit of being a compromise if nothing else" suggests that there are differing opinions or preferences on the matter being discussed. Additionally, the suggestion to vote further implies that there may be disagreement among the participants.


Passage number 399.
MR. ALTMANN. One question: We have 4-1/2 percent orsomewhat less for M-1A and 5 percent or somewhat less for M-1B. Do Iassume the 7-3/4 percent for M2 stands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individual is simply asking for confirmation or clarification regarding the percentages for M-1A, M-1B, and M2.


Passage number 400.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh gosh, poor M2 got lost in the shuffle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that someone named M2 got lost in a crowded or chaotic situation.


Passage number 401.
MR. ALTMANN. Last time the directive said "about." Wecould say "about" and I suppose that would be good enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Altmann is simply providing an alternative or suggestion.


Passage number 402.
MR. PARTEE. I'd rather let it stand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his preference without any opposing viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 403.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll let that stand. Shall we have the"about".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "We'll let that stand" indicates an agreement or consensus to keep something as it is. The addition of the word "about" does not introduce any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 404.
MR. PARTEE. It's running a little high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. The statement "It's running a little high" is a simple observation or statement of fact.


Passage number 405.
MR. ALTMANN. About 7-3/4 percent and then 13 to 20 percenton the federal funds rate range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating different percentages for the federal funds rate range without expressing any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 406.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 407.
MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos YesGovernor Schultz Yes-46-3/18/80Governor Teeters YesFirst Vice President Timlen YesGovernor Wallich NoPresident Winn YesTen for, one against.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Governor Wallich's vote is against the rest of the group, as they voted in favor.


Passage number 408.
MR. TIMLEN. Having in mind the special credit restraintprogram that the Federal Reserve announced last Friday, there may besome advantage in including a sentence in the directive that wouldmake reference to the rate of growth of bank credit falling within arange of 6 to 9 percent. To have that as part of the directive wouldbe supportive of your commentary over the last 3 or 4 days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 409.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can we say that for the first half of theyear. I would agree with the thrust of what you're saying, thatsomething here in the directive would be useful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the point being made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 410.
MR. PARTEE. We can't have 6 to 9 percent in the first half.It's not possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is stating that it is not possible to have 6 to 9 percent in the first half, suggesting a disagreement with a previously mentioned or implied statement.


Passage number 411.
MR. AXILROD. We don't think it's possible in the first half.Given the strength we already have, it would take an enormousreduction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Axilrod is stating a belief or opinion without any opposition or disagreement. There is no contention present.


Passage number 412.
MR. TIMLEN. Maybe the number is not the precise number thatwe want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the number may not be the exact one they desire.


Passage number 413.
MS. TEETERS. We'd have to put it in terms of the whole year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply suggests a need to consider a broader timeframe (the whole year) for something, without expressing any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 414.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 415.
 It's already in for the whole year, butit's not--MR. TIMLEN. It's not very prominent in terms of what peoplecan see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not contentious or disagreeable. It is simply stating a fact about something not being very prominent in terms of what people can see.


Passage number 416.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wonder whether we shouldn't try to getsomething in this directive. Maybe we just can't put a number in atthis point but we can say "taking account of the need for restraint onbank credit" or some language of that sort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is considering a possibility and suggesting an alternative way to phrase something. They are not directly contradicting or opposing any previous statement or argument.


Passage number 417.
MR. TIMLEN. Make it qualitative and not quantitative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage provided only includes the statement "Make it qualitative and not quantitative" from Mr. Timlen. This sentence does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply highlights a preference or instruction for an approach in a qualitative manner rather than a quantitative one.


Passage number 418.
MR. MAYO. We could say "taking account of our needs in bankcredit, consistent with the 6 to 9 percent [objective] for the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 419.
"MR. SCHULTZ. Or we could say "Close attention will be paidto bank credit" or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests an alternative phrase without expressing any disagreement or opposition to the previous statement.


Passage number 420.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's see if we're in agreement.We'll try to work on some phrase, which probably has to be qualitativerather than quantitative for the six-month period, and get it inthere. And let's get some discussion in the earlier nondirective part[of the policy record] about the importance of bank credit, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a course of action and seeking agreement from the other person.


Passage number 421.
MR. AXILROD. You could easily look to a marked slowing overthe next two months from the recent [rate].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there may be a marked slowing in the rate over the next two months.


Passage number 422.
-47-3/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Maybe that's the way to put it in:"Taking account of the need for a slowing in the rate of growth ofbank credit over the next few months, consistent with the objectivefor the year."There are a couple of other items that we should be takingup, if I can find [my agenda]. We have the [proposal] regarding theauthorization for domestic open market operations. To the best of myknowledge there have been no questions raised about that. If we canget that approved, it would be helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement about taking account of the need for a slowing in the rate of growth of bank credit and discussing other agenda items.


Passage number 423.
MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. "So moved" indicates agreement or approval.


Passage number 424.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, that is approved. Thesame for the authorization for foreign currency operations. Noquestions have been raised.SPEAKER(.). So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Without objection, that is approved" indicates consensus and agreement among those present. The sentence "No questions have been raised" further reinforces the absence of contention. The phrase "So moved" at the end signifies that the matter is being officially agreed upon and closed.


Passage number 425.
MR. ALTMANN. There is a housekeeping amendment in oneparagraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that there is a housekeeping amendment in one paragraph. It does not describe any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 426.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is that, Mr. Altmann.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 427.
MR. ALTMANN. There is just one housekeeping amendment. Inline with the changes in organization that the Committee approved lastAugust, in effect changing the titles of the Managers, in paragraph 6of the foreign currency authorization where the word "Manager"appears, we would simply change it to "Manager for ForeignOperations."SPEAKER(.). So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply agrees and supports Mr. Altmann's suggested amendment.


Passage number 428.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Now we go to theauthority for lending securities. This is more substantive. We'vereviewed this at intervals, quite a few intervals. I take it theproposal is to continue it unchanged. If nobody has any problems withthat, I would hope we could approve that with equal expedition.SPEAKER(.). So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Everyone seems to be in agreement and there is no objection raised.


Passage number 429.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, that's approved. Thewarehousing of foreign currencies, I think, falls in the samecategory. If you want to have a discussion of that, I would propose avery short-term approval of [the current procedures] and consider itat a meeting when we have time to discuss it. But if it doesn't needany discussion, we'll approve it for another year.SPEAKER(.). So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests a short-term approval and the other speaker moves and seconds the proposal without objection.


Passage number 430.
-48-3/18/80 -49-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, it's approved foranother year. The only remaining item we have is the date of the nextmeeting, Tuesday, April 22.SPEAKER(.). So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the date of the next meeting is Tuesday, April 22, and moves for its approval.


