Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 18, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,D. C., on Tuesday, November 18, 1980, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Baughman, and Eastburn, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Corrigan, and Ford, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Minneapolis, and Atlanta,respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Altmann, SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretaryPetersen, General CounselOltman, Deputy General CounselMannion, Assistant General CounselAxilrod, EconomistHolmes, Adviser for Market OperationsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ettin, Henry,Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, System OpenMarket AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market Account11/18/80Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMessrs. Prell and Siegman, Associate Directors, Divisionsof Research and Statistics, and International Finance,respectively, Board of GovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Boardof GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Boykin, Doyle, and McIntosh, First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Chicago, and Boston,respectivelyMessrs. Boehne, Brandt, Danforth, Keran, Parthemos, andScheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Philadelphia, Atlanta, Minneapolis, San Francisco,Richmond, and Chicago, respectivelyMr. Kubarych and Mrs. Nichols, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of New York, and Chicago, respectivelyMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a list of the attendees at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Ozog, Manager, Securities Department, Federal ReserveBank of New York-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofNovember 18, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to act on the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 3.
MR. PARTEE. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Partee simply states "So moved," which indicates agreement or approval. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 4.
MR. SCHULTZ. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is being mentioned, but there is no further information or discussion that would indicate any type of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 5.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "without objection" indicates that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 6.
MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The excerpt states a statement made by Mr. Pardee without any evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 7.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Should we ratify the transactions before Iforget.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a question about ratifying transactions before forgetting them, and there is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 8.
MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Mr. Schultz. So moved." does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement acknowledging that Mr. Schultz has made a motion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 9.
MS. TEETERS. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "Second" implies that there is a continuation or response to a previous argument or statement.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they are ratified. Isthere any discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The sentence "Without objection they are ratified" indicates that there was no disagreement or contention. Additionally, the phrase "without objection" emphasizes the absence of discussion or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 11.
MR. WALLICH. Scott, you made a number of very interestingobservations. I just want to check on how to interpret them. One,you said we bought as many marks as we possibly could. Was therereally in some sense a restraint on how much we could do. Whycouldn't we have done more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is questioning Scott's statement about buying as many marks as possible and asking why they couldn't have done more. This indicates a disagreement or contention between the two.


Passage number 12.
MR. PARDEE. It's an interesting exercise in how we achieve acertain objective. In order to maximize our purchase of marks, wehave to have a rising dollar market. So each time the dollar wouldrise, we would be in the market either in New York or in Frankfurtthrough the Bundesbank. But we would do small amounts. And to theextent that we would be perceived as operating we would [then want to]be perceived as backing away. It's quite different from an operationin which we're trying to stop a movement in the rate. The idea was toallow the rate to continue to move and thereby we would continue toamass marks. Once the exchange market comes to a stable point, it'svery difficult to dig many marks out of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement explaining a strategy or approach to maximizing the purchase of marks and acquiring them in the exchange market.


Passage number 13.
MR. WALLICH. My second question: You said the dollar mighthave been driven to levels that would have been perceived asunsustainable without this intervention. Do you have any thoughts asto what these levels might have been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for the thoughts or opinions of the other person.


Passage number 14.
MR. PARDEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since no specific passage or context is provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 15.
 It's very possible that it could have gone over2 marks to the dollar, but with a much more volatile market, muchgreater pressure on our foreign central bank counterparts to dosomething in response to the decline in their currencies, and muchgreater pressure on the EMS snake relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "much greater pressure on our foreign central bank counterparts to do something in response to the decline in their currencies" suggests that there may be disagreement or conflict between different central banks regarding how to respond to the decline in their currencies.


Passage number 16.
MR. WALLICH. I also noted that you said we helped othercountries hold their interest rates down. I believe that is right andI believe intervention can have that function. And it's an importanteffect. I just want to argue that one can't trade off interventionfor interest rates very far, though there is some such effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that intervention can help hold interest rates down in other countries, but also argues that there is a limit to how much intervention can impact interest rates.


Passage number 17.
11/18/80MR. PARDEE. I tried to phase it artfully. I don't see thatnecessarily as an objective of policy. No one has told me that it'san objective of policy. I'd say it's more a result of the policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply discussing their views and experiences without contradicting or arguing with anyone else.


Passage number 18.
MR. WALLICH. And finally, were you satisfied with the amountof foreign support you got and their maintenance of orderly marketsonce the dollar dropped sharply and then recovered sharply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. The speaker is asking a question about the satisfaction with foreign support and market maintenance.


Passage number 19.
MR. PARDEE. Well, the only instance of foreign support wasfrom the Bundesbank on that Tuesday morning. Since we are operatingthrough them to buy marks, there is the possibility that we wouldcomplete the circle and ask them also to sell marks for us. The riskis that once we start intervening through the Bundesbank really insupport of the dollar, then we will take over all of the operations onboth sides of the Atlantic, which could be very expensive. So on thatmorning, I talked to my friend from the Bundesbank who said he had noparticular interest in buying dollars that morning, but he did noticesome conditions that he considered to be disorderly--that iswidespread, sharply moving rates--in the market. So he did step inand buy dollars even though as far as his broader interests wereconcerned there was no need to step in at that time. But we did havegood cooperation. I hope our operations now are buying a good bit ofcooperation for the next sequence of difficulties for the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Pardee is discussing a conversation he had with his friend from the Bundesbank and expressing his hopes for future cooperation.


Passage number 20.
MS. TEETERS. What do you mean by that. Do you think thedollar is going to drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a question requesting clarification and an additional question inquiring about the speaker's opinion.


Passage number 21.
MR. PARDEE. Exchange markets are very volatile. We haveperiods in which the dollar rises and we have periods in which itdrops. And as I indicated, to the extent that interest rates leveloff or drop back, we may have a decline in the dollar. And to theextent that the markets tend to overreact then, I am sure we will beback in the market on the other side. This has been the way of lifesince 1973.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 22.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: To determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage, there needs to be more context provided. As the passage only states "Mr. Black," without any additional information, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement. Therefore, the answer is no.


Passage number 23.
MR. BLACK. Scott, would you say that our trading partnersare estimating our current account improvement at close to the samemagnitude as the staff estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 24.
MR. PARDEE. You might know more about that than I do, [Ted].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Pardee's statement suggests that Ted might have more knowledge about a certain topic, but it does not imply any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 25.
MR. TRUMAN. I am not sure about our trading partners per se.The market in general tends to have a somewhat smaller [estimate ofour] current account surplus in 1981 than we do. The OECD has aforecast for our current account surplus for 1981 in the $12 billionrange as compared with the staff's $18 billion. Now, I would considerthose in the same ball park, but we tend to be a little higher thanthe consensus that I am aware of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents differing estimates of the current account surplus, with Mr. Truman acknowledging that the market and the OECD have slightly lower estimates compared to his own.


Passage number 26.
MR. BLACK. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement of thanks from Mr. Black, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 27.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "Governor Partee" without providing any further context or information, so it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 28.
MR. PARTEE. I guess I don't understand the operating rulesthat we use for intervention any more, Scott. I thought we intervenedonly in disorderly markets. We have had a market that has been moving11/18/80up; it was not particularly disorderly. You said we bought as manymarks as we possibly could. I didn't understand that to be whatpeople did when they intervened. And my impression is that we boughtfar more marks than the Germans did. That is, we are doing thesupporting of the mark, not the Germans. And you gave as a reason forit that it helps hold down interest rates abroad, which I think is avery strange reason indeed because it seems to me that if we want tohold down interest rates, we ought to hold them down here not abroad.So I just don't understand what is happening. You also said that wewere doing this to match the Treasury's [foreign currency] debt. Butwe have matched the Treasury's debt. We have gone $100 million overthe Treasury's debt and you were still buying like mad early thisweek. So I think it's time for a discussion of the terms on which weintervene and what our strategy is other than that we just buy as manymarks as we can every time the dollar goes up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee expresses confusion about the operating rules for intervention and questions the actions taken by Scott and the reasons behind them. He presents his understanding that intervention should only occur in disorderly markets and raises concerns about the quantity of marks being bought and the impact on interest rates abroad. He also points out that the intervention has already exceeded the Treasury's debt and calls for a discussion on intervention terms and strategy.


Passage number 29.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how prolonged a discussion wecan have, but I would state it somewhat differently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement about the length of a potential discussion and a suggestion to express something in an alternative way.


Passage number 30.
MR. PARDEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 31.
 I am open to discussion, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about buying all that we can.That's a matter of interpretation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses openness to discussion and acknowledges that the viewpoint about buying all that we can is subjective, as it depends on interpretation. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this statement.


Passage number 32.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we bought $250 million [worth of marks] orsomething like that on Monday. How much did the Germans do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not showing contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about a purchase made.


Passage number 33.
MR. PARDEE. The Germans have had ahave taken up a great deal of their time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about the Germans and their impact on someone's time.


Passage number 34.
 So what we've had interms of economizing time, is that the Bundesbank officials--MR. PARTEE. If we do the buying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 35.
MR. PARDEE. They've been worrying about the mark/Frenchfranc relationship and we have been worrying the mark/dollarrelationship. We have been providing them with orders, which would beroughly the type of operations they would have in line with ourobjectives and in line with the kinds of operations they haveconducted in the past as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there has been a focus on two different currency relationships and that one party has been providing orders to the other in line with their objectives.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the Germans have a mixed mindabout this whole thing. They don't like the mark depreciating, butthey at least have an argument as to whether intervention is effectiveas a means of preventing it from appreciating. There's one school ofthought that says: Let it go up so it will go down further and themarket will learn a lesson. And I think that school of thought hasbeen prevalent. But we have been in a position of rather eagerlybuying in large part because the Treasury was extremely anxious tocover its losses. They are also anxious--I think it's a reasonablepoint and this is a combined operation--to have some surplus over thecoverage of their [foreign currency denominated] bonds in case thedollar goes in the other direction. They want a cushion so we willhave some margin of protection without making them short. And Isuppose from our standpoint, a cushion seems reasonable too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It discusses different viewpoints and goals of the Germans and the Treasury, but there is no clear conflict or argument between them.


Passage number 37.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know why that is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing uncertainty or confusion about the situation at hand.


Passage number 38.
11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a small cushion now; we haven'tdebated precisely how big the cushion might be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the cushion is small and that they have not discussed its exact size.


Passage number 39.
MS. TEETERS. But isn't that really the question. What arewe going to do now. We've covered the Treasury's debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply consists of a speaker posing a question and expressing uncertainty about what to do next. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 40.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's only part of the story. The otherpart is that, with the dollar rising against the mark, a normalleaning against the wind does relieve pressures on both us and theEuropeans to do something different in domestic policy than we reallywant to do. So the two things have to some degree coincided, to theextent the latter is important. I wouldn't put a lot of weight onthat in terms of affecting interest rate policy. But to the extent itaffects that, it goes in [the right] direction. So both of thosereasons coincide in suggesting that when the mark is weakeningappreciably some intervention seems desirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing two factors that coincide and suggest intervention is desirable when the mark is weakening appreciably.


Passage number 41.
MR. PARTEE. As I look at the experience of other countriesover the last couple of years, Paul, I observe that the countries withthe smallest inflation rate have been the ones with a rising currency.There's some circularity in that, of course, but it is certainly true,other things equal, that a rising currency reduces the observedinflation rate for a country. We have as a major objective of policyreducing inflation. I should think, therefore, that we would like tohave a rising currency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of observation and a personal opinion regarding the relationship between a rising currency and reduced inflation rate.


Passage number 42.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mind having a rising currency tosome extent, and it has been rising. I think it's clear from whatScott said that we have not been intervening in a way to prevent anyrise in the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 43.
MR. PARDEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the specific passage.


Passage number 44.
 In fact, to the extent that we backed away--MR. PARTEE. When we buy $250 million in a day, we certainlyhave prevented some rise in the dollar that day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the impact of their actions on the value of the dollar.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 45.
MR. PARDEE. To the extent that you back away, you leave animpression in the market that you're not holding the rate or, in fact,that your operations are not effective in holding the rate where itis. So you are helping the rate to move along that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows contention or disagreement. Mr. Pardee suggests that if someone backs away, it leaves an impression in the market that they are not effectively holding the rate. This implies a disagreement or difference in opinion about the effectiveness of certain actions in influencing the rate.


Passage number 46.
MR. WALLICH. Well, with respect to the dollar, I think wehave to aim at a happy mean. We want a strong dollar because it helpson inflation. We don't want it to get so strong that we're notcompetitive. We've had considerable appreciation in real terms. Andas far as the accumulation of reserves is concerned, in the long run Ithink we have to become like other countries and rely on ownedreserves, not on the swaps that others can deny us the use of. And weought to be building up some reserves gradually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting a balanced perspective on the dollar, expressing the need for a strong dollar to control inflation while also acknowledging the potential negative impacts of a too-strong dollar on competitiveness. The statement about the accumulation of reserves is suggesting a long-term approach of relying on owned reserves rather than temporary swaps. The idea of gradually building up reserves is also not a point of contention.


Passage number 47.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I second that very strongly. Chuck,it's a different kind of world in the last few years and will beincreasingly so. First of all, I would hope that we are not going tobe living permanently in a world where our interest rates are soridiculously high compared to those of other industrialized countries.I hope we will find ourselves in an improved domestic economicsituation. Under those circumstances, once that artificial stimulus[in interest rate differentials] is removed--to have a spread of 911/18/80percentage points between Eurodollar and Euro deutschmark rates isincredible--the dollar is going to go down very, very sharply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing strong agreement and hope for improvement in the economic situation. They mention the high interest rates and the potential decline in the value of the dollar as evidence supporting their viewpoint, but there is no direct disagreement with any opposing perspective.


Passage number 48.
MR. PARTEE. The dollar will go down because inflationsubsides. Is that what you are saying. After all, inflation is thereason that interest rates are high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply summarizing the argument that the dollar will go down because inflation is subsiding, which is the reason for high interest rates.


Passage number 49.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but what I am assuming is thatthere will be some moderation, but only partial, of inflation. Therewill be a much larger drop in interest rates at periods of timebecause of the way we've seen history [work] on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges their assumption about some moderation of inflation and a larger drop in interest rates based on historical patterns.


Passage number 50.
MR. MORRIS. Perhaps in the next quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Morris is making a suggestion or perhaps stating a possibility for the next quarter.


Passage number 51.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe next quarter. Nobody can besure of these things, but I suspect we will see disproportionatelylarge reverse movements in the dollar. I think we have to have a verysubstantial volume of our own foreign exchange resources to cope withsuch a situation. If we are always drawing on swap lines every timewe have to move in, the other countries can call the tune on us muchmore easily. Having our own resources will make us a little moremasters of our own policy. I am not sure I see why you are concernedabout this. I would not place the emphasis on intervention being agood thing because of the interest rate policy moves one can thereforeavoid to some degree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and suspicions about the future movements of the dollar and the need for a substantial volume of foreign exchange resources. They also mention the advantage of having their own resources rather than relying on swap lines. The speaker acknowledges that they may not fully understand the concern of the other person but states their belief that intervention may not necessarily be a good thing. There is no conflicting or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 52.
 Your concern relates to intervention toaccumulate foreign exchange resources more than--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure what the facts are on this,Scott, but my impression is that at times in the past the U.S.government has had substantially more net foreign exchange resourceswhen the dollar has been strong. I don't mean huge, but our net[holdings] are only at about $200 million plus now, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification about the facts regarding the U.S. government's net foreign exchange resources in the past.


Passage number 53.
MR. PARDEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is no. The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any further information or context to suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 55.
 They have been substantially higher thanthat in the past at times of--MR. PARDEE. Well, before the Carter notes on a couple ofoccasions we held $300 or $400 million worth of marks. It was in thatrange, but not substantially more.SPEAKER(.). We hold quite a lot of yen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers are providing information and there are no conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 56.
MR. TRUMAN. We have yen and Swiss francs, too, at themoment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about the different currencies they have. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 57.
MR. PARDEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The word "yes" is used to acknowledge the presence of contention or disagreement. However, since the passage does not provide any context or statement that indicates contention or disagreement, the answer is no.


Passage number 58.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, may I raise a technical question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 59.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without knowing the specific passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement. However, if there is contention or disagreement present in the passage, the answer would be "Yes."


Passage number 60.
MR. RICE. Do we have to sell securities in order to financeour purchases of foreign currencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It simply states a question being asked by Mr. Rice.


Passage number 61.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 62.
11/18/80MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any information or context to indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states "11/18/80 MR. RICE," which appears to be a date and a name.


Passage number 63.
 Have we tied specific sales of securities to aspecific volume of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In effect, it is washed out as anotheroperating factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement present in the passage. It simply presents a statement or observation without any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 64.
 You can't identify a sale of a security for aforeign--MR. RICE. How do we know we need funds for financing ourforeign exchange purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It is a question followed by a statement seeking clarification.


Passage number 65.
MR. PARTEE. It is a factor affecting the reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that "It is a factor affecting the reserves." There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 66.
MR. RICE. Our foreign currency purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Rice without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 67.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just goes into all the other factorsdraining or providing reserves. So there is somewhat of a one-to-onerelationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating that there is a one-to-one relationship between certain factors and the depletion or provision of reserves. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 68.
MR. RICE. So when we sell securities, we raise interestrates in the United States, do we not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no apparent contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question and does not present any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 69.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that was one comment that I was going torespond to. One thing I disagree with on our policy here is that weare not buying government securities. Instead, we are buying Germanmarks, and that does have a market impact in the United States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses a disagreement with the policy of not buying government securities and instead buying German marks, without any indication of a conflicting opinion or argument.


Passage number 70.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Chairman Volcker" without providing any additional information or context to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 71.
 Well,--MR. PARTEE. Secondly, we are taking an exchange risk that Idon't think is warranted for the central bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 72.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait a minute. We are not buying Treasurysecurities; instead we buy marks in the very short run. But you haveto ask what those people would do who want to get into dollarsotherwise, and presumably those people are getting into dollars andbuying some securities. They may not be Treasury securities, but inthe larger scheme of things it is a wash in our domestic market. Weare getting a capital inflow which we would not otherwise get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that instead of buying Treasury securities, they are buying marks in the short run. They acknowledge that others may still be buying securities, but overall there is a capital inflow into the domestic market.


Passage number 73.
MR. PARTEE. They are going to do that anyhow, aren't theythough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "They are going to do that anyhow, aren't they" is a question seeking confirmation or agreement.


Passage number 74.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, because otherwise the exchange ratewould go up and presumably we would get an equilibrium in the marketand they would not buy the securities. Sure, the analysis is that inthe immediate sense we are just selling Treasury securities; butsomebody is on the other side of that [transaction], buying somethingcoming into dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting an explanation or analysis rather than expressing a conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 75.
MR. RICE. Are you saying that the net effect on interestrates in the United States is neutral.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement stated. The statement made by Mr. Rice is a question seeking clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 76.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The net is probably zero in that sense,yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "The net is probably zero in that sense" implies that there is likely no disagreement or conflict regarding the topic being discussed.


Passage number 77.
MR. PARTEE. But it is downward on the markets[unintelligible] interest rate. Wouldn't the same thing apply in thecase of marks. [More holders will] be able to sell out of marks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 78.
11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am discussing now a mechanicalrelationship. How it affects policy, whether the Bundesbank wants toraise their interest rates or lower their interest rates because of[movement] in the exchange rates is a different matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a discussion about a mechanical relationship and acknowledges that the policy decision about raising or lowering interest rates due to exchange rate movements is a separate issue.


Passage number 79.
MR. TRUMAN. We wouldn't get the capital inflow without theintervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 80.
 I agree with your point, but the capital inflow isfacilitated by--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we wouldn't have the capital inflow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker starts by agreeing with a point made by someone else, but then introduces a contradictory statement by saying "but the capital inflow is facilitated by". This suggests that there is a disagreement or differing perspective on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 81.
MR. TRUMAN. That's because the official intervention is theoutflow counterpart to the private inflow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of fact explaining the relationship between official intervention and private inflow.


Passage number 82.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is precisely my point. You don't getthe capital inflow without the intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement emphasizing a specific point.


Passage number 83.
MR. ROOS. To further confuse the issue, look on page 10 ofthe Bluebook. I was always under the impression that strong interestrates domestically tend to attract foreign money into our economy andbolster the value of the dollar. But on the bottom of page 10 it says"Continued intervention by the United States to slow the appreciationof the foreign exchange value of the dollar could generate additionalpressure in Treasury yields, as the Fed offers securities to themarket to finance foreign currency purchases." It looks as though, ifI understand this, we are totally chasing our tail because we areselling [Treasury securities] in order to seek [less] appreciation inthe value of the dollar in foreign exchange markets, and in theprocess we are doing something that could generate additional downwardpressure on Treasury yields. I thought that upward pressure onTreasury yields is what bolsters the value of the dollar. Or do Ihave it totally backwards.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification on the relationship between strong interest rates, foreign money, the value of the dollar, and Treasury yields.


Passage number 84.
MR. SCHULTZ. That is what it does; it pushes it up not down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 85.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 86.
 This gets into rather--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "This gets into rather" does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments, but rather suggests a segue or transition to a new topic.


Passage number 87.
 Except, Paul, they wouldn't have any--MR. ROOS. Except for what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that someone named Paul would not have something unspecified.


Passage number 88.
 It certainly doesn't do--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the immediate sense, it requires moreselling of Treasury securities. There is no question. That isbecause Treasury securities is all we operate in. The other side ofthe transaction is not identifiable and it may well not [involve]Treasury securities. Now, if that makes a difference to you, it canbe of some significance. But in terms of the general supply anddemand in the money market as a whole, it is probably a wash. But ina very direct sense we sell Treasury securities to the extent we buymarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a process and stating their perspective on it.


Passage number 89.
MS. TEETERS. But isn't the real question before us: Whatare we going to do from here on out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. TEETERS is posing a question for consideration, but there are no conflicting viewpoints present.


Passage number 90.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if you want to have aprolonged discussion today; we can do it next time, if desirable. Thegeneral issue, as I understand it, is concern about how much [weshould accumulate]. What should be the guidelines and all the rest11/18/80and what should be our net positive position in foreign currencies.There are really two questions. There is that question plus underwhat conditions does it make sense to intervene. Now, we have justbeen basically leaning against the wind for a variety of reasons thathave been mentioned. We now have--looking at the government as awhole, and I think it is relevant in this particular case because theTreasury has been looking at our balances as a hedge against theCarter bonds at the moment--a $200 million positive position. Ifthere's real concern about that positive position and about thatgetting to the considerably bigger magnitudes that we are talkingabout and if interest rates stay high, then we have an immediateproblem. I frankly do not feel that concern. I think it would be areasonable precaution to hold amounts within the ranges we are nowtalking anyway--by which I mean in the hundreds of millions area. Ihave no real problem with that; I not only have no real problem, Ithink it is desirable for the reasons that have been suggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker does not express disagreement or contention in this passage. They are discussing their understanding of the issue and expressing their own opinion.


Passage number 91.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. May I comment on Chuck's secondpoint, the exchange risks. Of course, we have the same exchange riskswhen we borrow on the swap lines to support the dollar. I wouldargue, Chuck, based on my experiences at Treasury, that the exchangerisk is much smaller if we have substantial resources of our own. Weare almost sure to make money on our present operations. We arebuying the mark at a time that it is weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and sharing their experiences regarding exchange risks.


Passage number 92.
MR. PARTEE. Well, you think it is weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply expresses the opinion that something is weak.


Passage number 93.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I know it is weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states their opinion about something being weak, without any form of opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 94.
MR. PARTEE. You cannot foresee the future, Tony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is stating a fact that Tony cannot foresee the future.


Passage number 95.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, one can't see it completely.There could be a Middle Eastern war, which would upset the situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a possibility or speculation about a potential future event, without expressing any conflicting views.


Passage number 96.
But if--MR. PARTEE. That is a very reasonable possibility, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It merely presents a statement followed by a question that acknowledges the possibility of a reasonable scenario.


Passage number 97.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. But if you extract frommilitary [conflict and other] extreme assumptions, in economic termswith inflation in Germany now running 3-1/2 to 4 percent and with themiserable [inflation] record we have, when our interest rates comedown--which they will to some degree though I am not saying they willcome down a helluva lot--we are going to see some major reverse flows.I think you will find that we are in a better position to minimize ourexchange risk and maximize our gains if we have a stock of resourcesthan if we are forced to start borrowing. It's just a longer-run planbasically. And it is a more comfortable situation for the people whoare actually managing this. There is no mathematical proof of this,but I feel that most people in the Treasury and in the foreignexchange area in New York would agree with me that this is the way tooperate in practice. We have not done badly at all in the last fewmonths on this whole question of exchange risks and profits and loss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a plan, but there is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 98.
And one can be a better manager when one has--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that having a certain quality (in this case, being a better manager) is possible when a certain condition is met.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 99.
 Well, certainly, if one assumes that 180 is theright rate for the mark, we ought to buy all we can at more than 180because when--11/18/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think 193 is not sustainable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Well, I think 193 is not sustainable" indicates that the speaker does not believe that the rate of 193 is sustainable. This suggests a disagreement or differing opinion from the assumed rate of 180 mentioned earlier in the passage.


Passage number 100.
MR. PARTEE. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that MR. PARTEE does not know something.


Passage number 101.
MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Chairman, could we get a staff analysis ofour own reserves and those of other countries and some analysis ofthis particular question. Then maybe we could discuss it at the nextmeeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is requesting a staff analysis and proposing a discussion on the topic at the next meeting.


Passage number 102.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that is probably what we ought to do.But I would point out, just in terms of this general problem, that wehave an example currently of a country that is taking the extremeopposite view, which is the United Kingdom, and even they haveaccumulated some reserves. They have had a very high inflation rate,high interest rates, and a prolonged and very sizable appreciation ofsterling. Whether that is good or bad is the question. But that isan example of a country that is taking a different view. They havenot taken it so extremely that they haven't acquired any foreigncurrencies; they have. But they haven't acquired very many.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply pointing out a different approach taken by the United Kingdom in regards to foreign currency reserves.


Passage number 103.
MR. WALLICH. That is for monetary policy reasons not becausethey made decisions about reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact regarding the reasons behind a decision.


Passage number 104.
 I think we ought to bear in mindfirst Tony's point that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it has anything to do withtheir fears about gains or losses on foreign exchange transactions.Whether it's for, as you say, monetary policy reasons or economicpolicy reasons, they are willing to take a strongly appreciated poundto put pressure on their inflation rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is presenting the speaker's opinion and there is no mention of any disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 105.
MR. WALLICH. I think gains and losses in the exchange markethave to be evaluated including the interest that one earns. On oneside if we have D-marks, as Tony says, the chances are that in thelong run the D-mark will be stronger than the dollar, but we will havelower interest earnings on that. On the other hand, if we oweD-marks, having drawn on the swap, say, that is an adverse positionbecause the D-mark may appreciate. If we pay interest in D-markterms, we would be benefitting from that. So the interest to someextent counteracts the risk factor insofar as the risk factor is basedon purchasing power parity considerations, which will not work outexactly in the long run. Also, I would like to remind you that othercountries have enormous reserves. The Germans still have, I think,$40 billion; they had $50 billion plus. The Japanese have $20billion. They all take a great risk because these reserves are mostlyin dollars, which from their perspective have depreciated, giving themlosses. We have a very large gold stock. Every time the gold pricemoves, we are becoming richer or poorer. We [never] pay any attentionto that, and rightly so. But let us not say that we are withoutexchange risks from the movement [in the value] of our financialassets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is discussing the potential gains and losses in the exchange market, specifically regarding the D-mark and the dollar. They mention the different factors that need to be considered, such as interest earnings, appreciation of the D-mark, and risk factors based on purchasing power parity considerations. The speaker also brings up the differing reserves and gold stocks of other countries. The various points and considerations mentioned indicate that there is contention and disagreement on how to evaluate and understand the exchange risks.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 106.
MS. TEETERS. But I am afraid we are making policy bydefault. By not giving any guidance at this point, we are saying tothe international Desk in New York to go ahead and do what it has donefor the past month. That could lead us not to $$100 million but toanother $2 billion in marks. And that seems to me a rather majordecision. Do we want the Desk as the mark rises to buy marks as11/18/80rapidly as they can and to accumulate a war chest. Is that what weare telling them to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage because MS. TEETERS expresses concern about the lack of guidance and the potential consequences of continuing with the current policy. She questions whether the decision to accumulate a war chest is the desired outcome.


Passage number 107.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is a bit of an exaggeration tosay they bought as many as they could, but that is a market judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not imply any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about a market judgment.


Passage number 108.
MR. PARDEE. This is what I am telling the Treasury anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Pardee, is simply stating what he plans to communicate to the Treasury.


Passage number 109.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Institutionally we have to face the factthat the Treasury is extremely eager to acquire marks and build up anest egg. They will build it up if we don't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the Treasury is eager to acquire marks and build up an nest egg, and will do so if others do not.


Passage number 110.
 It is very awkward forthem to--MS. TEETERS. They've done it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating that it is awkward for "them" to do something.


Passage number 111.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but they're still short [oftheir objective] by about a billion dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that the subject is still short of their objective by about a billion dollars.


Passage number 112.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is in fact very awkward for them tohold [marks]. I don't have any disagreement with the Treasury policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker states that holding marks is awkward for them but also mentions they have no disagreement with the Treasury policy.


Passage number 113.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think Governor Partee's and Governor Teeter'spoint is well taken. What Governor Partee is really asking is: Whatunderlies our intervention policy. What are our objectives. Shouldwe be using intervention policy to impede progress on the inflationfront by [not] letting the dollar appreciate. What are we doing. So,I think some more analysis of the broader context would be helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges that Governor Partee and Governor Teeter have made valid points and suggests that further analysis of the broader context would be beneficial.


Passage number 114.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I accept the notion that people think thatis true. And I have no reluctance to do it. I do not myself feel theleast bit confused about what we are doing, which apparently we havenot articulated correctly. We are leaning somewhat against theappreciation of the mark and we are willing to accumulate somebalances for all the precautionary reasons that have been suggested.That's apart from mostly in the past being in the position of justgetting back into balance as the United States and that phase at themoment is over. It changed very rapidly a week ago when we suddenlygot into a minus position after being in a positive position for a fewdays. But having reached that arithmetic point, I had presumed thatwe were willing to acquire some additional foreign currenciesconsistent with our general philosophy of being willing to leanagainst the wind, anyway. Now, if that is wrong, we ought to changeit; but I don't think it is wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their acceptance and willingness to adhere to a certain viewpoint or course of action.


Passage number 115.
MR. PARTEE. To avoid disorderly conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states the intention of Mr. Partee to avoid disorderly conditions.


Passage number 116.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" is simply stating the title of a person, it does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 117.
 Well,--MR. PARTEE. I believe those are the terms of the directiveof the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage is a dialogue, and it is possible for there to be contention or disagreement between Mr. Partee and whoever he is speaking to. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine the nature or extent of the disagreement.


Passage number 118.
MR. GUFFEY. The Committee does have rules with respect towhat the Desk can hold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the Committee has rules regarding what the Desk can hold, without presenting any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right. The [informal limit] nowis $1-1/2 billion. [Secretary's note: The $1-1/2 billion informallimit is for all foreign currencies excluding yen. There is aseparate limit of $1 billion for holdings of yen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

In the passage, there is a discrepancy between the initial statement of an informal limit of $1-1/2 billion and the secretary's note that there is a separate limit of $1 billion for holdings of yen. This suggests a disagreement or conflicting information regarding the limits for foreign currencies and yen.


Passage number 120.
]-10-11/18/80MS. TEETERS. And we can change it by notation vote betweenmeetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 121.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, there is an intermeeting limit as well asa maximum we can hold in any one currency. Aren't we getting at ornear that limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. MR. GUFFEY is simply stating a fact and seeking confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 122.
 If it is not changed--MR. PARDEE. We might be. As I said, in marks we now have$1.1 billion against [an informal limit of] $1.5 billion. The maximumfor the total open position was left at $8 billion from an earliersiege; that we have not changed.SPEAKER(.). In all currencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statements made by Mr. Pardee and the speaker are providing information and discussing the current situation without any indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 123.
MR. PARDEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No


Passage number 124.
MR. GUFFEY. So in the period ahead, we are talking aboutaccumulating a maximum of $400 million in marks unless we have anotation vote to change the limit during the intermeeting interval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply outlines a plan to accumulate a maximum of $400 million in marks unless there is a vote to change the limit.


Passage number 125.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As things now stand, that is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the current situation is correct without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 126.
MR. GUFFEY. That seems reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. The statement "That seems reasonable" indicates agreement with the previous statement or idea.


Passage number 127.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context to suggest there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 128.
 Well, we can schedule a longer discussionof this--MR. PARDEE. Technically under the directive we have tworeasons for intervening. One is to counter disorderly conditions.The other is to change balances in light of future needs. There is avery weak need [currently] for piling up lots of marks, but in lightof future needs it's something we clearly have in mind. Also [thedirective requires that] we have close and continuous consultationwith the Treasury. And right now the Treasury is in a mood to have usbuy as many marks as we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the two reasons for intervening and mentioning the requirement of close consultation with the Treasury. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 129.
MR. PARTEE. Of course, this is run by a steering committeeof the FOMC, [the Foreign Currency Subcommittee]. But thatsubcommittee has to observe the rules that the Committee has laiddown. I just think the subcommittee ought to read those rules anddecide whether it is authorizing transactions in keeping with them ornot. And I would like to have a review of the subject.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and suggesting a review of the subject.


Passage number 130.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can review the subject. We will reviewthe subject.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both sentences express the same idea without any conflicting information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 131.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could ask Scott aquestion. I would be interested, Scott, in your views on thedivergent trend between the spot and the forward rates last month.The dollar rose by an average of 1.1 percent against six majorcountries on a trade-weighted basis. But the forward rate for oneyear went down by about .3 percent. And the longer-term forward ratewent down about 1 percent. What do you make of that divergent trend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles simply asks Scott for his views on a divergent trend.


Passage number 132.
MR. PARDEE. Well, we've had substantial movements ininterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention between parties. It simply states that there have been significant changes in interest rates.


Passage number 133.
-11-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless the market is in disequilibrium, itis an interest rate arbitrage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a statement of fact without presenting any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 134.
MR. PARDEE. There are wider and wider differences betweendollar rates and foreign rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Pardee, is mentioning that there are wider differences between dollar rates and foreign rates. This suggests a disagreement or conflict between the two rates, indicating contention.


Passage number 135.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The market is in equilibrium isn't it.The forward differential changes every time interest ratedifferentials change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states two facts: that the market is in equilibrium and that the forward differential changes when interest rate differentials change.


Passage number 136.
MR. PARDEE. I don't know of anything other than [that].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Pardee expressing his lack of knowledge about something.


Passage number 137.
MR. TRUMAN. If you believe--and some people do and somepeople don't--that the forward interest rate is the expected futurespot rate and has something to do with purchasing power parity, asGovernor Wallich mentioned, and things like the longer-term outlookfor a country's current account and so forth, then the fact that theforward rate has moved over this period could be interpreted assuggesting that expectations of inflation in the United States[relative to abroad] have moved up over this period. That would beone story. I am not sure, personally, whether one would want to put alot of weight on that particular story. But that is a possible andplausible interpretation of why there was an increase in thedivergence between the spot and [forward rates].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting alternative viewpoints and acknowledging that they are not sure which interpretation is correct.


Passage number 138.
MR. WALLICH. I would like to add to what Scott said aboutthe purposes of intervention. There are those two reasons hementioned. One is countering disorder, not maintaining order; wesometimes say it is countering disorder. Disorder this time seems tobe mostly on the way up whereas in the past it usually was encounteredon the way down. There is also accumulating for future needs. And Iwould say that forming a reserve is provided for in that. But themain qualification is that it has to conform with article IV,paragraph something, of the IMF articles of agreement. And that givesa fairly wide degree of latitude for intervention in conditions offloating [exchange rates]. It specifies mostly what one is notprepared to do, such as driving the exchange rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply adding to what another person said and providing additional information about the purposes of intervention.


Passage number 139.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement. The passage only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 140.
 It speaks of erratic--MR. WALLICH. Erratic fluctuations, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "erratic" suggests that there are fluctuations that are inconsistent or unpredictable, which can lead to disagreement or contention. The response of "Erratic fluctuations, yes" confirms this by acknowledging the presence of such fluctuations.


Passage number 141.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will have a more orderly reviewof this at the next meeting. Do you have a recommendation withrespect to operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 142.
MR. PARDEE. Yes, the swap lines are cleared. But betweennow and the end of the year all of our swap lines with 14 foreigncentral banks and the BIS come up for renewal for a further 12 months.As in the past, I am recommending that the Committee approve therenewals at this meeting, so there will be ample time for the formalexchange of cables with our partner central banks who must also gothrough their formal approval processes. This year the negotiationsare somewhat more complicated in view of the Committee's decision toeliminate the risk-sharing provisions on our drawings and to switch toour paying of interest rates based on what one would pay on thecurrencies we borrow rather than on the U.S. Treasury bill rate. Wehave had no problem with substance with the other central banks which-12-11/18/80are most affected by this decision. They agree that this is a logicalapproach. Indeed, I found out that the Bundesbank had been ratherquiet about pushing the issue because they made some furthercalculations and found that it might be to their advantage to keepthings the way they were, given the interest differentials. But theyhaven't complained that we are moving this way. For most we arewaiting for each of the central banks to indicate which specificinstrument in their market, a Treasury bill or whatever, correspondsmost closely to our Treasury bill. In most cases there should belittle difficulty. But in two important instances, with theBundesbank and with the Bank of Japan, the corresponding instrumentsto our Treasury bill are not obvious. We must be careful not to linkour swap drawings to a higher cost instrument than a Treasury billmight be. For swap arrangements on which we are not likely to draw, Isee no need to negotiate a specific instrument on their side.Nevertheless, we could come down to the wire on some of thesenegotiations, so I would like to recommend that the Committee approvethe renewal of swap arrangements now subject to a final review anddetermination by the FOMC subcommittee when these negotiations havebeen completed that the terms and conditions are acceptable. So itinvolves agreeing generally now that we can proceed with thenegotiations and then a review by the subcommittee that the terms onthe elimination of the sharing of risk and on the particularinstruments that we will be using are acceptable to the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting information about the renewal of swap lines and discussing the negotiations involved, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 143.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My recollection is that the Committeehasn't formally approved these [agreements at this stage] but that youare authorized to proceed and undertake these negotiations. We willhave to approve them formally at some stage. There has been somelimited consultation with the Congress by the Treasury. So far asthey are concerned, it is okay, but I am not absolutely clear in mymind that there will be no objections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that the Committee has not formally approved the agreements yet and there may be objections in the future. This suggests a disagreement within the Committee or potentially with the Congress.


Passage number 144.
MR. TRUMAN. There hasn't been any objection on the Houseside to date. There was just one question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that there has been no objection on the Houseside and only one question.


Passage number 145.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had a consultation on the House side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 146.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes. The Treasury staff talked to people on theHouse side and they have not stirred up any objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 147.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks as if it's proceeding on course,subject to these technical [details].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that something is proceeding on course, but there are some technical details that need to be taken into consideration.


Passage number 148.
MR. PARDEE. But they are important elements of thenegotiation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any elements of contention or disagreement. It simply states that these elements are important in negotiations.


Passage number 149.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "I understand" is a statement of personal understanding or comprehension, and does not involve any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 150.
MR. PARDEE. We want to know what interest rate we are goingto be paying on the marks we borrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker simply wants to know the interest rate they will be paying on borrowed marks. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 151.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand. You don't need any specificaction now today, do you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and confirmation of whether or not the listener needs any specific action at the current moment.


Passage number 152.
MR. PARDEE. Well, approval of the renewal of the [swaps].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 153.
-13-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are they going to be done before the nextmeeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply asks about whether something will be completed before the next meeting.


Passage number 154.
MR. PARDEE. Yes, December 4th is the first maturity for anumber of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact that December 4th is the first maturity date for a number of them.


Passage number 155.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Do we have a motion on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 156.
MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement "So moved" indicates agreement or support for a previous statement or proposal. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 157.
MR. BLACK. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only includes the statement "MR. BLACK. Second," without any additional context or conflicting views.


Passage number 158.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any objections. That is approved. Now,there is this one question of the Swedish swap, I take it, as to howbig that will be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply asking if there are any objections and then acknowledging approval. The mention of the "one question of the Swedish swap" does not indicate disagreement, but rather a topic that needs clarification or further discussion.


Passage number 159.
MR. PARDEE. Right. They haven't said anything, so we havelet sleeping dogs lie. We have a sentence in the cable that will goout indicating that we are reconfirming the increase to $500 millionthrough May, which is the date set [for the expiration of thetemporary increase]. We will make reference to the agreement of lastMay in this cable. They might come back to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is the case where we temporarilyincreased the line through next May, and you are suggesting that therenewal would be consistent with maintaining the increase but onlyuntil next May.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that the renewal would maintain the increase only until next May, while someone else is suggesting a different course of action.


Passage number 161.
MR. PARDEE. Right. I assume that at some point they willcome back to us and ask us to make the increase permanent. But sincethey haven't made it an issue, as I say, I have let sleeping dogs lie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a potential future event but states that they have not encountered any issues or opposition regarding it, so they have chosen to not address the issue further.


Passage number 162.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So that doesn't require any action then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that no action is required.


Passage number 163.
MR. PARDEE. No separate action for today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "No separate action for today" is a straightforward statement without any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 164.
MS. TEETERS. Why did they want an increase in the swap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The text does not provide any information about who is asking for an increase in the swap, what the swap is, or any reasons in support of the increase. Therefore, it is not possible to determine the content of the passage.


Passage number 165.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They were in trouble.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that "they were in trouble" without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 166.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They wanted the increase becauseGovernor [Wohlin] felt that they might have to draw on the swap line.The $200 million line was extremely small, so we felt it would be agesture of cooperation to increase it to $500 million and it wouldgive him a little more clout, so to speak, in talking with the Swedishgovernment about what he felt were certain inflationary policies thatwere putting the Swedish currency under pressure. And this was a wayof reinforcing his position. He felt that there might be a need forit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is describing the reasons for wanting to increase the swap line and there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 167.
 The last time I saw him at the BIS last week heCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This was arranged last April I believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply provides information about a past event.


Passage number 168.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. It is not a burning issue, butit seemed like a useful gesture of cooperation at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mentions that there is no burning issue or significant disagreement, but rather a gesture of cooperation that seems useful.


Passage number 169.
-14-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was discussed with the Committee,though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence simply states that something was discussed with the Committee, without further indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 170.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, yes. We approved it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 171.
MR. PARDEE. I am sure it will come up again because theywill probably ask for a continuation; but at the moment they haven't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Pardee is expressing his prediction that a certain situation will arise again in the future, but there is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoint present.


Passage number 172.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we are not doing anything on that. Ourearlier decision stands. All right, Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they are not doing anything on a particular matter and confirms that their earlier decision stands. They conclude the statement by addressing Mr. Sternlight, indicating a cooperative or neutral tone.


Passage number 173.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the context provided in the appendix, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 174.
]MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, could we have the most recentmoney supply numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a request made by Ms. Teeters for the most recent money supply numbers.


Passage number 175.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M-1B startled me. I don't know how therecame to be such a difference between M-1A and M-1B, $700 million forM-1A and $1.4 billion for M-1B, as Peter said. I was just looking atthese data and M-1B is only $100 million higher than it was four weeksago while M-1A is $500 million lower than it was four weeks ago. Now,the figure four weeks ago had a little spike, but we haven't had a bigincrease since the [October meeting]. We have had two weeks ofdecline and then this week of increase which has about balanced off[the declines]. I might say on those money supply figures that theydon't reflect complete reporting; they reflect reporting for all themember banks and the sample of nonmember banks that we used before.When we complete the tabulation of the nonmember banks that we havenot been getting, there may be a need for a benchmark revision, whichwould be exactly analogous to the benchmark revisions we have beenmaking every quarter anyway. We indicated in the announcement thatthat might become necessary. There is no reason to think that thebenchmark revisions will be any bigger than those we have made in thepast, but it is going to take several more weeks, I take it, to getthe flow of data from the new reporters before we integrate it. Wewill do that all at one time and then if it comes out different from[the estimates based on] the sample, we will announce a benchmarkrevision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the differences between M-1A and M-1B and explaining the need for potential benchmark revisions in the data.


Passage number 176.
MR. ROOS. Will we get back on the Friday cycle this week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking about a schedule.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not positive of that. Mr Axilrod isa little skeptical, I guess. We expect to do it on Monday if we don'tdo it on Friday. But we are not certain yet we can do it on Friday.I might say that as I understand it, the whole process went quitesmoothly. People seemed to be reasonably satisfied with the data wehave, though we don't have all the new reporters. Tell me, Mr. Beck,if I am not reflecting your views and other's views accurately. We donot yet have the data from the new reporters but the data from the oldreporters seem to be in pretty good shape, and we got the numberstogether with a relatively short lag. I think that's quite a tributeto the efforts throughout the System to get this done in an orderlyway. And it does seem to have gone quite smoothly. I know itinvolved a lot of hard work around the System generally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is giving their own observations and expressing uncertainty about certain aspects but does not mention any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 178.
MR. BLACK. When we publish these figures, are we going tobreak down the reserve figures for the old members and then the newreporters separately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a question about how to publish certain figures, without any conflicting opinions or disagreement.


Passage number 179.
-15-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we are going to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a date followed by a statement of future plans without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 180.
MR. AXILROD. If you are talking about publishing the reservefigures, I don't think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Axilrod expresses his opinion that he does not think there is contention regarding publishing the reserve figures.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 181.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, there is a problem here which you maybe referring to but I can't recite it all exactly. Steve, you cancorrect me, but I think the main problem we are running into is thatwe have a huge amount of excess reserves now with the new system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions a problem but acknowledges that they are unsure of the exact details. They also invite Steve to correct them, indicating a potential disagreement or differing perspectives on the issue at hand.


Passage number 182.
MR. BLACK. That is what I was thinking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, Mr. Black simply states what he was thinking about without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is all this vault cash. So, what weare going to do is to put an additional line on the statement thatsays "excess vault cash" or something like that. For analyticalpurposes people presumably will subtract out the vault cash that isjust sitting there from the total of excess reserves to get an excessreserve figure that seems functionally [equivalent to] the old excessreserve figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a plan to add an additional line on a statement for analytical purposes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 184.
MR. AXILROD. We are going to publish two forms of totalreserves. One will be the total including all the vault cash of allnonmember institutions, which would imply very sizable so-calledexcess reserves. But then we are also going to publish a totalreserve figure which will include the reserve [deposits] held at theFed of all depository institutions, vault cash of those institutionsthat hold required reserves at the Fed, plus the vault cash for thosewho do not hold required reserves at the Fed up to [the amount] equalto their required reserves. The sum of those figures [less requiredreserves] would be excess reserve balances at the Fed, but not excessvault cash since we are not putting in the [surplus vault cash of]nonmember institutions. And that's the item we propose to run on;that will have in it an implicit excess reserve figure that is verylittle different from the excess reserves that we've had recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is proposing to publish two different forms of total reserves, suggesting that there is disagreement or debate over which approach is more accurate or appropriate.


Passage number 185.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In effect, it's excess reserves of boundbanks, bound banks meaning those that have a reserve requirementhigher than the vault cash they ordinarily hold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is providing a definition or explanation of "bound banks" as those that have a reserve requirement higher than the vault cash they ordinarily hold.


Passage number 186.
MR. BLACK. I was just thinking about the problem ofinterpreting these for people on the outside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply mentions that Mr. Black was thinking about the problem of interpreting something for people on the outside. There is no explicit mention of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 187.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage consists of only one person's title or name, "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER." It does not provide any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 188.
 It's a real problem, but I--MR. AXILROD. We will explain that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not demonstrate any form of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement being made followed by a response from Mr. Axilrod indicating that an explanation will be given.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 189.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We think this should satisfy them, butit's a problem for us too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement "We think this should satisfy them..." implies that there is a disagreement or contention between "them" and "us" regarding a certain issue.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 190.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, only half in jest, I would like tosuggest that this would be a good excuse to stop publishing weeklyfigures at all and to publish them about once a month. I am moreconvinced that these weekly numbers create more mischief than they dogood. Is that doable at all under the Freedom of Information Act.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage because Mr. Balles suggests stopping the publication of weekly figures, stating that they create more harm than good.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've [looked at] that, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the speaker has considered or examined something.


Passage number 192.
-16-11/18/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It is doable in one way, because Ihave looked into it. If we publish the weekly seasonally unadjustedfigures and only make our seasonal adjustment calculation once a monthwhen we publish the seasonally adjusted figures for the month, then weare okay under the Freedom of Information Act. But if we don'tpublish the seasonal adjustment and still prepare it internally, thenwe could be subject, although with a time lag, to a Freedom ofInformation request.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 193.
MR. PARTEE. People in the market would do their ownseasonals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple statement of fact without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 194.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but there would be all differentkinds of seasonals; [they would be] all over the lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating that there would be a variety of seasonal workers located in different places.


Passage number 195.
MR. PARTEE. A Sindlinger seasonal and so forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Mr. Partee is a Sindlinger seasonal and so forth, without presenting any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 196.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know, but my own instinct is thatwe would not get by with that. I have had some casual conversations[about whether] we would be subject to Freedom of Information Actsuits if we didn't straighten out these reserve figures somehow toshow them on some basis that made sense and was comparable with thepast figures, which is what we are trying to do by the way Stevedescribed it. [I was told that] people were about to bring suits todemand that we make such calculations so that they're not fouled up.I cite that as the sensitivity in this business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No - The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is discussing potential legal issues and the sensitivity of the situation.


Passage number 197.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, one can make a persuasiveargument that the weekly seasonal adjustment is so unreliable that itshouldn't even be prepared internally, and we could prepare it on amonthly basis [only]. Therefore, I don't see that anybody would haveto face this issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 198.
 My lawyers tell me that--MR. BALLES. That would appear to me to be a viable way outof this trap, Tony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 199.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It boggles my imagination to think that wewould really operate for a whole month without attempting toseasonally adjust the figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses surprise or disbelief, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 200.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we would have to get successive estimatesof the month we are in based on weekly information, using the monthlyseasonal adjustment factors. I think it could be done. But I don'tthink it would be constructive to have ten different seasonals of theweekly numbers floating out there in market; that in itself would be asource of great confusion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his opinion on the idea of having ten different seasonals of the weekly numbers in the market, stating that it would be a source of great confusion.


Passage number 201.
MR. SCHULTZ. Legal questions aside, we are already gettingenormous criticism that we are not doing a very good job of explainingwhat we are doing right now. And if we attempted to do that, I thinkwe would get inundated with criticism. And I suspect certain membersof the Congress would rise in wrath.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Schultz is expressing concern about the criticism they are receiving and the potential for more criticism if they were to attempt to explain their actions further. However, this is his personal opinion and does not indicate a direct disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 202.
MR. WALLICH. I think the basic objection is that we would bethrowing away information, even if it's not very good information. Wecan always filter that. There's a great deal of research on whetherone should throw away information just because it's not very good.The answer is to filter it and give it little weight. We may be-17-11/18/80giving too much weight to the weekly data, but to throw them awaytotally just reduces the accuracy of the steering mechanism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Wallich is discussing the objection of throwing away information, but he does not indicate any disagreement or contention. He suggests filtering the information instead of completely discarding it, which implies a resolution rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 203.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I may be too Polyannaish, but when Iobserved the market recently, I thought there was a change in thatthey have kept these weekly figures in some reasonable perspective.They haven't jumped all that much just on the basis of one week'sdata. Occasionally, we get a jump because they say, in effect: Wewere hoping it would come down and now we have lost hope. And that'spretty much the way that we have looked at it, too. If we have thesetargets, we really can't blame them for observing [the trend] over aperiod of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal perspective and agreement with the market's approach of keeping the weekly figures in perspective.


Passage number 204.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's true, Paul. PeterSternlight also feels that the market is reacting to the weeklynumbers in a more moderate way. Even so, it is interesting that threemore public-minded and important market participants in New York intelephone calls to me over the last couple of months basically madethe same suggestion that John Balles has made. They believe that theweekly figures are inadvisable and are causing much more volatility inthe market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents the opinions of different individuals regarding the impact of weekly figures on market volatility.


Passage number 205.
MR. BALLES. That's what I am concerned about. Surely, therecan't be anything that says we have to publish bad numbers. We havebeen faced with enormous changes, such as social security changes andgovernment pay increases and so forth, that have created realsuspicion about the meaning of the numbers we are churning out,despite the best job that the staff can do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It expresses the concern and doubt of Mr. Balles about the accuracy and credibility of the numbers being published.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 206.
 I am sure that the staffis doing their best on these weekly seasonals, but they have to be thewildest, most unreliable things that we--MR. GRAMLEY. But if we publish seasonally unadjustednumbers, they will be even more erratic. And it's true that therewill be a lot of seasonal adjustment factors floating around themarket. But the official numbers put out by the Fed will be even moreerratic than what we put out now. It doesn't seem to me that we canever correct the problem that is bothering the market except by notreacting to the weekly numbers the way we do. We are [now] causing aproblem by reacting to them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley argues that publishing seasonally unadjusted numbers would result in even more erratic data and suggests that the market should not react to the weekly numbers. This contradicts the earlier statement expressing frustration with the current unreliable seasonal adjustments.


Passage number 207.
MR. BALLES. It's the market that is reacting to them,though, not us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is simply stating that the market is reacting to something, rather than them.


Passage number 208.
MR. GRAMLEY. Those numbers were around there for a long,long time, John, before we got onto the policy that generated theseerratic movements in interest rates. It is not the market's fault.It is our fault. If we want more stability in rates, we know how toget it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Gramley explaining that the erratic movements in interest rates are not the market's fault but the result of a policy. He also suggests that if there is a desire for more stability in rates, there is knowledge on how to achieve it.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, I am willing to re-examine thisissue. I don't know how to do it analytically. My own instinct, asexpressed by Fred Schultz, is that even if 90 percent of the people inthe market agreed with us, the other 10 percent are going to raise aruckus and there's going to be a big brouhaha. We can look at theissues; I don't know how to look at them systematically, but we cantry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 210.
-18-11/18/80MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we have done various kinds ofresearch, which we could make available to the Committee, to try todetermine if the market has behaved "rationally" or not. My memory isthat the results are that mainly they have behaved rationally. Thatis, they have moved when they view the change in the money supply as agood predictor of the change in the federal funds rate and have notmoved otherwise for the most part. So from that point of view, theredoesn't seem to have been all that much irrationality in marketreactions. But we can update that research and present it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, we would lose something [bychanging] this. On some occasions, obviously, it is extremelyannoying to publish these weekly numbers which may be erratic. Onother occasions, like today, when the market is thinking that themoney supply is even stronger than it probably is, it is nice to getthe numbers out and show them it is not quite as wild as they think itis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the benefits of publishing weekly numbers.


Passage number 212.
MR. BLACK. Let's just publish them when they're good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black suggests publishing something when it is considered good, which does not imply any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 213.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given text only mentions Chairman Volcker, but it does not provide any information that indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 214.
 If I could edit the figures--MR. WALLICH. I can't see how one can believe in markets andthen try to avoid supplying information, however [questionable it is].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a viewpoint that the speaker does not understand how someone can believe in markets and still try to avoid supplying information.


Passage number 215.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't we have a little paperwritten on the pros and cons of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is suggesting writing a paper discussing the pros and cons of a certain topic, indicating an open and impartial approach to considering both sides of the argument.


Passage number 216.
MR. FORD. Paul, if we do that, which I strongly [favor]--Isupport the notion that we should look at the pros and cons of all ofthe issues that have been raised--we ought to consider one other basicquestion, which we are assuming can't be raised. And that is just notgenerating the numbers so often. I heard you say that we couldn'toperate for a month or even two weeks without going through thisexercise. But [I wonder about that] when I look at the commitment ofresources that we are making to this--the overtime, the blood, sweat,and tears of the staff. One can discount that very heavily in termsof a need for information. But there are other countries in theworld, it seems to me, that operate their monetary policy withoutgoing through this tremendous expenditure of resources and all theproblems of revising and re-revising and interpreting and re-interpreting the data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 217.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, if you raise that question, youhave to raise the question of how we keep reserve requirements,because basically these figures are generated in the first place sothe banks know what their reserve requirement is. [Unintelligible]monthly reserve requirements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that if one raises the question of how reserve requirements are kept, it becomes necessary to also question how the figures for reserve requirements themselves are generated.


Passage number 218.
MR. GRAMLEY. We could take the incoming deposit reports,which are on a micro basis, and calculate reserve requirements whichare not based on the same concept of deposits that goes into the moneysupply. Then we could if we wished, as we used to do many years ago,just calculate the money supply on the last day of the month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing different methods of calculating reserve requirements and the money supply. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 219.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can theoretically; it is not going tosave much work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not present any opposing viewpoints or disagreement. It simply states that something is possible but not very efficient.


Passage number 220.
-19-11/18/80MR. PARTEE. The problem of [using just] that day is that itmight be high and it might be low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that using only the information from that specific day is problematic because it could be either high or low.


Passage number 221.
 Then it would be like--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we do a paper raising all theseissues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. The speaker suggests doing a paper to discuss the various issues, which implies collaboration or agreement rather than contention.


Passage number 222.
MR. AXILROD. We wrote it 3 or 4 years ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. The statement simply provides information about when something was written without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 223.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I would hope that if you do a paper ofthat kind there would be an added dimension to it. And that is thatgiven the environment we are living in today, communication has becomean integral part of monetary policy to a degree that it never has beenbefore. What people are thinking about in regard to what is going onand our credibility are of considerable importance to the policyitself. So I would say to you that there may be an added dimension interms of communications that wasn't an issue 2 or 3 years ago, whichshould be addressed in such a paper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and there does not appear to be any conflicting viewpoints present.


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In this general connection, let me make apoint about something I have looked at recently in preparing sometestimony. I don't know if it will provide you with any reassuranceor not, but if you think our M1 has been unstable, look at any foreigncountry's M1 figure. If you look at the data over a period of years,the standard deviation in the United States is about half of that inother countries on a monthly basis, as I recall the numbers. Even theannual numbers don't look any better; they look worse. Isn't thecharacteristic of all these series that M1 is much more unstable thanM2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is simply providing information and making a comparison between the stability of M1 figures in the United States and other foreign countries.


Passage number 225.
MR. ROOS. In this connection, could someone just reportbriefly on the progress of Steve's effort to restudy how we are doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply asks for a brief report on the progress of Steve's effort to restudy something.


Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's try to do it later. I don'tknow what it is myself. But let's get on with our work here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any signs of contention or disagreement. It is simply suggesting a delay in order to focus on the current task at hand.


Passage number 227.
MR. BALLES. One final point, if I may, Mr. Chairman. I havebeen impressed with the ingenuity of the Board's legal staff infinding ways around the date in the Monetary Control Act on whichreserve requirements would have to be put into effect. I hope theywill exercise that same ingenuity with respect to our purportedresponsibility under the Freedom of Information Act to put out weeklymoney supply figures. I hope that issue can be examined in depth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their admiration for the legal staff's ingenuity and hopes that they will apply the same level of ingenuity to another issue.


Passage number 228.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will produce a memorandum. Did youhave a comment that you wanted to make earlier, Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the intention to produce a memorandum and asks if Bob has any comments he wanted to make earlier.


Passage number 229.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we have gotten right far off [thetopic]. My comment was related to a technique on monetary policy. Idon't know whether you feel we have time for anything more on that ornot. I can ask at a later time. It's an important point, but we havespent right much time, so I'll wait.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is simply stating that he would like to discuss a technique on monetary policy, but is unsure if there is time to do so in the current context.


Passage number 230.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did we ratify your transactions, Mr.Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a simple question asking whether "we" (the speaker) ratified Mr. Sternlight's transactions. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the question itself.


Passage number 231.
MR. EASTBURN. Could I ask Peter a question. Peter, wouldyou elaborate just a little on the techniques of the Desk in view of-20-11/18/80the uncertainties in these numbers. Are you operating pretty much asbefore or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Eastburn is simply asking Peter to elaborate on the techniques of the Desk given the uncertainties in the numbers.


Passage number 232.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I was apprehensive a month ago about thekind of flow of information we might have as we came up to theNovember 13 date. I was gratified that we did not seem to be gettingas much confusion and uncertainty [as I expected], at least, as thatweek began. Things seemed to be settling down in a reasonablepattern. Now, I have to allow that I was thrown off by the demandsfor reserves that we experienced yesterday. I just don't have anexplanation of that. I am not sure whether it had more to do with thechanges coming out of the Monetary Control Act or whether it was justsome unsettlement in the immediate wake of the new discount rate andpenalty rates. Until I can see more on the behavior in terms ofdesired holdings of excess reserves and so on, I just don't have agood answer. But at least up until now, we have not felt a need for asignificant departure from what had been our mode of operation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Sternlight is expressing his personal observations and uncertainties, but there is no mention of any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 233.
MR. CORRIGAN. May I ask just one quick question, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question.


Passage number 234.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It better be quick.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "It better be quick" does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests a sense of urgency or importance for whatever needs to be done quickly.


Passage number 235.
MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of what you mean to publish, I thinkyou said that the reserve numbers will include the required reservesassociated with the new reporters. The money supply numbers and totalbenchmark when done will not. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement clarifying the inclusion of reserve numbers and money supply numbers in the publication.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 236.
MR. AXILROD. That's right, but it will include the samesample.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement being made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 237.
MR. CORRIGAN. The sample of nonmember banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the following passage. From the limited information provided, it is not clear what the exact contention is, but there is likely a disagreement between Mr. Corrigan and another party (possibly member banks) regarding the sample of nonmember banks.


Passage number 238.
MR. AXILROD. That's right, but that might be for only a veryfew weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a statement without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 239.
MR. PARTEE. It's the sample that is used to estimate theuniverse, Jerry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a simple statement made by Mr. Party about the sample used to estimate the universe. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 240.
MR. CORRIGAN. I appreciate that. Do we now have a firm fixon how many nonmembers will actually have to post reserves and whatthe level of total reserves associated with the nonmembers is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is about seeking clarification and understanding, not about expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 241.
MR. AXILROD. No, not at this moment. We don't even have thetotal required reserves for members for this week as of this verymoment. That may be part of the source of Mr. Sternlight's problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about the total required reserves not being available at the moment.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only states the name "Mr. Kichline" and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 243.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement that indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 244.
]MR. SCHULTZ. Jim, do you have the preliminary survey onbuilding permits for last month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking for information.


Passage number 245.
MR. KICHLINE. We have it for the first half of the month,which was down 14 percent from the level in September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact about the percentage decrease in the level from September to the first half of the current month.


Passage number 246.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't you go ahead, Steve, and thenwe'll have a general discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that Steve should speak first before transitioning into a general discussion.


Passage number 247.
-21-11/18/80MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 248.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we now want general comments onthe economic situation and strategy. Let me make only two preliminarypoints. First of all, the story isn't in yet but I will anticipatethe story. I don't know what is going to happen to long-term rates.I take it they are higher now, or not much changed anyway, than beforewe changed the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their uncertainty about the future of long-term rates and acknowledging that they do not have all the information regarding the current rates.


Passage number 249.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Not much changed but somewhat higher, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Not much changed but somewhat higher, yes" is a simple affirmation or agreement with someone's previous statement.


Passage number 250.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It appears that the discount rate changehas had an impact on short-term rates. I'd just point out once againthat thoughts that a discount rate change is a "freebie" in adjustingto the market are not warranted in the particular situation that weare now in, when banks are borrowing very heavily. The use of thesurcharge is an attempt to moderate that reaction, but just how muchit will moderate it or whether it will moderate it at all is nottotally clear. That's the general point on the paths. Looking ahead,let me say that I would find too intense a discussion on preciselywhere the target is in the short run sterile--not only sterile, butpossibly misleading--because it doesn't have much to do with where weset the path. As I indicated last month, we've had repeatedindications in the past few months when the figures were coming inhigh that it made very little difference where the target was set. Itmade a lot of difference as to how we reacted to the deviation fromthe target, right or wrong. And that's precisely what the discussionought to center on more profitably--whether one looks at it in termsof what the borrowing adjustments in particular should be or, as somepeople may, in terms of what kind of interest rate changes one iswilling to tolerate or permit. Those are the variables. And theyhave very little to do with whether "A," "B," or "C" is chosen becausethe actual events are likely to [vary] over a much wider range, up ordown, than is indicated [by those alternatives]. The results areunpredictable, and as Steve just said, probably not much affected bywhat we do between now and the end of the year because we simply don'thave that much time to affect the aggregates. So we have to look atit with a view that what we are doing today may affect developmentsafter the end of the year. I don't see how one can avoid it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It mainly focuses on discussing the impact of discount rate changes and the need to analyze borrowing adjustments and interest rate changes.


Passage number 251.
 So,with those preliminary comments--MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, could I just repeat my question toSteve on the technical study of how we go about achieving our targets.Is that progressing well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply restating a question to Steve regarding the progress of a technical study.


Passage number 252.
MR. AXILROD. Well, President Roos, we are going to have all-day staff meetings tomorrow and Thursday on the first drafts of thepapers and I would be in a much better position to comment after thatthan before. But so far as I can tell, people are right on schedulein the production of the documentation and I expect to have a veryfruitful meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker states that they would be in a better position to comment after the staff meetings and expresses optimism about the progress of the documentation.


Passage number 253.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to ask a question also. AmI correct in assuming that when when you talked about being in thelower half [of the ranges] in the coming year that that would be basedon the actual fourth quarter of 1980 and would not attempt to correctfor any overshooting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply includes a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 254.
-22-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That has been the practice and I wouldpresume that that is what it will be, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage states a fact and a presumption, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 255.
MR. PARTEE. I would think we'd adjust our targets in thelight of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 256.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Consistent with past practices, ifwe wanted to adjust, in effect, we would put the target lower andexplain that as the reason why the target was lower. I don't knowthat that's written in concrete, but that is the implication of whatwe've done before anyway. It is what the Congress is used to and it'swhat we are used to. So in a sense we still have a sliding base on anannual basis. We no longer have it on a quarterly basis if wecontinue that procedure. We could debate that, but that has been thepresumption, anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining past practices and the consensus among Congress and the speaker regarding adjusting targets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 257.
MR. WALLICH. Well, that gives excessive weight to theachievement of the target for the rest of the year. I think it wouldbe much better just to adjust the path for the next year rather than[to try] to reach a particularly low base in order to avoid basedrift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement indicated in the passage. Mr. Wallich suggests adjusting the path for the next year instead of trying to reach a low base to avoid base drift, indicating a difference in opinion or approach.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I see no reason [why we couldn't] doit that way--to say we're still targeting with an older base--if theCommittee wanted. We'd have some confusion, I think, in explainingourselves. But if that's what we wanted to do in substance, it isconceivable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "We'd have some confusion, I think, in explaining ourselves" suggests that there may be disagreement or potential difficulties in implementing the suggested approach.


Passage number 259.
MR. PARTEE. There are other questions involved, too. Therealways were [unintelligible] questions about justifying the floatingquarterly base and they certainly would be stronger if we weretargeting on a floating annual base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. PARTEE acknowledges that there are other questions involved and suggests that the justification for a floating quarterly base would be stronger if they were targeting on a floating annual base.


Passage number 260.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I am not recommending that because itwould seem to complicate things even more if we were to change thepractice. How are we going to adjust for the NOW accounts [in theeffort] to understand all these changes. But I was just wondering ifyou think we will be under political pressure or internal pressure toin some way absorb the overshoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply posing a question and discussing potential complications and pressures.


Passage number 261.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. I haven't thought aboutthat question particularly. I certainly haven't thought about achange in procedures. [Unintelligible] there is something to say ifit changed the procedure despite all the very valid objections youhave. If it was thought terribly important to try to make up for anovershoot, instead of just having a target that sounded terribly lownext year, we might get the same result but it would look a littledifferent. I literally had not thought of doing it that way. I thinkthere would be a horrendous problem in explaining precisely what wewere doing, but it may have some merit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their lack of knowledge and consideration regarding a specific question or topic. They mention that there may be some validity to considering a change in procedures, but overall, there is no clear disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 262.
MR. WALLICH. Different aggregates have overshot or notovershot in different degrees.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement is a neutral observation that does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about different aggregates overshooting or not overshooting to different degrees.


Passage number 263.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have to change the relationshipamong them. I am sure of that. Well, I think we ought to begin ageneral discussion. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their certainty about the need to change the relationship among "them" and then suggesting a discussion to start addressing this issue.


Passage number 264.
-23-11/18/80MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that the picture we are facingis one in which the economy has been a great deal stronger than weexpected. But we also now face the prospect of a greater degree ofweakness hereafter resulting from this strength. In other words, itputs somewhat of a ceiling on the development of the economy if itbecomes really strong temporarily and that raises interest rates tolevels that will push the economy down again. I would not try tocounteract the prospective dip in the economy, if that is what mighthappen in the first quarter. I think we ought to look further aheadinto the future, both with regard to the real sector and the monetaryaggregates. Now, I think the chances of a repetition of the secondquarter of 1980 are very slight, even if interest rates don't go downas sharply as they did then. I doubt that the economy will sufferanything like that. But the chances of a severe drop in interestrates are there again. And if we [allow] that a second time--ifinterest rates go up and then go down again in a yo-yo fashion--wewill be accused, reasonably, of destabilizing interest rates beyondwhat is necessary. Our new techniques do imply that interest rateswill be more volatile, and that's the way the economy is kept on trackunder these conditions. But we shouldn't yield to that tendency ofthe system very much.So far as the aggregates are concerned, my inclination wouldbe to try to get back on track in the first quarter of 1981 but not inthe present quarter, even if that were possible by a drastic wrench.But at the same time, I'd try to limit the interest rate implicationsof that. The interest rate implications of just saying we are goingto get back on track in early 1981 might be to allow interest rates todrop quite far if the economy is weak. I would say we should aim at arelatively reasonable growth path from here on out; something between"A" and "B" might do it if we want to be back on track with M-1B inthe first quarter, but not with the interest rates specifications of"A" or "B." The interest rate specifications of "C" give us a chance,if interest rates tend to go down sharply, at least to review thesituation and not to accept the slide willy-nilly as we did in thesecond quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is the speaker expressing their perspective and suggesting a course of action.


Passage number 265.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in the interest of clarification,Governor, I understand why you like the lower limit of alternative Cfrom what you've said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses that the speaker understands and acknowledges the governor's preference for the lower limit of alternative C. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 266.
 But I might have thought, knowing you, thatyou might not like the upper [limit] implication because of the swingin interest rates and the emphasis you put on--MR. WALLICH. I don't feel very strongly about the 19 percent[upper limit for the funds range]. It just seems to me that we shouldnot make the range too narrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the upper limit for the funds range, but there is no indication of conflict or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're mainly concerned about the lowerlimit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is stating a fact or opinion about the speaker's concern about the lower limit. It does not present any conflicting views or arguments, thus there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 268.
MR. WALLICH. I have a concern about the lower limit. And 18percent [for the upper limit] would be just as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While Mr. Wallich expresses concern about the lower limit, there is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage. He suggests that the 18% upper limit would be equally acceptable.


Passage number 269.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 270.
MR. WINN. To step back a little on the economic picture,Paul, I am concerned about two things. One is the energy situation.While at the moment we are faced with a glut of storage space for oil-24-11/18/80in this country and temporarily have a big supply hanging over themarket, trying to get a fix on what is happening in the Middle East isextremely difficult. I came back from there with reports of from 3 to10 years to put things back together. In this country we are talkingabout 3 to 10 months. I don't know what the truth of the matter is,but I think we are more heavily exposed to energy problems than wehave been in the past. If [those problems materialize], the priceimplications are very scary for agriculture and [many other sectors]because of the energy situation. Things are happening, and we havehad an interruption of supply. And not to try to get a better fix onthat is a serious mistake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It expresses concern about the energy situation and the potential price implications for various sectors.


Passage number 271.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that we can get abetter fix on it. I strongly underscore what you have to say: Thatthis is a major uncertainty. It is very much analogous to thesituation at the end of last year when we were humming along in somesense and thought we might make a little progress on inflationarysentiment and other things, and along comes a 50 percent increase inthe oil price. That has a certain implication for psychology,behavior, money pressures, and everything else. The way thatsituation is developing, we surely can't exclude another shock of thatkind in the relatively near future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and reiterating the uncertainty and potential impact of a future shock similar to the increase in the oil price.


Passage number 272.
MR. WINN. They are talking about big increases in pricesthis time, and that really scares me. My second observation--and thisis perhaps a sample of one--is that I can't help but be impressed bythe amount of military supplies that are being moved to the MiddleEast. And that makes me think that defense expenditures in real termsare going to be much larger than anything we see in the budget figurestoday. I realize that the expenditures have gone up but it seems tome that the assumption built into the models needs to be questionedseriously. And this could alter the budget figures, resulting eitherin offsetting [cuts] in other areas or again an uncertainty in thepicture that hasn't been completely built into the forecast for nextyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It consists of the speaker expressing their concerns and observations about potential price increases and increased defense expenditures in the Middle East. However, there is no clear disagreement stated.


Passage number 273.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. After citing all these uncertainties, doyou care to express a judgment as to what you think is going to happenor the nature of the problems we face.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for the listener's opinion or judgment on the matter.


Passage number 274.
MR. WINN. I am afraid we are going to get both [higher]energy costs and a big increase in defense expenditures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the possibility of higher energy costs and a big increase in defense expenditures, implying that these outcomes are likely to happen.


Passage number 275.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that make you want to be tighter oreasier in terms of the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply posing a question about whether the information provided would make the reader prefer a tighter or easier money supply.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 276.
MR. WINN. Tighter, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The word "Tighter" suggests disagreement or contention.


Passage number 277.
MR. PARTEE. Tighter in terms of the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It simply mentions the idea of tightening the money supply without presenting any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 278.
MR. WINN. Yes, I came back very much depressed about theinflation picture over there and the complacency with which they faceit--the efforts to index it and then to juggle the index, the wholeproblem of what it is doing to the economy, the brain drain that hasset in and the implications of that. I think it's a complacency thatwe just can't buy in this country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their disagreement with the complacency that is shown towards inflation in the country being discussed. They highlight their concerns about efforts to "index it and then to juggle the index," as well as the negative effects of inflation on the economy and the brain drain.


Passage number 279.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What country are you talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a question asking for clarification, not expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 280.
-25-11/18/80MR. WINN. Israel and Egypt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply appears to be a date and the mention of Israel and Egypt without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 281.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the passage starts with "Mr. Morris," indicating that the statement will likely be about or from Mr. Morris, but the full statement is not provided. Without further information or context, it is not possible to determine if there is any disagreement or contention in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 282.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we have all beensurprised by the resiliency of the economy since July and we areconcerned about the dip that the staff is projecting in the firstquarter. We'd all like to be able to produce a smooth 2 percent realgrowth rate for the next couple of years but I don't think that'scompatible with our attempts to decelerate the rate of monetary growthgradually. It seems to me that the rather small undulations ineconomic activity that are probably ahead of us, as much as we maydislike them, can't be avoided. We have probably produced a greatdeal by our actions in the past months that is not yet reflected inthe economic statistics or in the monetary growth rates. Nonetheless,I like the alternative B growth rates for the aggregates simplybecause I don't think we can continue to raise our objectives for thequarter month after month in response to unexpectedly high increasesin the aggregates. We did it last month. But I don't think we canmaintain our credibility if we respond to bulges in the aggregates byraising their targets. So I would stay with the growth path for theaggregates that the Committee voted for last month. I would set a 13to 17 percent funds rate range because I have a feeling that we canaccomplish our objective within that. If we find that we can't, thenwe can reassess it later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The person speaking expresses disagreement or contention with the idea of continuously raising targets in response to unexpected increases in the aggregates. They believe that staying with the growth path voted for last month and setting a funds rate range of 13 to 17 percent will allow them to accomplish their objective.


Passage number 283.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you may have answered my question inyour last comment, but I say this for everyone's benefit: The wholequestion, whichever one of these targets we pick numerically, is goingto be how hard we work to get to those targets and at what expense interms of borrowings or interest rates. And I think you have expressedthe dimension of your interest rate feeling anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying their perspective and expressing the importance of considering the effort and cost associated with reaching specific targets.


Passage number 284.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I think we have to give the Manager up to17 percent on the funds rate, which is roughly 2 percentage pointsabove what we have already done. But I don't see the necessity ofpushing the top of the range to 18 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Morris expressing his opinion about the necessity of pushing the top of the range to 18 percent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 285.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't want to do it prematurely,but I'd like to get to some [views on the] borrowing assumption beforewe finish. Mr. Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker states that they would like to get some views on the borrowing assumption, which suggests that there may be different opinions or disagreements on the topic.


Passage number 286.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I find myself in the unusualposition of being sympathetic with some, though not all, of theremarks of Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, states that he agrees with some of the remarks made by Governor Wallich.


Passage number 287.
 I haven't been with him since lastspring, so--MR. SCHULTZ. I was with him right up to the very last.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply describes a personal experience of not being with someone for a certain period of time and then someone else stating that they were with that person until recently.


Passage number 288.
MR. GRAMLEY. I was, too. I don't think we ought to try toprevent a decline in economic activity in the first quarter. It's toolate for that. I think the staff is right that it is in the cards.But I believe the staff may be underestimating the severity of thedecline that could occur early next year for two reasons. One is thatwhen the staff put its forecast together last week, it was able towrite: "Our forecast assumes a further rise in interest rates." Thatno longer is true. The rise in interest rates which the staff assumedis already here; it has happened. So interest rates are going to have-26-11/18/80to decline somewhat from present levels if the staff's forecast isgoing to hold. The second reason is that the staff has built into itsforecast for next year, and has continuously done so since early 1980,an assumption that the money demand function is going to shift down.That assumed shift, when they first put it in, was a year away. Butnow it is right ahead; it is six weeks ahead. If that shift doesn'thappen, then interest rates not only are not going to stay at currentlevels or go down a bit, but as the staff indicates, they will have togo up 3-1/2 percentage points further in the first quarter. If we getbill rates in the 16 to 17 percent range and the prime rate in therange of 19 to 20 percent for the quarter as a whole, then peak rateswill probably exceed their levels of last spring. And then I am notat all sure that we would not be in for a decline in economic activityevery bit as severe as the one we had in the second quarter of 1980.Now, we are facing a very difficult long-run inflationproblem. I don't see any reason for thinking that any improvement hasoccurred at all yet. But it would be extremely counterproductive tofollow a course of policy which pushed the economy over the cliff oncemore. I think interest rates are high enough now. I don't want tosee them decline much; on that I agree with Governor Wallich entirely.I think they should stay about where they are but not come down muchfrom here. We have recently seen performance in the money measuresalong the lines that we wanted. We're starting to see the slowdown wehave been trying to get. In the past four weeks, as you indicated,the M1 numbers show rough stability if we balance off M-1A and M-1B.I could go with either of Steve's suggestions: Either narrowing thefederal funds range or setting some upper limit to the growth rate ofthe monetary aggregates and accepting a shortfall, provided thenumbers come out right. If I were going to select the federal fundsrange that suited my predilections, it would be something like 12 to15 percent. Or if I wanted to go in the other direction, I would takethe specs of "A" and accept any shortfall in money growth from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 289.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 290.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, as far as the economy isconcerned, I think the staff projections and estimates are as good asthey can be. I agree entirely with Mr. Winn's comments about theuncertainties associated with oil and I agree that the whole fiscaleconomic policy area is one where what does or does not come out ofthe hopper could have an enormous impact on expectations if nothingelse.In looking at policy, I am driven by two conflictingthoughts. One is the desire to come as close to the 1980 targets aswe can, or at least in line with Mr. Morris's comments not to adjustthe targets for the current quarter upward at this point. But at thesame time I'd like to enter 1981 on a growth trajectory that isroughly compatible with what our targets for 1981 might be. There isa bit of a paradox in that I think the first criteria would bring onesquarely to "B" and the second in some sense might bring one to "A" interms of the growth rates for the aggregates. I would reconcile thatparadox by accepting aggregate growth numbers somewhere around "B" ormaybe a bit higher. But in line with one of Steve's suggestions, I'dtreat those numbers as maximums, with the explicit understanding thatif we were hitting or exceeding those maximums we would adjust thenonborrowed growth targets to offset any growth over the maximum. I-27-11/18/80recognize that that in itself would probably mean that we'd end upabove the maximum for the period anyway because of the time it takesto know we are above them and then to respond. But I, too, am a bitencouraged by these more recent money supply numbers. And if therewere some maximum, I think it is possible that such a maximum could becompatible with a funds rate band of maybe 13 to 16 or 13 to 17percent. On borrowing, I'm just having a heck of a time figuring outwhat might be [appropriate], given all of these number problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing their thoughts and considerations regarding the economy and policy, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 291.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we are too encouraged by theaggregates in the past four weeks--and I'd love to be encouraged, too--I remind you that these things have come in lumps and if we go backone more week, we had a $5 billion increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting a statement and providing a reminder.


Passage number 292.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's why I like the idea of trying to use amaximum as more of a guide than perhaps we have in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Corrigan is expressing his personal preference for using a maximum as more of a guide.


Passage number 293.
MR. SCHULTZ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The passage only mentions Mr. Schultz and does not provide any information or statements that would suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 294.
 Furthermore, the very preliminary figures wouldindicate another increase for next week, so--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting preliminary figures that suggest an increase for the following week.


Passage number 295.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With regard to theeconomy, the staff's projection seems reasonable. I would just notethat they consistently have underestimated the strength of theeconomy. And if that continues through the remainder of this quarter,we could have some of the additional pressures that Steve spoke of oninterest rates. On the other hand, if I understand the Bluebookcorrectly, for the first time in several months the staff has notbuilt into any of the alternatives any further downward shift indemand for money over this remaining two-month period. So it wouldgive me some comfort that we may come closer to hitting those numbersbetween now and the end of the year than we have in the last couple ofmonths when we experienced overshoots from the staff's projections atthe time of the Committee meeting. Coming down to policyconsiderations, it seems to me there are a couple of things. TheFederal Reserve has a credibility problem. It has been talked aboutaround this table. Last month we chose to adopt ranges for theaggregates for the quarter that insured that we would be outside the[annual] range for at least two of the three targets--M-1B and M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. It presents different points and observations without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interrupt. I don't thinkour adoption of those targets insured a darn thing. We didn't knowwhat the money supply was going to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Instead, the speaker is expressing their doubt or skepticism regarding the effectiveness of adopting certain targets and their uncertainty about the future money supply.


Passage number 297.
MR. GUFFEY. No, but we understood that if we hit thosetargets it would take M-1B outside for the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or understanding without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we hit those targets. But there isnothing in our experience that says we are going to hit the targetsover that kind of a time period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is stating that there is no evidence or past experience to suggest that they will achieve the targets over the given time period.


Passage number 299.
MR. GUFFEY. I would agree with that. And unfortunately, themisses have always been on the high side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement and provides additional information.


Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is certainly correct recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That is certainly correct recently" does not show any contention or disagreement. It implies agreement with a previous statement.


Passage number 301.
-28-11/18/80MR. GUFFEY. And that brings in the credibility question,which I'd like to address.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they would like to address the credibility question, indicating a desire to discuss or explore the topic further. However, there is no indication of any opposing views or arguments presented in the given excerpt.


Passage number 302.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the issue; the actuals have beengoing higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply stating a fact that the actuals have been going higher. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 303.
MR. GUFFEY. And the revisions have all gone one way,unfortunately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact without expressing any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 304.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 305.
MR. GUFFEY. As to the credibility problem, of course, wewill be in a new era after the change of Administration and the changeof Congress. And the Federal Reserve is going to be looked at interms of how we plan to perform. It seems important to me that we notadopt aggregate targets at this meeting that would suggest we aretaking another step, as Frank Morris pointed out, toward insuring thatwe will miss the aggregate target for 1980 to an even greater extent.It seems to me that "B" is consistent with what we set last month;thus I would opt for the B alternative with a funds rate range of 13to 17 percent, having in mind that if we have underestimated thestrength of the economy for the remainder of this year, we may beusing that 17 percent. I am really suggesting that a cap of 17percent might be appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion and preference.


Passage number 306.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 307.
MR. ROOS. Well, some of what I say will be a repetition ofwhat Roger said. If one goes back to the fundamentals of what we aretrying to do, I don't think there's any question that if anythingemerged from the November 4 experience, it was a recognition that thepeople of this country--and we are serving them--are primarily andindelibly concerned with something being done about inflation. Ithink the second fundamental that we have to address is the erodingcredibility of our ability to perform effectively in what we'veannounced we're trying to do. If we continue to operate as we haveall year--I'm talking about our operating procedures--I would agreewith the Chairman that the choice we make today in terms of thealternatives will probably have very little effect on anything because[the results for the year] probably won't be a reflection of thechoice we make. However, if the Bluebook is correct, it's too latereally to accomplish our annual objective in terms of the targets forthe aggregates. But whatever action we take today will have a veryreal effect on our credibility. Recognizing that the world knows thatwe're above the upper limit of our M-1B target, for example, if wedon't choose an alternative that at least appears to attempt tocorrect for that overshoot, I think we will see a further erosion ofour credibility.Secondly, another factor that is currently affecting ourcredibility is the increasing suspicions on the part of the publicthat we are indeed moving back toward what I at least consider to be afailed policy of attempting to stabilize interest rates. Therefore,our fed funds range should not be narrower than the width we'veadhered to most of this year. I would opt for alternative C. Underany circumstances, the danger that I would perceive in the futurewould be permitting interest rates to drop significantly. And I would-29-11/18/80not like to see us set a lower limit of the funds range at less than14 percent.Finally, I would hope desperately that by February, when wego into [our deliberations for our targets] next year, Steve's studywill have been conducted and will be taken seriously. And I hope itwill be conducted, as I know it will be, with an open mind to seewhether we can't come up with a better operating procedure that wouldreduce the potential margin of error between the actions we take atthese meetings or the alternatives we choose and how the aggregatesactually [turn out].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roos is mainly giving his perspective and opinions on the current situation and offering his preferred alternative.


Passage number 308.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to make your comments a littlemore operational, Mr. Roos. In choosing "C" are you saying that weshould immediately decrease the nonborrowed reserve targetsubstantially and therefore increase the level of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply seeking clarification on Mr. Roos' suggestion and does not indicate any opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 309.
MR. ROOS. No, sir. First of all, I feel that the techniqueof operating with the nonborrowed and borrowed reserve paths is notworking. I can't answer your question because we place more emphasison total reserves in our view than on borrowed and nonborrowedreserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, states that the technique of operating with the nonborrowed and borrowed reserve paths is not working. This implies that there is disagreement or contention about the effectiveness of this technique.


Passage number 310.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just interpret that. I canunderstand that, but the only way we can affect the total is byaffecting nonborrowed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their understanding and suggesting a potential solution.


Passage number 311.
MR. ROOS. Well, I think we could control the total, couldn'twe. Again, that's what Steve's people are studying and I hope they'llget data on that. But I can't translate "C" specifically tononborrowed and borrowed reserve paths because I haven't asked ourpeople to develop that. I am not prepared to respond to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement.


Passage number 312.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not appear to be any contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. Without further context or information, it is difficult to determine if there is any disagreement related to Mr. Rice.


Passage number 313.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I know we often say that we'refacing a period of unusual uncertainty. But this time I really meanit. We obviously face uncertainty in the fiscal outlook resultingfrom recent political developments. Also, as you and Mr. Winnmentioned, there is uncertainty in the energy price picture. Also,with possible changes in the discount rate and the surcharge, we don'tknow what bank attitudes will be toward borrowing. So the picture isvery cloudy. Despite that, there seems to be an unusual amount ofagreement as to the direction in which we should move. I would saythat in light of all these uncertainties, the staff forecast is aboutas reasonable as one could expect, and I see no reason to disagreewith that forecast. I feel that if we were to take any action thatwould result in a significant raising of the targets, that wouldcertainly be open to an erroneous interpretation, or perhaps even theright interpretation but certainly one that we would not like to see.And it would definitely run the risk of adding to inflationaryexpectations. So, I would not opt for alternative A. On the otherhand, it seems to me that any further move toward restrictivenesswould have the very undesirable effect of making the projected declinein economic activity in the early part of the year sharper than wewould like to see or sharper than might prove to be the case if wefollowed a more moderate course. Therefore, I would supportalternative B. And I agree with Governor Gramley that interest rates-30-11/18/80are now about as high as they need to be. So I would combine mysupport of alternative B with a federal funds range of 12 to 16percent. Now, the growth that we get, of course, may be inconsistentwith this federal funds rate range. If it is, I would be prepared tosee the funds rate somewhat higher--maybe one percentage point higher.But I would not like to see that occur without the advantage ofadditional information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, acknowledges the uncertainties and agrees with the staff forecast. He also agrees with Governor Gramley that interest rates are currently at an acceptable level. He supports alternative B and suggests a federal funds range of 12 to 16 percent, but acknowledges that the actual growth may require a slightly higher funds rate. Overall, there is a consensus in this passage.


Passage number 314.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions "Mrs. Teeters" without providing any context or further information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 315.
MS. TEETERS. I think the talk about the targets for 1980 isirrelevant. We're done. At most we have four weeks in which tooperate and the reserves will be set with lagged reserve requirements.So it seems to me what we're really talking about is how high we'regoing to let interest rate go between now and the end of the year, andthat's it. I am also strongly of the opinion that rates are alreadytoo high. We have already killed the housing market. We aredepressing the automobile market. We have continued pressure onbusiness fixed investment, and it's to a point where I think it willstall out. I would like to point out to you that the last time we hada federal funds range approximately like this was in February of lastyear and we had a 9-1/2 percent drop in real GNP in the secondquarter. I think the changes in interest rates have influenced agreat deal the pattern [of GNP growth] we got this year. And I don'tthink the staff has done a bad job. I went back and looked at theirfourth quarter-over-fourth quarter projection of February of last yearand they had a decline for the year of about 2 percent. And if theyhave the fourth quarter right now, it's going to be a decline of about1-1/2 percent this year. The pattern was different; the pattern ofinterest rates was not the one anticipated. I think these risinginterest rates have an extraordinarily damping effect on the economyand if we let them go any higher, we're inviting disaster again. Inaddition, we'd be [inviting] a rerun of the great interest rate cycleof 1980 on an economy that is not where it was last February. LastFebruary we were at 85 percent capacity utilization and at 6 percentunemployment. A lot of things were different than they are now. Wehave a relatively severely depressed economy that would be put throughthe wringer again and I think that would be a mistake.Some of you say you're going to take "B" because it's nodifferent from what we did last time. There's a 4 percentage pointincrease in the federal funds rate range associated with "B." It was9 to 15 percent [last month] and the staff is saying "B" is [now]compatible with 13 to 18 percent. I think 18 percent is outrageouslyhigh. On account of the growth in the money supply, we immediatelyrun everything up to the top of the range, usually within a week afterthe Open Market Committee meeting. Consequently, I don't care whatyou do with -the money supply. I do care what you do with the interestrate range. I would put the maximum at 15 percent with maybe a bottomof 11 percent. The borrowing assumption is funny because we determinethe borrowing from the nonborrowed reserve path. By doing anonborrowed reserve path, at least for the next two weeks, wedetermine what the borrowings are going to be. There's a Catch-22game going on here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Ms. Teeters disagrees with the idea of setting targets for 1980 and believes that interest rates are already too high. She argues that the high interest rates have negative effects on the economy and that allowing them to go any higher would be inviting disaster. She also disagrees with the proposed federal funds rate range and argues for a lower maximum rate.


Passage number 316.
MR. WALLICH. We determine the funds rate; that determinesthe borrowing, and that determines the nonborrowed, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a cause and effect relationship between determining the funds rate and its impact on borrowing and nonborrowed funds.


Passage number 317.
-31-11/18/80MS. TEETERS. You have worked it backwards, I think, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement addressing someone named Henry.


Passage number 318.
MR. WALLICH. That's the unspoken sequence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 319.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we have a wide funds rate range,then it's the borrowing assumption that determines the nonborrowedreserve path, not the reverse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the borrowing assumption determines the nonborrowed reserve path when there is a wide funds rate range.


Passage number 320.
MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage in question is not provided, making it impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 321.
 PARTEE and MS. TEETERS. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any disagreement or contention between PARTEE and MS. TEETERS.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement related to Governor Partee.


Passage number 323.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Where we are is $2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Where we are is $2 billion" is a simple statement about a specific amount of money. It does not involve any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 324.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it simply states that Mr. Partee knows something without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 325.
 But we had--MR. AXILROD. The implication of what we were targeting onwas that $1.6 billion in borrowing would emerge out of the week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is discussing a specific amount of borrowing that would emerge out of a week. There is no contention or disagreement being presented.


Passage number 326.
MR. PARTEE. That's what I mean. It came in high for theweek, but we thought we were on a target of $1.6 billion, and that'swhere I would [start] it. If the aggregates are strong, it will go upfrom there. If they are weak, it will stay about there. That's whatI would do--not have an even-handed monetary target, but aim to hit-33-11/18/80those numbers that I mentioned and if growth of the aggregates fallsshort, let the shortfall occur.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement of opinion and suggestion by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 327.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're running awfully late. I don't knowwhether people want to go out and drink some coffee before we finishthis. Let's do that. Then we'll come back and complete thisdiscussion.[Coffee break][Secretary's note: When the meeting resumed after the coffee break, afew comments were missed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are running late and suggesting that they take a coffee break before continuing the discussion. The secretary's note suggests that some comments were missed after the break, but this does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 328.
]MR. BLACK. It seems that way. The first question is: Howmuch confidence can we have in the relationship between the rates ofgrowth in the aggregates and the federal funds range as specified bythe alternatives. Everybody realizes that [estimating thisrelationship] is a very risky business at best and that we probablyask the staff to accomplish the impossible there. The second questionis: What are the risks involved if we miss the paths specified in thealternative we choose, whatever that happens to be. I would considera further miss on the up side to be pretty significant--much more so,of course, if we go with "A," less so if we go with "B," and maybe notso significant if we go with "C." But perhaps the most importantissue of all is the likely effects on inflationary expectations ofwhatever policy option we select. They would be clearly worse under"A." That would involve raising the path for M-1A for the fourthstraight month in the face of overshoots. I looked back and foundthat we had raised the December target figure for M-lA by a total of$5.7 billion over the last three meetings. If we do more of that, itcertainly would not augur well for inflationary psychology.Alternative B would involve not adjusting the target in the face ofsome overshoots and would, of course, be less detrimental toinflationary psychology. I think "C" would work positively [in thatregard], and although I don't think there is any earthly way we couldhit the target as specified by the end of the year, we couldconceivably be within the range for M-1B.In any event, I think it would be better if we were perceivedas working toward a range even if we miss it, as I suspect wenecessarily will. Finally, there is the question of what this impliesfor the 1981 targeting problems, which we've talked about. All ofthese options are going to involve some upward base drift, a problemwith which we have contended for many years. Presumably "C" wouldinvolve less upward drift, although I doubt there is going to be agreat deal of difference. So, I would come out for "C." I wouldn'tobject to widening the federal funds range; I have never objected tothat. I don't like a range anyway, so to cover both "B" and "C" 13 to19 percent would seem good to me. So far as the borrowing figure isconcerned, I would start off where we are now on borrowing. But thenif borrowing deviates from the figure we select initially, I think weought to adjust the nonborrowed reserve target in the oppositedirection by that full amount. In looking at the reasons for missesin the past, I think part of the blame lies with the Committee in nothaving selected the proper range, but in retrospect I believe we havenot been sufficiently active in adjusting our nonborrowed reservestarget to compensate for misses in the borrowing figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mostly consists of the speaker expressing their opinions and preferences on various policy options.


Passage number 329.
-34-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 330.
MR. SCHULTZ. I can be very brief because I agree withGovernor Wallich's and Governor Gramley's arguments and I come outpretty much where Governor Partee is. I think the economy is going toease off considerably; I think inflation is extremely intractable; andI think volatility in interest rates is going to give us a realproblem, so I would not like to see rates go up very much because Idon't want to see them come down very much in the first quarter. Weare going to have a great deal of trouble with this yo-yo effect. Ilike the technique we are using because it has a tendency to getinterest rates to go more rapidly where they appear to need to go inan inflationary environment. But we must use judgment rather thanadhere slavishly to some of these targets or we are going to getourselves in deep trouble. I think we ought to look at the aggregatesthe way Governor Wallich has [suggested] we look at them--through thefirst quarter. So to me something between "A" and "B" makes sense foraggregates targets, but that's not the crucial question; at this pointborrowings and the funds rate are. I would put borrowings at about$1.6 billion and the fed funds range at 13 to 17 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement that expresses agreement with previous arguments and suggests a specific course of action.


Passage number 331.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you have not provided a complete passage or any context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Could you please provide the full passage for analysis?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 332.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, after listening to this dialogue,I wish we had the option of saying none of the above relative to "A,""B," and "C," because there doesn't seem to be a good answer. Broadlyspeaking, the dilemma that we've been faced with for some months hasgotten worse. In a sense, we are still the only game in town in termsof an anti-inflation policy. Despite the election, if one looks atbond yields, inflation expectations haven't gone down. The fact thatthe forward rate on the dollar has actually gone down may indicatethat inflation expectations in the view of foreigners have gottenworse. And while I continue to hope month by month, as does Steve,that these higher interest rates will result in some downward shift inthe demand for money, I see a contrary trend going on. I think we aregoing to experience more of it because the cost of long-term money isso darn high that there is immense incentive on the part of businessesto borrow short--that is, in the commercial paper market or throughbanks--and that drives deposits up. So I expect this recent surge inbusiness loans to continue.As I see it, the really damaging thing to the economy is theheight of long-term interest rates, and I don't see how we are goingto get them down until inflation expectations come down and until thebudget of the new Administration gets sorted out, which is going to bea source of uncertainty. Meanwhile, we have to worry about whetherour monetary growth rates themselves are becoming a source ofinflation expectations, as some of my directors and a good many of theprofessors at our recent academic conference think is the case. Inview of all of this, I think it is too late in the year to aim for"C," which is a meat ax tactic; so the next less damaging [posture]would be to stay pretty much with "B" as Messrs. Morris, Guffey, andsome others have said. I wouldn't want to increase further the rangesthat we are shooting for. Furthermore, I would not be inclined tonarrow the federal funds range, as some people have [suggested]. Ithink 13 to 18 percent is a viable range to stay with, given all theuncertainties that we face.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses skepticism and disagreement with the options presented ("A," "B," and "C") and offers his own views on the situation. He also mentions that some of his directors and professors have a different opinion about the source of inflation expectations, indicating a difference in viewpoints.


Passage number 333.
-35-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage seems to be an incomplete sentence or statement without any context or information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 334.
MR. EASTBURN. The only comment I would like to make aboutthe economy is that I think the Board staff's forecast is inevitablywrong in projecting a flat line beyond the first quarter, but we allrealize that that reflects the uncertainty that we face beyond that.The first-quarter projection may be right, although I must say I amimpressed by how strong the economy has consistently been and howwrong we have consistently been about that strength. What that doesto me is to tend to shorten my sights and make me less concerned aboutwhat may be happening in 1981 and more concerned about looking to theshort term. And even though we can no longer achieve our targets forthe year, I think we ought to stick pretty much with what we had. Sothat brings me to "B." I would not narrow the funds range. We havebeen criticized and will be criticized for erratic interest rates butwe are equally criticized for erratic money growth. And I think thelimitations on the funds rate have had some effect in permitting moneygrowth to exceed our targets. So I would stick with the range that wealready have, do what we can to get within the limits of the targetsfor this year, and start off as low as possible for 1981. I don'tknow what the borrowing figure ought to be. I have written down arange of something like $1 to $1-1/2 billion; I think somewhere inthat area is probably [appropriate].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and views without engaging in any argument or debate with others.


Passage number 335.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is insufficient information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 336.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I am a rather pessimistic guythese days and I couldn't get cheered up any with the discussion herethis morning. I think there is much to what Mr. Partee has said aboutprices and wages, even given fairly strong monetary and fiscalpressures and whatever pressures [come from] substantial unusedresources in the economy. And that means to me that about allmonetary policy can do is to avoid fueling additional inflation. Eventhough we have had what we thought was a fairly tight policy for thelast couple of years it has nevertheless accommodated additionalinflation, so we must be pretty careful to try to avoid that situationcontinuing in 1981. I am not impressed with the idea that we canslowly and gradually wring inflation out of the economy using monetaryand fiscal policy. I see inflation strengthening and I see more andmore people apparently making a very good living out of marketinginflation protection gadgetry and developing what seems to me to bevery high risk loans or uses of credit for that purpose. I read thatas indicating that inflation momentum or expectations are stillstrengthening rather than weakening.On monetary policy, I would think that the surcharge willpretty effectively discourage borrowing by the large banks, so I wouldnot expect high levels of borrowing in the weeks immediately ahead.With respect to the monetary targets and the federal funds rate,alternative B seems to me about as good as one can do in the currentcircumstances. I believe it would be appropriate to hitch on to the"B" aggregate figures the suggestion that they serve as ceilingsrather than midpoints. And I am sorry to share the view that we dohave a fairly near-term end to this recovery that has gotten started,given what needs to be done in terms of monetary and fiscal [policy].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 337.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Doyle, we're glad to have you with ustoday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a statement showing a positive sentiment towards Mr. Doyle and expressing satisfaction with his presence.


Passage number 338.
-36-11/18/80MR. DOYLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There have been twoprominent themes in the discussion so far, and I certainly wouldemphasize that there is some inherent conflict between what to doabout the uncertainties on the one hand and what to do about thecredibility issue on the other. The uncertainties question, asGovernor Partee and others have already pointed out, may be changingfrom that status to something closer to [a real threat] in terms ofthe energy situation. I believe the reaction to movement in eitherdirection on that is difficult to determine. That is, if a changedoes occur or is suggested in either direction, it's hard to say justhow the market or anybody else would react in terms of dealing withthese uncertainties that I don't believe are perceived by the marketsgenerally at the present time. On the credibility side, I mightsuggest that the issue may not be that we have a credibility problembut that we don't have one. In fact, I think the public and marketperception of the Federal Reserve, as someone else has just suggested,is that we are the only game in town and that we are doing the jobright. Therefore, I would not like to see any further slippage fromthe targets that were [adopted] last month. I believe it would have asevere credibility [impact] and would produce some negative reactions.Therefore, I would support alternative B with some slight narrowing ofthe funds range, perhaps to 13 to 17 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 339.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 340.
MR. FORD. I'm disheartened, as everyone is, about thealternatives in front of us. On the inflation front, Paul, everythingwe have discussed and everything we see is disheartening except thepossible outside chance of house prices weakening due to a disaster inthe housing market. That's clearly shaping up in front of us. I feelstrongly that it's too late to try to salvage the year-to-year growthrates in the monetary aggregates because it would require a very sharpadjustment that would be extremely difficult to achieve. So I wouldcome out, for essentially the same reasons Mr. Balles mentioned, infavor of alternative B with the proviso that the aggregate growthtargets be viewed as a maximum. I would not be inclined to narrow therange on the fed funds rate. With regard to what Governor Parteesaid--he threw in something about how we communicate this to the otherregulators--I do think we are headed into a period of very difficulttimes for the thrift institutions. In talking to Jerry Corrigan andother people in different parts of the country, we are now starting tosee some really sharp deterioration in the balance sheets of thriftsall around the country. I am afraid that in the next few months weare going to see [the need for] some fast mergers in that area thatare going to be rather difficult, and I don't know what this Committeecan do about that. That's just another inevitable side effect of thisperiod we are entering. Should we get a crisis in the Middle East,based on the OPEC meetings and consultations around this time, I thinkwe would have to consider reconvening this Committee to restudy ourentire program in light of the experience back in '74 when we wentthrough [an oil crisis] the last time. Overall I come out in favor of"B" as it stands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 341.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided, so it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 342.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would prefer a $1.6 billionborrowing assumption and the specifications of "A." My first instinctwould be a fed funds range of only 13 to 17 percent, but I am worried-37-11/18/80that if things don't go as expected, we might find that the 17 percentupper limit would force the supplying of very large amounts ofreserves, more than the Committee would want. So my instinct would benot to lock ourselves into the 17 percent but make it 13 to 18 percentwith some flexibility in judgment regarding that 17 to 18 percentarea. It seems to me that we ought to try to stay within the 17percent, but if in consultation with the Manager it looks to you asthough that will require supplying more reserves than is advisable,there ought to be sufficient flexibility in the directive for you tomake the judgment to go up to 18 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the upper limit of a fed funds range being set at 17 percent, as they worry it may require supplying more reserves than advisable. They suggest a range of 13 to 18 percent with flexibility for the manager to make a judgment call. This suggests disagreement or conflicting viewpoints about what the appropriate upper limit should be.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 343.
MR. PARTEE. That's consistent, though, with having 13 to 17percent and then providing, as we've done previously, for consultationof the Committee if the 17 percent proves not to be reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is potential contention or disagreement in this passage as Mr. Partee implies that the 17 percent may not be reasonable, suggesting that there may be a disagreement about the percentage.


Passage number 344.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You mean by telephone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 345.
MR. PARTEE. Yes. The directive has that structure. Iwasn't criticizing [your suggestion]; I was just making a point thatwhat you said is consistent with choosing 13 to 17 percent andemphasizing the possible need for consultation, which also goes withwhat Bill said, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee is clarifying his agreement with the suggestion made by someone else. He is not expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 346.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is also some advantage, Chuck,to leaving it at 13 to 18 percent with the Chairman understanding thatthe Committee hoped it would not go beyond 17 percent, simply becausewhen the directive is published the market may overinterpret in anegative way the fact that we narrowed the range. So, strictly forthe directive, I still would favor 13 to 18 percent but with anunderstanding that, if possible, not to go beyond 17 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 347.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's see whether we can reach adecision. There is a fair amount of difference of views on some ofthe specifics but some recognition on practically everybody's part ofsome common concerns, too. On approaches, I would just make twogeneral points. I think what we are seeing now in general terms isthe famous collision between the recovery and monetary targets thatare in some sense too restrictive to permit recovery unless themomentum of inflation declines. I didn't expect to reach [this stage]this early, but here it is. A number of people have commented thatthese targets, just to put it very quickly, lower the limit on theability of the economy to expand. They are going to continue to dothat, I suspect, given all the uncertainties, with targets of the typethat we have until inflation declines. And that's a veryunsatisfactory picture from any perspective, other than sole-mindedconcern about hitting the targets. That's where we are and that'swhere we may be.Somewhat related to that, which has already been mentioned,is that we still have some concern as to how much fluctuation we aregenerating in the money supply figures and interest rates by notrecognizing some natural instability in these data. It's purely amatter of judgment and it's totally unsatisfactory in terms ofreaching specific decisions because, to exaggerate a bit, we areguessing. Let me simply put it that if we bend over backwards to hita target in the short run and find ourselves not making it, we end upwith exactly the opposite problem in a very limited period of time interms of the targets and with some real effects on the economy as time-38-11/18/80passes. And we have unnecessary fluctuations; we may be stuck withthem to a degree but they are not a happy circumstance in which tooperate. But that doesn't give us precise guidance on how to balancethose considerations.As for hitting the growth targets or not hitting the growthtargets--and I can only give you a personal view--I am not asconcerned about that as some people are because I don't think, as I'vesaid before, that these targets are written in heaven. There is a lotof uncertainty in these relationships. I do think we have todemonstrate, and I am satisfied that we have, that we take themseriously. That is important. Whether being precisely in the rangesor slightly outside of them is terribly significant to credibility ornot I think depends in part upon our own attitudes, how we portray it,and how we describe the problems. [To the extent that] there is arecognition of the very real problems that we have, that credibilityproblem is diminished. If we attach what I personally think is undueimportance to absolute precision, obviously the public is also goingto attach more importance to absolute precision than they otherwisewould. In that connection, I would only remind you that most foreigncountries use a range. I believe they all do now. Is there one thatdoesn't, Mr. Truman. I don't know. There used to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is contention and disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that there are differing views and recognizes common concerns, but also expresses dissatisfaction with the current targets and suggests that hitting them may lead to negative consequences. Additionally, the speaker mentions that some people are more concerned about hitting the growth targets than others, indicating differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 348.
MR. TRUMAN. The Swiss don't have a range and the Frenchdon't have a range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents information about the Swiss and French not having a range.


Passage number 349.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The French have been pretty good on theirtargets. The Swiss have varied between growth in M1 of 23 percent oneyear to minus 3 percent the next year to plus 4 percent the followingyear, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provides different information about the growth rates of M1 in France and Switzerland, but does not express any disagreement or contention between the two.


Passage number 350.
MR. TRUMAN. There was a year in between when they didn't tryat all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not showcase any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Truman regarding a specific period of time.


Passage number 351.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But they have not lost their reputationfor prudence and concern in the process.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the reputation for prudence and concern has not been lost, indicating agreement on this point.


Passage number 352.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage or information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the statement "MR. PARTEE". Therefore, the answer is neither yes nor no.


Passage number 353.
 They couldn't have a range--MR. WALLICH. It's a small open economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "They couldn't have a range" is simply followed by an explanation that it is a small open economy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 354.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure, and that's part of the reason. AllI am saying is that in part the public's attitude toward these thingsdepends upon our general behavior, not the precise arithmeticprecision with which we reach the range. Well, that's a philosophicalcomment. We have to reach a decision here.So far as the money supply targets are concerned, I sensethat we are dealing with two somewhat conflicting concerns. One,which I certainly recognize, is that we are in the middle of thequarter. If we were on the schedule that we talked about before, thiswould be the middle-of-the-quarter meeting. We would already have seta quarterly growth target and the inclination would be not to changethat unless there was something very persuasive going on. But wewould consider whether to change it and how to alter our operations.Certainly we have been forced to raise that target repeatedly inrecent months, and one can argue that for purely presentationalpurposes it would be nice to avoid a further change in the target. I-39-11/18/80think there is a lot to be said for that view. The consideration onthe other side was described by Governor Partee: Is that beingrealistic. Is anybody here really proposing the strength of actionand the kind of interest rates that might be necessary in our bestjudgment to reach alternative C--certainly "C" but even "B"--whichimplies from now on [unintelligible]. Is it realistic to think [wecould achieve the target].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are conflicting concerns regarding the money supply targets and the timing of the decision. One concern is to avoid changing the target again for presentational purposes, while another concern is whether it is realistic to achieve the desired target given the necessary actions and interest rates.


Passage number 355.
 I don't doubt that it could happen, butgiven all the uncertainty about the normal relationships that thestaff gives us, which in fact are very erratic but are all we have togo on--MR. MORRIS. But given the run-up in interest rates we havealready had in the last few months, it seems to me entirely possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement followed by a personal opinion or observation.


Passage number 356.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it may be. You can reconcileyourself to that view and that's all right. I don't think the staffwould say that that would be their best judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 357.
MR. MORRIS. I think it's possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply expressing his belief that something is possible.


Passage number 358.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know. Anything is possible here.I agree it is possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses agreement and possibility, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 359.
MR. ROOS. I think some of us looked at it as a very short-range [step] that would avoid our having to jam on the brakes nextyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a personal opinion about considering a certain step as a short-range solution to avoid abrupt actions in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 360.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you could argue that. All I amsaying is that if we took the staff's median judgment and reflectedthe distillation of assembled wisdom, recognizing that there is a hugerange of uncertainty around it, I think one would have to say [itmeans]: Let's really bang it now. One could argue that that's a goodidea because it's going to save us a lot of problems in the future.On the other hand, a lot of concern was expressed that really bangingit now is just going to complicate our problem in the very short run.I think that kind of consideration would lead one in substance towardalternative A. If I take seriously what I think I am hearing incomments we have had about the interest rate range and the borrowingassumptions and all the rest--that people don't want to go out thereand really bang it--that leaves me in something of a dilemma because Ithink the Committee is in something of a dilemma. It doesn't excludethe possibility that we could hit the targets because we just don'tknow these relationships well enough. And there is the argument thatit's better not to change things and mislead anybody as to our realintentions. I am not sure, but I believe the Committee members aremostly between "A" and "B." I haven't counted and I am not sure theyall said precisely [what their preference was]. But that pretty welldescribes the considerations. We are somewhat artificiallyconstrained because we are talking about a period that only has sixweeks more to run. If we were not right at the end of the year--if wehad looked at it from the perspective of the next four months insteadof the next six weeks--and were somewhat worried about how this looksin terms of the targets for the year, I don't know whether peoplewould say something like "A" is reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting two different perspectives, one arguing for "banging it now" and the other expressing concern that it will complicate the problem in the short run. The speaker is uncertain and acknowledges that the Committee members may have different preferences.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 361.
MR. WINN. But don't we have to consider the trajectoryeffect on 1981. To take the end of the year as the horizon withregard to where we want to be I think is the wrong [approach].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Winn, disagrees with the approach of considering the end of the year as the horizon for where they want to be.


Passage number 362.
-40-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I am suggesting in part.I would guess that people might say "A" would be all right if we werelooking through the whole first quarter of next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or suggestion made by the speaker.


Passage number 363.
 I don't knowwhether that's true or not, but I--MR. PARTEE. Abstracting from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that they don't know whether something is true or not, and they proceed to share their own perspective or response by saying "but I -" before being interrupted by Mr. Partee. Therefore, there is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 364.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what you mean by yourcomment. I think what a lot of people are worried about, Willis, isthat by banging it really hard now, we're going to look foolishly lowinstead of foolishly high in the beginning of the first quarter oreven in December. Now, one may think the economy is very strong--andI think it may have a little [more] momentum right at the moment thanthe staff implies, but I don't doubt that all the risks are for adecline in the time perspective of now through the end of the firstquarter. But we may find the fourth quarter numbers are a littlehigher than the staff is suggesting, which further complicates thisdilemma. We'll see just where you want to go, but I also detectedsome concern about the interest rate level expressed by a good manypeople. Consistent with what we're doing, I wouldn't like to getdeliberately in an area where we have to work against an interest rateconstraint because that changes the tone of our actions, but theborrowings have implications for that. A $1.6 billion level ofborrowings or thereabouts has been mentioned by a few people. That'slower than it has been, inadvertently or not, most recently. Thatseems not inappropriate to me, if we don't want to put a lot ofadditional pressure on the market because we just had a discount ratechange. And in a sense, by moving the initial borrowing assumptiondown slightly, it probably will not have much of an easing effect onthe market. But it prevents the discount rate move from beingamplified and reverberating through the market excessively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions on the current economic situation and potential risks, but there is no direct disagreement or conflicting viewpoints with anyone else.


Passage number 365.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I mentioned that number becausethat was implied in the week's figure. But we tried to be clear tothe Committee that in thinking this through we had assumed in theBluebook, for whatever constellation of pressures you are consideringon bank reserves, that with this discount rate move you'd have tolower borrowing relative to what it had been. So in some sense that$1.6 billion was before the discount rate action; a level of borrowingconsistent with that $1.6 billion after the discount rate action wouldbe somewhat lower. We'd put in a notional $1.5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining a technical calculation and there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 366.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To be consistent with "A," in effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that something needs to be consistent with "A" in order to have an effect.


Passage number 367.
MR. AXILROD. That's right. But even you just said youwanted to start at the recent level of borrowing. If you factored inthe discount rate action, that would have to be a bit lower. That'sjust a technical [comment].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod is simply pointing out a technical detail regarding the recent level of borrowing and the potential impact of factoring in the discount rate action.


Passage number 368.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If your conceptual level of borrowingbefore the discount rate action was $1.6 billion, it should be lowernow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply suggesting that the conceptual level of borrowing should be lower now after a discount rate action.


Passage number 369.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. The response "That's right" simply affirms or agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 370.
MR. GRAMLEY. How much lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a question asked by Mr. Gramley.


Passage number 371.
-41-11/18/80MR. GUFFEY. The fact of the matter is that borrowing hasbeen higher than $1.6 billion. Over the 4-week period it has beenabout $1-3/4 billion; it has only been $1.6 billion for the week thatwe're in now. So what we're really looking at in terms of the recentborrowing level is somewhat higher than that $1.6 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents facts about borrowing levels without any conflict or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 372.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it has been running somewhat higherthan $1.6 billion. What has the market done after your operationsthis morning, Peter. Where is the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply asking for information about the market and the federal funds rate.


Passage number 373.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It pretty well held those opening gainsafter the money supply numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about the opening gains after the money supply numbers.


Passage number 374.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did the federal funds rate do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking a question about the federal funds rate without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 375.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Funds trading opened at about 17 percent andwent up to 17-1/2 percent--this was shortly after 11 a.m.--and we wentin and have offered some overnight repurchase agreements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the actions taken by Mr. Sternlight regarding funds trading.


Passage number 376.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you don't know what has happened sincethen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 377.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I know that after we went in to do the RPs,the market strengthened very slightly further, but not enough to benoticeable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the market without any contradictory information.


Passage number 378.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether you're suggesting,Steve, that consistent with what I and other people were trying to sayin concept--I lighted on $1.6 billion as a few people did--we shouldreally be saying $1.5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement of uncertainty or doubt.


Passage number 379.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we had suggested $1.5 billion for "A" and$1-3/4 billion for "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is just a statement of suggested amounts for "A" and "B" without any indication of disagreement or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 380.
"MR. PARTEE. Well, $1.6 billion is right in between.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement between parties.


Passage number 381.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In a sense, what a lot of people seem tobe talking about is that they want to keep "B" for the reasonsuggested--that they don't want to show a further change in what we'reaiming at. But we were talking more about the specifications of "A"with a higher federal funds rate on the low side of its range anyway.Let me just get reactions to this proposal: The "B" specificationsand, taking account of Steve's comment, $1.5 billion or thereabouts onborrowing, and 13 to 17 percent for the funds rate, which a number ofpeople mentioned for that, and a hope that they are consistent despitean analysis that they might not be.Steve has also suggested the idea--it sounds awfullycomplicated but it just is complicated at this stage of the game--ofwriting something into the directive that we are looking toward thefirst quarter, in effect. We could certainly write it into the policyrecord, anyway. We're thinking of "B" here on how we set the reservepath and would repeat the targets that we had last time, which arethose in "B." And we'd put in some phrase that we recognize thatthere isn't much time between now and the end of the year to get on aspecific path. But we would in a way reverse what we've said [in thepast] if we adopted "A;" we'd say the Committee thought that a smallovershoot would be tolerable, provided that growth in the aggregates-42-11/18/80was at a pace consistent with more moderate growth next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is primarily discussing different proposals and considering their implications, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict among the speakers.


Passage number 382.
 I don'tknow whether that language--MR. PARTEE. We could say "in the early months of next year,"or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting an alternative wording for a statement, without expressing any opposition or argument.


Passage number 383.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The early months of next year, yes. Now,what that leaves out is that some overshoot from the specifications of"B" or any of these alternatives, if it developed, would be tolerablein the short run without our aggressively moving against it. I don'tknow how much you would work that language in, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and discussing the possibility of tolerating some deviation from the specifications in the short run.


Passage number 384.
MR. ROOS. Didn't several proponents of "B," Mr. Chairman,also suggest that the aggregate figures in "B" be viewed as the toplimits and that we should not tolerate an overshoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the suggestion made by proponents of "B" regarding the interpretation of aggregate figures.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a conceptual difficultythere. I am sure that you are right, but sometimes those same peoplesaid we should not set out now to bang up the borrowing level and bangup interest rates. That's the inconsistency with which we aredealing. Verbally they may have said "Don't tolerate an overshoot,"but they didn't seem to be supporting the strength of action thatwould be needed to insure against an overshoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement or inconsistency in the views of different people. Some people believed that borrowing levels and interest rates should not be increased, while others believed that strong action was necessary to prevent an overshoot.


Passage number 386.
MR. ROOS. In considering these figures, which are for thenext six weeks--and I recognize that short-term fluctuations in moneyprobably don't have a very real effect on output and the economy--arewe overlooking the fact that the first six weeks of this quarter camein quite high. You speak of jamming the brakes on too hard with "C;"wouldn't that really be counterbalancing an almost run-away situationover the first six weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply raising a question and seeking clarification on whether the current figures are overlooking the high performance in the first six weeks of the quarter.


Passage number 387.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no question, growth in theaggregates was very high in the first six weeks; so are interestrates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 388.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, what would happen under thesespecifications if, in fact, we came out from now to the end of theyear with what I would consider to be a very fine performance of themonetary aggregates, i.e., no change in M-1A. If M-1A were completelyflat and let us suppose that in fact $1.5 billion in borrowing wereconsistent with the specs of "B," then what we would end up doing Ithink--if I'm wrong, maybe Steve or Peter could enlighten me--would betaking actions deliberately to push interest rates up further. Andinstead of a federal funds rate of 15 percent we would end up with 17percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley expresses a different opinion than Steve or Peter. He believes that if M-1A remains flat and borrowing is consistent with the specifications, deliberate actions would push interest rates up further. This implies that he does not agree with the actions suggested by Steve or Peter.


Passage number 389.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve can correct me, but my sense of itis that if we started out at the borrowing level that we're talkingabout and there were no change in the money supply from now on, weekby week, we would come out very close to "B," wouldn't we, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement seeking clarification or confirmation from Steve.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 390.
MR. AXILROD. Actually M-1A would come out at "A." That is,the average for the week of the 5th and what we expect for the 12thcomes out to a level for M-1A of $387.9 billion, and that's theDecember level that's built into "A." To achieve the specs of "B"would require a drop in M-1A from here on in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that achieving the specifications of "B" would require a drop in M-1A from the current level, suggesting a difference of opinion or conflicting views on the appropriate course of action.


Passage number 391.
-43-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You only get a $.3 billion drop inDecember with no increase in the weekly figures from here on out.Aren't you assuming some increase [in those weekly figures] in that"A" [alternative].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact that there will only be a $0.3 billion drop in December with no increase in the weekly figures. The last statement is a question seeking confirmation or clarification rather than expressing disagreement.


Passage number 392.
MR. AXILROD. I was giving you the December average level forM-1A; it would be $387.9 billion. That's virtually no change from theNovember average level, and the first two weeks of [December] areroughly at the November average level. So there would be no change,in effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the December average level for M-1A without expressing any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 393.
MR. ROOS. Does anyone view M-1A as a serious aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question.


Passage number 394.
MR. PARTEE. I do. I still think it's the most important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion without any opposing views or arguments presented.


Passage number 395.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 396.
 Even though the change has occurred toward abroadening--MR. PARTEE. Sure, because I can't read M-1B with all thoseNOW accounts being created.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement because Mr. Partee expresses frustration with the change happening towards "abroadening" and the creation of NOW accounts.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 397.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble is, Larry, that they're bothwrong. You should average the two. It gives you a rougher "rightanswer," as a matter of fact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement or contention between two people, as it states that "they're both wrong." The suggestion to average the two indicates a differing opinion on how to find the correct answer.


Passage number 398.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, on this matter of whether or notto have some maximum: If we took something like "B" or a littlehigher or something between "B" and "A" for the aggregates paths andtreated them as a max--if for no other reason than having that be ourconsultation point rather than perhaps the federal funds rate--I don'tthink those things have to be incompatible. It comes down to ajudgment as to how much of an impact the things we already have donewill have. I think it might be possible to structure something likethat, which would just put somewhat greater weight [on theaggregates], even if merely for consultation purposes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a suggestion or idea.


Passage number 399.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're having a consultation right now.Out best estimate is that we are above "B." If you want to choose"B," we are consulting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply informing the listener that they are currently having a consultation and providing their best estimate. They also offer the option to choose option "B" after consulting.


Passage number 400.
MR. CORRIGAN. I'm saying in terms of this maximum, [use] "B"or something a little higher than "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. It is a statement or suggestion made by Mr. Corrigan.


Passage number 401.
"MR. PARTEE. We could say "A" is what we project and "A"would be what we plot. It means essentially zero for the rest of theyear. And we'd accept any shortfall; but if it rose up above that, wewould react strongly against it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that "A" is the projected value and any value below that is acceptable, but any value above that would be strongly opposed.


Passage number 402.
MR. CORRIGAN. In a sense I think that's the key because ifit turns out that we get a couple more strong weeks, then all of asudden we're in a position that we're not even realistically lookingat [an outcome close to] "A" and then we're really in the soup.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing a personal opinion or observation.


Passage number 403.
MR. PARTEE. That's right. And that's a real possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 404.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are realistically looking at "A" now.That is the projection. Now, it's an extremely uncertain projection,and I don't attach a lot of weight to it, but the experts say that's-44-11/18/80where we are. The range of uncertainty around it is very wide. Thesense of what I have proposed, just distilling some of your comments,is that for visual reasons, which are not unimportant, we will stickwith "B" [for the ranges] and hope growth comes out at "B," but actsomewhat like "A" at the moment. That leaves us with the question ofhow strongly we react if "A" gets confirmed or, worse yet, if growthgoes higher than the specifications of "A." That's the sense of it ifwe adopt these specifications; and it's reflected in part in thefederal funds range. Obviously, we have to consult if we hit [thelimit on] that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that "A" is the projection, but also expresses uncertainty and does not attach much weight to it. They propose sticking with "B" and hoping for growth, but also question how strongly they should react if "A" is confirmed or if growth exceeds the specifications of "A." This suggests that there is disagreement or uncertainty about whether to adhere to "A" or consider alternative actions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 405.
MR. WALLICH. You said earlier that we ought to think moreabout the deviations from the targets and the response to that thanabout the absolute targets, and I thought that very persuasive. So animportant ingredient of this decision seems to be where do we go withthe funds rate if [monetary growth] falls below or goes above. Now,one way of not capping but flooring the rate on the down side would beto set a rather high [level for the lower] limit, and I suggested 14percent. Another might be to say accept a shortfall in theaggregates. I am not quite sure what that implies in terms of thefunds rate, really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is disagreement or contention in the passage because Mr. Wallich suggests setting a high lower limit for the funds rate (14 percent), while another option is accepting a shortfall in the aggregates. This suggests different views on how to handle monetary growth deviations and what the appropriate response should be.


Passage number 406.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure what it implies in terms of[that rate but] there is a relationship. What it implies is thatwe're pretty slow about changing the nonborrowed path to make up forany decline in borrowing. That's what it specifically implies, whichin turn slows down any decline in the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is unsure about the implications of a certain rate, but they provide an explanation that is not challenged or contradicted.


Passage number 407.
MR. PARTEE. It might bring down the funds rate a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 408.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any specific information or context that could imply contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 409.
 It would come down some if we had a reallybig shortfall, but--MS. TEETERS. I strongly object to pegging that rate at 14percent. We have let it run up way above what we expected a monthago; and if you're going to play that game, Henry, you have to be ableto play it on the down side, too. A rate of 14 percent is justridiculous in this economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters strongly objects to pegging the rate at 14 percent and considers it ridiculous in the current economy.


Passage number 410.
MR. WALLICH. After taxes fourteen is negative in real termsfor those people who pay taxes. I am being told that there are manypeople who don't pay taxes and take the standard deduction or have noprofits, so one has to take both things into account. I think therates are almost there but not quite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is discussing the impact of taxes on individuals and acknowledging that some people may not pay taxes or have profits, both of which need to be considered when discussing the rates. However, he expresses the belief that the rates are almost at the desired level but not quite.


Passage number 411.
MS. TEETERS. Oh, baloney. Why shouldn't the securityholders have a decline in real income, too. Everybody else has.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing an opinion by questioning why security holders should not experience a decline in real income like everyone else. However, no opposing view or debate is presented.


Passage number 412.
MR. PARTEE. We've had this discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The statement by Mr. Partee is presented as a simple statement of fact or acknowledgment of a previous discussion.


Passage number 413.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's clear that people in generalterms are willing to [tolerate] some shortfall from whatever target weadopt, without moving very aggressively [on the funds rate]. I don'twant to pin that rate at 14 percent at this point, but I would be slowto react on that side under our normal operating procedures. If themarket really thought the money supply was coming in low, we would geta big psychological effect in the market that would move interestrates. But we would drag in changing our paths. I think what is at-45-11/18/80issue is how much we drag on the up side. If we set these kinds ofspecifications, I would sense--without counting the people who did nottalk too specifically, and many people did not--that there is noeagerness to whack it too hard if growth comes in above the ranges.We're going to get some reaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and opinions on the topic, without mentioning any opposing views or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 414.
MR. MORRIS. Would you define "whack it too hard".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a question asking for a definition or clarification.


Passage number 415.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a technical term. Let me say, justin round numbers, that we start at $1.5 billion [in borrowings]. Youknow, precisely what has happened after we argued interminably in thelast two meetings about whether the target should be one percentagepoint more or less, is that within a week, or literally a few days,the next money supply figure that came in was over anything we weretalking about. So we moderately whacked it, I would say. We raisedthe net borrowed reserves, we lowered the reserve path by $100 millionor so, which was enough, and we probably overshot the reduction alittle. It was enough to have a very noticeable effect on the market.Growth in the next week came in pretty high, I think perhaps bycoincidence. If it came in high [in the week ahead], let's say, butmore moderately high than those numbers, maybe we wouldn't do anythingfor a week to see whether it was confirmed the next week. If it camein very high, we'd probably react but more mildly than we did theprevious two times.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing a decision that was made and the actions taken in response to a specific situation. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 416.
MR. PARTEE. That is, we would end up not adjusting thenonborrowed reserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests that not adjusting the nonborrowed reserve path would lead to a particular outcome, which implies a disagreement or contention with the current approach or proposal.


Passage number 417.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it came in only slightly or moderatelyabove the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states a condition or possibility.


Passage number 418.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, we might begin to get some tightening inthe market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there might be some tightening in the market.


Passage number 419.
MR. ROOS. Are you saying that we bias it to tolerate anovershoot more than an undershoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply asking for clarification or confirmation about a particular bias.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 420.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think we're saying the opposite ofthat. We're very tolerant of an undershoot. What I am trying to pindown is how tolerant we are of an overshoot. I think the generalsentiment is that we're going to be less tolerant of an overshoot thanwe are of undershoots. But should we be tolerant at all of anovershoot is the question or do we react very quickly. My dilemma isthat if we're really not tolerant at all of an overshoot, we ought tobe whacking it right now, which is not what people said. So on howtolerant we are of an overshoot, I suppose what we're saying is thatwe'd be fairly tolerant right at the moment [up to the specificationsof] alternative A. If it got above alternative A, we'd beprogressively less tolerant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is questioning whether or not they should be tolerant of an overshoot and expressing their dilemma about whether they should react quickly or be more lenient. This indicates a contention or disagreement within the speaker's thoughts.


Passage number 421.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'd rather consult if the funds rate got over17 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests a preferred course of action or preference but does not involve any conflict or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 422.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whether the funds rate gets over 17percent or not depends upon how tolerant we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "depends upon how tolerant we are" implies that there is potential for disagreement or differing levels of tolerance in regards to the funds rate reaching over 17 percent. Different individuals or groups may have varying opinions on whether such an increase is acceptable or desirable.


Passage number 423.
MS. TEETERS. It's already at 17 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of a percentage.


Passage number 424.
-46-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.SPEAKER(.). Well, that's the point I was trying to express.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that the statement made by the other person is correct and expressing agreement or understanding.


Passage number 425.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure we can escape this problem bysaying we're going to consult next week. I'm trying to consult rightnow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about whether they can solve the problem by waiting until next week to consult and they are indicating their intention to consult immediately.


Passage number 426.
MR. FORD. Tony Solomon addressed that. What's wrong withSolomon's approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 427.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Solomon's approach is fine, let's take it.Let us proceed. The funds rate is already in his area for consulting.I am consulting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses approval and agreement with Solomon's approach and indicates a desire to proceed with utilizing his consulting services.


Passage number 428.
MR. PARTEE. Well, what do you want to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. It is a simple question asked by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 429.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you want to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking for the speaker's preferences or desires. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 430.
 That's preciselythe--MR. SCHULTZ. That's the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states "That's the problem."


Passage number 431.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's not put it off until next week.Here we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement or suggestion, there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 432.
MR. SCHULTZ. I don't know. Chuck, what do you want to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Schultz is simply expressing uncertainty and asking for input from Chuck.


Passage number 433.
MR. WALLICH. I think we ought to go slowly. I differentiatebetween 14 and 17 percent, and I would hesitate to go above that.Let's look toward next quarter and try to get on a [path] that willget us back on track. Then we will [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about going slowly and setting a certain limit, but there is no active disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 434.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me repeat: We put forward the "B"specifications; we put down a funds range of 13 to 17 percent; we putdown a borrowing number of $1.5 billion at the moment; we don't doanything except just what we're saying here at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply restating and clarifying their previous statements without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 435.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then we'll miss "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that "we'll miss" something, without providing any further information.


Passage number 436.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether we'll miss "B" ornot. There is a lot of uncertainty. The staff tells us we're likelyto miss "B." We understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and acknowledging that the staff has informed them that they are likely to miss "B." The statement does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 437.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's what I mean. Taking thestaff's view, we'll miss "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 438.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We understand that. We're misspecified inthat sense. We're hoping that if the money supply comes in highagainst their current projections in the next week or two, we're goingto increase that borrowing level. I can't be perfectly specific abouthow much we're going to increase it; we haven't got a formula forrelating the borrowing level precisely to a new estimate of the moneysupply. I am saying that if it comes in significantly higher thanthat, we'd probably move it by $100 million, but we wouldn't move itby more than that unless [the money supply] was enormously higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are misspecified and hoping to increase the borrowing level if the money supply comes in higher than projected. There is no conflicting viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 439.
MR. AXILROD. Borrowing would rise in any event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 440.
-47-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, borrowing would rise in anyevent. We're talking about whether we reduce the nonborrowedreserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 441.
MR. ROOS. What is the objective of that nuance. I'm alittle lost. I'm not asking that in a critical way. Why are we nottaking straight "B".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Roos, admits that he is a little lost and confused about the situation but adds that he is not asking the question in a critical way.


Passage number 442.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want to get a sense from the Committee.I'm not talking in numbers that will turn out to be somewhatmeaningless if we get new figures. I want to know how hard theCommittee is willing to [resist an overshoot]. We're talking about a20 percent federal funds rate if these numbers really come in high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking information and expressing their desire to understand the Committee's willingness to resist an overshoot. They mention the possibility of a 20 percent federal funds rate, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 443.
 Itake it you're not--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but that's not your proposal.This is for 20 percent; yours is for 17 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the other person's statement but clarifies that it does not align with their proposal.


Passage number 444.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now. And 17 percent is barely marginalnow. The presumption is that if we have a $1.5 billion borrowinglevel immediately, it will come down from 17 percent. But almost anyovershoot from what we now expect is going to force the consultationyou're all talking about a couple of weeks down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential outcomes of a borrowing level and the need for consultation.


Passage number 445.
MR. CORRIGAN. If we had a $2 billion increase in the moneysupply next week, all of these numbers presumably would be out thewindow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a hypothetical scenario without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 446.
MR. FORD. Yes, but if we put a 17 percent cap on the fedfunds rate, that almost guarantees--I mean it could be happeningbefore we get out of this room.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is simply expressing his belief or prediction that if a 17 percent cap is put on the fed funds rate, it is very likely to happen quickly.


Passage number 447.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am assuming that the present situationis tolerable. We'll wait a week or so to see whether it comes down.If it doesn't, we will have to consult again in a week or two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the use of words like "assuming" and "consult again." The speaker is simply stating their intention to wait and reassess the situation if it does not improve.


Passage number 448.
MR. ROOS. That means that for a week we'll supply money tooquickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that money will be supplied quickly for a week.


Passage number 449.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether it's too quickly ornot. All I'm saying is that we only know that ex post, Larry. We'llknow whether it was too quickly or too little along about next March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their uncertainty about whether something is happening too quickly or not, and mentioning that they will only know for certain after a future event (next March).


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 450.
MR. ROOS. I was all set in the spirit of Thanksgiving andgenerosity to move from "C" to "B," but this whacky proposal bothersme.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker refers to the proposal as "whacky" which implies that they do not agree with or support it.


Passage number 451.
MR. FORD. It's not whacky; it's semi-whacky.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford states that something is "semi-whacky," suggesting that it is not completely crazy but rather somewhat unusual or eccentric.


Passage number 452.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 453.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I couldn't vote for "B" as it stands. Iwould vote for "B" as you suggested it--that is, if we don't reallymean the specs of "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 
Explanation: The speaker mentions that they couldn't vote for option "B" as it currently stands, suggesting there is a disagreement or contention with the current specifications of option "B".


Passage number 454.
"MR. GRAMLEY. Should we instruct the staff to calculate thenonborrowed reserve path accordingly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for the staff to calculate the nonborrowed reserve path.


Passage number 455.
-48-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [From what] I observed, a good many peoplecame right to that conclusion. But there is enough difference so thatI'm not sure I can see a majority anyplace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there is disagreement among people and that the speaker is unsure of a majority opinion.


Passage number 456.
MR. WALLICH. I'd be willing to go to 17 percent [for theupper limit of the funds rate range] provided the 13 goes to 14. Myconcern is more with the lower limit than the upper limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their willingness to adjust the upper limit of the funds rate range, but their concern lies more with the lower limit.


Passage number 457.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it isn't going to happen. You have noworries, Henry, between now and the middle of December on how lowinterest rates are going to go. The worry is in the first or secondquarter of next year. And I think the higher we put interest ratesnow, the greater the danger is that by the second quarter economicactivity is going to be in a nice steep decline and interest rates aregoing to be falling like a stone. We're going to be chasing the moneysupply. The way to keep out of this is, as the Chairman says, to notwhack it too much now, to let things settle down. We've gone a longway. And we have gone a long, long way just since October. We'veincreased short-term interest rates by something like 2-1/2 to 3percentage points in a month. In a month. We've increased long-terminterest rates by a percentage point or so, a bit less for mortgagerates. Those are enormous increases by historical standards. We arereally resisting money growth. I think the Chairman is quite right inthat. We're showing our determination. And we have let interestrates move through swings since the summer, since recovery began, thatare just totally unprecedented. Let's wait and see what happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is discussing the current state of interest rates and expressing agreement with the Chairman's approach.


Passage number 458.
MR. ROOS. Lyle, have we resisted money growth, though, to anextent that would have a beneficial effect on reducing inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question asked by Mr. Roos to Lyle, seeking confirmation about their efforts to resist money growth in order to reduce inflation.


Passage number 459.
MR. GRAMLEY. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is unintelligible.


Passage number 460.
]MR. SCHULTZ. Over the long run it will. That's a long time,Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Schultz simply states that it will take a long time for something to happen.


Passage number 461.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me see if people think we can reachsome kind of consensus around stating "B" and in some sense adoptingthe specifications of "A" because of a feeling that they may proveconsistent over time and that we shouldn't anticipate theirinconsistency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the possibility of finding consensus and adopting certain specifications based on the belief that they will remain consistent over time.


Passage number 462.
 I suppose that is the analysis that--MR. MORRIS. But the reserve path is going to be drawn on"B." Is that what you're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or clarification of what the speaker understands or believes.


Passage number 463.
MR. SCHULTZ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 464.
 Well, the reserve path is drawn on borrowing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The path is in a sense drawn on "B" butwith a starting point on borrowing which the staff tells us in theirbest judgment is more consistent with "A." But we're overriding [thestaff's judgment on] that in a sense. The changes from then on wouldbe consistent with "B." Let me just finish this. Again, let me tryto get some degree of consensus for 13 to 17 percent. I think Lyle isprobably right that we're not going to hit the 13 in the next month.I recognize that we're at the 17 right now. Implicitly by citing thatkind of target, we are accepting the current level of market rates.We'd accept it fluctuating even slightly higher for a few days in thethought that the specification for the borrowing will probably bringit at least slightly lower. If it doesn't, we will have to consult-49-11/18/80because [our specifications] will be inconsistent. But we'll let thatgo for a week or so. We will react quite sluggishly to shortfalls.We will react less sluggishly to overruns, but without enormousaggressiveness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different options and potential outcomes, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 465.
 We don't have a formula for--MR. BLACK. That's whacking it lightly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement without any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 466.
MR. MORRIS. I don't think 17 percent is whacking it lightly,though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is simply stating his opinion that 17 percent is not a small or insignificant amount.


Passage number 467.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're right there now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "We're right there now" simply indicates that the speaker is currently in a particular place or situation without implying any opposing viewpoints or conflict.


Passage number 468.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, but we've only been there for a couple ofdays.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact that they have only been there for a couple of days.


Passage number 469.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "That's right" is an affirmation or agreement with a previous statement. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 470.
MR. STERNLIGHT. What I might say about the 17 or 17-1/2percent that we are getting today is that I don't see our approach asaccepting it. We are putting in reserves. I regard that very highrate of yesterday and today as something of an aberration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply expressing his opinion and stating his perspective on the high interest rate.


Passage number 471.
 I wouldthink, given what we're aiming for, that it ought to be getting downmore than--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what we're assuming now. Butyou're basically operating on the reserve path, as I understand it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a thought and seeking confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 472.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, but there are enough uncertainties inthat reserve path that we feel this is one of those occasions that wejust have to use a little discretion around that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Sternlight is simply acknowledging that there are uncertainties in the reserve path and suggesting the use of discretion.


Passage number 473.
MR. WINN. What do you consider to be the normal rate at thistime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for an opinion or assessment.


Passage number 474.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I would expect it to be more like 15percent, given the borrowing level of $1.6 billion that we've beenaiming at this week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about an expected borrowing level.


Passage number 475.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could talk about mild [adjustments in]quantifications or whatever. Does that general pattern represent alegitimate consensus. Can I have a show of hands on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 476.
MR. PARTEE. How many would accept it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely asking a question about how many people would accept something.


Passage number 477.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I'm asking whether it's essentially[acceptable], without getting into every last refinement: Is thisacceptable, with the explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking a question and does not contain any statements or arguments that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 478.
MR. ALTMANN. Seven.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that someone named Mr. Altmann has seven of something, without any indication of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 479.
MR. SCHULTZ. That's better than you usually get on the firsttry. [Now] it's eight or nine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing satisfaction with the current situation, indicating that it is better than usual.


Passage number 480.
MR. ALTMANN. Eight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states that "MR. ALTMANN" found eight.


Passage number 481.
MR. ROOS. Instead of starving us into submission, you'vewhacked us into submission.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 482.
-50-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It appears that I am as reasonably closeas I can get to a consensus. I don't know if there is any refinementthat will conceivably increase this number. Henry is worried about 14percent on the lower end. I am not sure whether that's operationallysignificant or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both the speaker and Henry are expressing uncertainty and doubt about a particular percentage, but there is no active disagreement or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 483.
MR. SCHULTZ. I think you did very well. You lost Henry andNancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I think you did very well" indicates that the speaker is pleased with the person's performance, while the mention of losing Henry and Nancy suggests that they are no longer part of the group or team. However, this does not necessarily imply disagreement or contention in the context of the passage.


Passage number 484.
 And that's about as good as you can--MR. WALLICH. Why not do it my way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "And that's about as good as you can" is an agreement with a previous point, and "Why not do it my way" is a suggestion without contradicting or opposing the previous statement.


Passage number 485.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll tell you. Part of the reason,Henry, to put it baldly, is that it upsets a lot of people's doctrinalviews to have [the range] that narrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opinions. It is simply providing an explanation for why a certain range is narrow.


Passage number 486.
MR. SCHULTZ. You better vote before you lose somebody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply advising someone to vote before they potentially lose someone.


Passage number 487.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Let's vote." It is simply a suggestion or call to action for a group decision-making process.


Passage number 488.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states the name "MR. ALTMANN" without providing any further context or information.


Passage number 489.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters NoGovernor Wallich YesPresident Winn NoIt's 10 for--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, "10-4" means the meeting is over.Let me say for all its difficulty, I think we were concentrating moreon the right variables today. And it was helpful to me. We have someunderlying problems that aren't going to go away. A number of peoplemade comments, which I think are understandable, about whether thewhole process of gradualism makes sense. I just don't think that's anissue that we can decide at this meeting. Nor, indeed, is it an issuethat is up to the Federal Reserve itself because we're not going todeviate successfully from what has been termed gradualism without aneffort by the government right across the board, of which we wouldhave to be part.When I speak of collisions next year, I think you ought to beaware, and I'm sure you are, of the potential for the Federal Reserveto be left out there hanging alone in extremely unsatisfactoryeconomic circumstances with expectations, deliberately [encouraged] ornot, of what we can do about inflation through monetary policy alonemuch overdrawn. And when policies are not a success, there will be aninclination for people to say that somehow inflation would havedisappeared if we'd been 1/2 percentage point within the targetinstead of 1/2 percentage point outside the target or if we hadn't hada big fluctuation downward in the first quarter and upward in thesecond quarter or whatever. That is a conclusion that I don't think-51-11/18/80bears much relationship to reality. Nonetheless, we're going to beextremely vulnerable, particularly if we feed that impressionourselves that somehow we're going to do it all alone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The chairman and most of the individuals mentioned agree on the issues being discussed.


Passage number 490.
MR. BAUGHMAN. I would think, Mr. Chairman--and I presumethis is going on or will go on--that it would be desirable to get thenew President to commit his credibility as early as possible toattacking inflation for the purpose of trying to erode somewhat thepossibility that we will be standing out there alone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Baughman expressing his opinion on the importance of getting the new President to commit to attacking inflation early on.


Passage number 491.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The danger that I see, and I put it verycrudely, is that everybody will be committed to an attack on inflationbut it's entirely up to the Federal Reserve to perform.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the author's view and concern about the possibility of everyone being committed to attacking inflation, with the responsibility falling solely on the Federal Reserve to achieve this goal.


Passage number 492.
MR. PARTEE. That won't hurt. We've already been there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee suggesting that going to a particular place will not cause any harm because they have already been there.


Passage number 493.
MR. BALLES. I have a hunch that our Horatio at the bridgeact isn't really going to change unless or until the size of thatbudget deficit comes down, however it may be done. Until then, we'reunder awful pressure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing the speaker's hunch and opinion about the situation.


Passage number 494.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is one major element. There are alot of other elements in the inflationary picture. Don't forget,there are people out there who are approaching this from one point ofview, which at the extreme--Mr. Corrigan ran into this the other day--is that the budgetary deficit doesn't make the least bit ofdifference. And other policies don't make the least bit ofdifference. Inflation is purely a monetary phenomenon. And if theFederal Reserve would only get its act straightened out, it wouldpretty much disappear in 12 months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents different perspectives on the cause of inflation without expressing disagreement or debate between them.


Passage number 495.
MR. BAUGHMAN. But I think that's a pretty small group.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Baughman's opinion about a small group.


Passage number 496.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They're very vocal, Ernie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that "They're very vocal" without indicating any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 497.
MR. BAUGHMAN. I know it's a very vocal group but I thinkit's pretty small.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion about a group being small and vocal.


Passage number 498.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in one sense, it's a small group.I'm not sure it's an uninfluential group. And when things don't gowell, there is a certain irresistible political temptation to say thatthat small group was right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that acknowledges the influence and potential political temptation associated with a small group.


Passage number 499.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the actual passage provided, it is not possible to determine the topic or specific points of disagreement.


Passage number 500.
MR. CORRIGAN. But another thing, too, is that the FederalReserve in its own way has done a marvelously effective job ofconvincing people that the growth of money matters, to the point whereeven for nonmembers of that small group it is very easy to latch onto[monetary policy] as the scapegoat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the Federal Reserve has been successful in convincing people about the importance of the growth of money.


Passage number 501.
 Even the nondoctrinaire peoplewho don't even understand it--MR. BAUGHMAN. I assume we're not prepared to disavow that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 502.
MR. ROOS. Is that small group currently being subjected to achastising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that a small group is being subjected to chastising without presenting any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 503.
MR. BALLES. You're getting whacked, Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Mr. Roos is "getting whacked," without any further context or information provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 504.
-52-11/18/80MR. SCHULTZ. What is even more disturbing is that I'mconvinced that the vast majority of people in this country thinkcontrol of the money supply has no connection to interest rates. Thatis really disturbing. They say: You know, interest rates wouldn't beso high if you people would just control the money supply. That putsus politically in a very difficult position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that the majority of people do not understand the connection between control of the money supply and interest rates, and they find this viewpoint disturbing. They also mention being in a politically difficult position, implying a disagreement or conflict between different groups or perspectives.


Passage number 505.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Very often [the interpretation is] evennarrower. It's if you wouldn't print so much money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by someone named Mr. Baughman.


Passage number 506.
MR. SCHULTZ. That's right. That's what they're talkingabout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. It simply states that "That's right" is what they are talking about.


Passage number 507.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I bring to your attention that the nextmeeting is a bit off schedule to get us in line with our new schedule.So it's on a Friday because that's the time when we could fit it in.It would not be surprising if we have to have some consultation beforethat time. I hope some food is out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply informing the reader about the next meeting being on a different day and mentioning the possibility of needing consultation before the meeting. The last sentence about food is unrelated to any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 508.
MR. ALTMANN. I am told that it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Altmann, simply states a fact that he has been told something without expressing any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 509.
MR. PARTEE. It's only four weeks away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It only mentions the time frame of four weeks.


Passage number 510.
MR. BALLES. Paul, are we meeting here for the planningsession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking for confirmation of the meeting location.


