Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 2, 1984A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 2, 1984, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMs. SegerMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Kohn, Lang, Lindsey,Siegman, and Stern, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account10/2/84Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Griffith, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of San FranciscoMessrs. T. Davis, Keran, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Kansas City, San Francisco, Chicago, andAtlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus, Burger, Ms. Clarkin, and Mr. Fieleke,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,St.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a list of the individuals present at the meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Louis, New York, and Boston, respectively-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofOctober 2, 1984CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can start, if somebody wants to movethe minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply presents the transcript of a meeting without any conflicting views or opposition.


Passage number 3.
MR. MARTIN. I move the minutes, Mr. Chairman.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is making a motion to approve the minutes, and the Speaker is seconding the motion.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Let's turn to foreigncurrency operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "without objection" indicates that there is consensus and agreement, not contention or disagreement.


Passage number 5.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or contradictory statements. It is a simple statement by Mr. Cross.


Passage number 6.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Perhaps you could refresh my memory andthat of others as to the nature of this informal limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is requesting clarification or a reminder of the nature of an informal limit, but there is no sign of any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 7.
MR. CROSS. We raised the total amount of this limit and theDM amount. The total [informal limit] is now $5-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Cross is simply stating a fact about the raised limit without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 8.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the operative significance of thisinformal limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It appears to be asking a question or seeking clarification.


Passage number 9.
MR. CROSS. Well, it is an informal limit. We have a formallimit of $8 billion, which is recorded and registered as the decisionof the FOMC and I imagine made public. This $5-1/2 billion is aninformal limit, which has been operative for a number of years, underwhich we seek the FOMC's views about how much we would operate withinour total authorized $8 billion. We now have an informal maximum of$5-1/2 billion for all currencies, with [limits of] $4 billion indeutschemarks, $1 billion in yen, and $500 million in othercurrencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the formal and informal limits for the amount of currencies they operate within.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we were not having a Committeemeeting and these limits were threatened to be exceeded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is simply stating a hypothetical scenario without expressing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 11.
MR. CROSS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 12.
 I believe you have the authority--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, there is an Executive Committee--a 3-person subcommittee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no visible contention or disagreement in the passage. The first statement expresses a belief that the individual being addressed has authority, while the second statement simply provides information about the existence of an Executive Committee consisting of three people.


Passage number 13.
MR. CROSS. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee could authorizeit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a committee that has the authority to authorize something.


Passage number 14.
MR. GRAMLEY. What are your present holdings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a straightforward question without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 15.
MR. CROSS. The present holding of DM is $3.9 billionequivalent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the present holding of DM being $3.9 billion equivalent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 16.
 Our limit is $4 billion equivalent and I am requesting--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the mark increased in value, we wouldexceed the limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the phrase "If the mark increased in value, we would exceed the limit." It suggests that there is a potential conflict between the limit of $4 billion and the possibility of the mark increasing in value, leading to exceeding that limit.


Passage number 17.
MR. CROSS. No. These are recorded on [the basis of]historical acquisition costs. We could never operate in this day andage if we were operating on the basis of market value.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating that the recorded costs are based on historical acquisition costs rather than market value.


Passage number 18.
MR. PARTEE. We haven't done much with this for a long time,10/2/84I must say, and I am sure everybody's mind is very fuzzy on it--atleast mine is. Why is it, Sam, that we take the interest in marksrather than converting it to dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 19.
MR. CROSS. Well, if we converted it into dollars, that wouldbe, in effect, an intervention operation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Cross is suggesting a hypothetical scenario of converting something into dollars, which implies a potential intervention operation.


Passage number 20.
MR. PARTEE. But it would be a very regularized small thingthat would permit us to get [the interest earnings] back into our owncurrency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a solution to a problem, which is regularizing a small thing to get the interest earnings back into their own currency.


Passage number 21.
MR. CROSS. It is not as though we have such massive amountsof these currencies that we need to worry about our balances being toohigh, it seems to me. As I say, the United States [holdings] as awhole are way below what they were even a couple of years ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Cross, is expressing his own opinion and there is no opposing viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 22.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that is true. It's not even as much asthe Continental loan. Nevertheless, a lot of people might consider $4billion in marks to be quite a holding, particularly when you recallthat we got most of it at under 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Partee about the value of $4 billion in marks.


Passage number 23.
MR. CROSS. Well, the total value of these at today'sexchange rate would be less than $3.9 billion. So, I think we aretalking about a very modest amount of currencies and it is in ourinterest to have some of these currencies available.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and expressing the idea that having some of these currencies available is beneficial.


Passage number 24.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I assume you are not interested indriving the value of the dollar up any higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement shows an assumption or belief but does not suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 25.
MR. PARTEE. I don't know what the periodic receipts are, butthey certainly can't exceed $100 million. I guess I would have arguedthat it would not have had any appreciable effect on the dollar had wedone this periodically when we get them as a convention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their lack of knowledge about the periodic receipts and stating their opinion that it would not have a significant effect on the dollar if they were handled periodically.


Passage number 26.
 And I don'tknow why it is--MR. CROSS. We get about $200 million per year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and expressing their lack of understanding for the reason behind that fact.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 27.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's true if you believethat there is a principle involved here, but I don't know what theprinciple is. You're assuming that all interest on foreign currenciesshould as a matter of routine be converted to dollars. Is that whatyou're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses doubt and questions the assumption made by the other person. The phrase "but I don't know what the principle is" suggests disagreement or a lack of agreement on the underlying principle.


Passage number 28.
MR. PARTEE. I don't know why it shouldn't be. I considerthe home currency to be the dollar rather than the mark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the opinion of Mr. Partee regarding the home currency.


Passage number 29.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That still is a form of intervention,so I don't understand why you would want to do that unless you had anintervention objective in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any form of contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing confusion about the need for intervention unless there is a specific objective in mind.


Passage number 30.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't remember the basis for doing itthis way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their lack of memory or knowledge about the reasoning behind a certain approach.


Passage number 31.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whether or not it's intervention seems tome semantic. The question is whether we feel comfortable oruncomfortable with the amount of currencies we hold. I personallyfeel that we hold an uncomfortably small amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement does not present any conflicting or contrasting viewpoints. It expresses a personal opinion without discussing any opposing arguments or viewpoints.


Passage number 32.
10/2/84MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, it seems conceivable that we mayneed more than $500 million over the next year, so why not increasethe informal limit by $1 billion instead of $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting an alternative option to increase the informal limit by $1 billion instead of $500 million.


Passage number 33.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm perfectly happy to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to analyze the passage without any specific text. Could you please provide the passage you'd like me to analyze?


Passage number 34.
MR. MARTIN. I certainly support that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin expresses his support for something without any indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 35.
MR. CROSS. I would welcome an increase of $1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they would welcome an increase of $1 billion.


Passage number 36.
MR. MARTIN. Is there some significance that you didn'tarticulate to the $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for clarification about the significance of a certain amount of money.


Passage number 37.
MR. CROSS. No. It's just that the past couple of times whenwe raised it, we increased it by $500 million and I did not want togive the impression that there was anything very major involved. Itseems to me it would be quite appropriate--and in fact it would beadvisable--to increase it by $1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. Mr. Cross is suggesting increasing something by $1 billion and stating that it would be appropriate and advisable.


Passage number 38.
MR. MARTIN. The inevitability of gradualism. I'd go for abillion dollars. Operationally, I think it makes sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin expresses his opinion about the effectiveness of gradualism and states his willingness to support it with a billion dollars.


Passage number 39.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I really don't know why we have [aninformal limit]. I would move to do away with it altogether. Afterall, at the rate at which interest is accumulating we will double ourmoney every six or seven years anyhow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their personal opinion, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 40.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not at German interest rates or [rates on]Swiss francs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating a fact about interest rates in Germany and the Swiss franc without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 41.
MR. MARTIN. Let's hope not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 42.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, do what you want to do, but it seemsto me that this informal limit may be useful within the overall limitof $8 billion. It confuses me a bit as to what it is, but at theminimum it is some kind of Committee checkpoint. It is $5.5 billionpresently. I don't think it does any harm and it forces the Committeeto review this, though not very frequently. It hasn't been reviewedfor however long it has been, but it seems to me it has at least amodest usefulness and I would think we probably would want to keep it.I have no problem with [an increase of] $1 billion. I think that'smore appropriate, but that's because my bias is that we don't holdenough of these currencies anyway against the contingencies of anunknown world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially expresses confusion about the informal limit and its purpose, suggesting that they may not find it useful. However, they later acknowledge that it does have at least modest usefulness and suggest that it should be kept. Additionally, the speaker expresses their opinion that an increase of $1 billion is more appropriate, indicating a difference in perspective or preference.


Passage number 43.
MR. GRAMLEY. Then we'd want to raise the informal maximumfor all currencies to $6 billion from $5-1/2 billion too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 44.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it would be $6-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents a numerical value without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 45.
MR. CROSS. $6-1/2 billion and raise the total for all ofthem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a figure and suggests an increase in the total.


Passage number 46.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, the yen is within $400 million[of its limit]. It's not so far away but the amount is not very largeeither--not that it is very difficult to change these.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the yen being close to its limit of $400 million. There is no opposing view or contradictory statement presented.


Passage number 47.
10/2/84MR. CROSS. Another possibility, Mr. Chairman, if you wantedto consider it, would be to keep the informal limit on the total butto eliminate this difference between how much is in DM and how much isin yen, and how much is in Swiss francs and other currencies. Thatwould provide a little more flexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It suggests a possibility or alternative solution without expressing any opposing views.


Passage number 48.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, without taking that major step, Itake it this is an understanding and not a formal [vote]. And I takeit that what the understanding really means is that these are ourforeign currency [limits] but in an emergency I can breach them. Butthe sense is that the Committee is thinking in terms of these [limits]and if they were breached I would come back to the Committee at somepoint and I would at least explain why they were breached. Limits of$5 billion [on DM], $1 billion [on yen] and $.5 billion [on othercurrencies] is the minimum change we're talking about. If there areno widespread objections to that, we will proceed.We've had a very strange exchange market during this period,as Mr. Cross has described, and he rationalized as best he could whythe dollar is so strong. It's not so clear why it's so strong againstdeclining interest [rates], weaker economic activity, and severaldevelopments indicating an easier Federal Reserve policy, all of whichin days of yore--like two months ago--would have sent the dollar down.They don't seem to have any effect right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and seeking confirmation or agreement from the Committee.


Passage number 49.
MR. CROSS. I would certainly agree that there is no veryclear-cut explanation. It is amazing how much the attitudes [havechanged]; everybody seems to talk about what a good thing the dollaris to get into these days. One can listen to how they talk now andthink back to how they talked in 1978 and 1979 when it was going theother way and the United States was [viewed as] hopeless as far as thefuture was concerned. It's hard to believe they are talking about thesame country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the change in attitudes toward the American dollar over time.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 50.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There was very widespread and deep concernabout this among European Finance Ministers and central bankers--really for the first time, so far as central bankers are concerned.Certainly the intensity [was great] at the time of the IMF meeting,which was right in the middle of this surge. Various proposals forcoordinated intervention were explored and there was very considerableurging that we ease policy much more aggressively to deal with thisproblem. The intervention that Mr. Cross referred to was coordinatedin a rather loose way. It was a general agreement among 4 or 5central banks, anyway, that upward movements in the dollar would beresisted in our respective markets over the past week. The dollar didstay in a lower range, as Mr. Cross indicated, but when it went updecidedly we had really rather modest intervention. There weren't allthat many strong movements in the New York market but there was[unintelligible] intervention on some scale abroad occasionally whenthe dollar was strong, and that was all agreed to last week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage mentions that there was "very considerable urging" to ease policy more aggressively, suggesting disagreement on the appropriate level of policy response. Additionally, the mention of "rather modest intervention" implies disagreement on the effectiveness and scale of the intervention.


Passage number 51.
MR. PARTEE. We intervened in a rising market. Is thatright.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Partee is making a statement about intervening in a rising market. There is no apparent contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 52.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In a rising market. The words you used,Mr. Cross, were "a pronounced rising market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply describing a rising market and quoting someone's statement about it. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 53.
"10/2/84MR. PARTEE. We don't attempt to create disorderly conditionsthe way the Germans did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward assertion of the speaker's perspective on the behavior of Germans.


Passage number 54.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They jumped on the declining dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The sentence states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention. It simply describes the action of "jumping on the declining dollar" without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 55.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We deliberately didn't do that. I thinkit may have been helpful that they did it, but I don't particularlywant to be in the posture of doing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that someone else may have found a certain action helpful, but personally, they do not want to do it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 56.
MR. PARTEE. I wouldn't want to be a party to it. I wouldlike to have the opportunity to register myself against such anoperation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. Partee expresses his disagreement and opposition to a certain operation. He states that he would not want to be involved and wants to register himself against it.


Passage number 57.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we haven't done it at this point andI have no present intention to do it. We weren't very aggressive,that's for sure. But we need to ratify the transactions if there areno other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they haven't performed a certain action, do not currently plan to do so, and acknowledging that they were not aggressive in their approach. They also mention the need for ratification of transactions if there are no further questions. The passage primarily consists of statements and clarifications rather than conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 58.
MR. MARTIN. Move ratification.[SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Answer: Yes

Explanation: The passage shows contention or disagreement because there is a speaker who seems to hesitate or have doubts, as indicated by the empty parentheses after "SPEAKER". This hesitation suggests that there may not be unanimous agreement on the motion to ratify.


Passage number 59.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide any context or information about MR. STERNLIGHT's statement, so it is unclear whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 61.
]MR. BLACK. Peter, do you think that it would work a littlebetter if we used only adjustment borrowing for our borrowing targetsand eliminated seasonal borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asked by Mr. Black to Peter about his opinion on whether using only adjustment borrowing would be better for their borrowing targets.


Passage number 62.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know that it would. It could havesome different effects. Our experience is that seasonal borrowingdoes seem to respond to interest rate pressures, and I think that'sthe logic for coupling it with adjustment borrowing. On the otherside, it doesn't have the same pressure to repay quickly thatadjustment borrowing has and that's the logic on the other side of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting two different perspectives or arguments without taking a clear stance on either one.


Passage number 63.
MR. BLACK. You'd come out on balance for leaving it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention as it only presents the statement by Mr. Black without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 64.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I'd tend to leave it alone, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, expresses his opinion about leaving something alone. There is no indication of contention or disagreement present in this statement.


Passage number 65.
MR. BLACK. In the recent period, adjustment borrowing wouldhave given you a better idea of what the federal funds rate was goingto do, wouldn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply seeking confirmation or agreement from the speaker.


Passage number 66.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, if we had done that in the recentperiod, I think it would have tended to push rates higher than theywent because we had the seasonal component building up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 67.
MR. BLACK. I was thinking you would have cut the adjustment[borrowing assumption].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black expressing his thoughts.


Passage number 68.
MR. STERNLIGHT. If we make the suitable adjustments in theborrowing level, which work into the path, we could work with eitherof those. However, the Committee may not want to do that [kind of]short-run adjusting. I tend to think of the combined total as abetter number to work with, but I think it can be argued either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they can work with either of the suitable adjustments in borrowing level, but they acknowledge that the Committee may prefer not to do short-run adjusting. The speaker also mentions that they personally think the combined total is a better number to work with, but they believe it can be argued either way. This shows that the speaker is open to different opinions and perspectives.


Passage number 69.
10/2/84MR. PARTEE. It is sensitive to interest rates. Is thatright.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement about something being sensitive to interest rates.


Passage number 70.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Adjustment borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the "adjustment borrowing", without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 71.
MR. PARTEE. I mean the seasonal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply clarifying their statement by adding "I mean the seasonal."


Passage number 72.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The seasonal, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statements or remarks that express contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a topic, the seasonal aspect, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 73.
MR. BLACK. I would have thought that it was so much lesssensitive that the other conceivably might work better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing an opinion about one option potentially being more effective than another.


Passage number 74.
 If you thinkthe federal funds rate--MR. AXILROD. President Black, we have done some empiricalwork, and it doesn't seem to show much difference between the two.And I think as Peter mentioned, in the jargon it is essentially an"intercept" problem. You would have a lower level of borrowing onaverage for whatever funds rate you would be thinking of. As far asthe volatility in the relationship, day-to-day, between borrowing andthe funds rate, I don't think it makes one iota of difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the results of empirical work and stating that there is not much difference between the two variables being examined.


Passage number 75.
MR. CORRIGAN. Peter, do you think there still is aprecautionary premium affecting the federal funds rate right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply asking Peter's opinion on whether there is a precautionary premium affecting the federal funds rate.


Passage number 76.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm hard put to say what there is right nowbecause after that funds rate [unintelligible] did give some ground,and one could say that there has been evidence just in the last fewdays of some lessened reluctance to use the window. We've had severalsizable banks come in early in the reserve period. On the other hand,the funds rate has been back toward the high side in this currentweek. It is averaging about 11.21 percent so far in this statementperiod, which suggests that maybe this is just statement-datepressure--that would be my guess as of the moment--and that there issome return toward normalcy underlying this. But I would have to seeanother several days before I could conclude that with greaterconviction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing observations and speculations about the current state of the funds rate.


Passage number 77.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it is a very strange period. Everyindicator ordinarily would be associated with lower interest rates:The money supply was very sluggish; every bit of business news, Ithink, came in on the lower side of market expectations; and there wasgrowing evidence of lower reserve pressures. We were in the marketevery day and the market just didn't react in any consistent way. Andnow, after all this, the federal funds rate goes up where it wasbefore, with fewer reserve pressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply describing a strange period where all the indicators suggested lower interest rates, but the market did not react in a consistent way. The mention of the federal funds rate going back to where it was before also does not indicate disagreement, but rather a continuation of the unusual situation.


Passage number 78.
MR. PARTEE. We could very well be having that statement-dateeffect, couldn't we, Paul. As I recall, looking back, we've had thatrather regularly now over the last couple of years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. MR. PARTEE is simply stating a possibility and recalling a trend that they have noticed.


Passage number 79.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a funny statement-date effect, comingafter the statement date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing ideas. It simply describes a "funny statement-date effect" without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 80.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We keep talking about the banks beingreluctant to borrow, and many of the banks talk about the Fed havingtightened its administration of the discount window. I've had thatsaid to me time and time again even though I know that our discountofficers deny that. But I don't know why there is such a strong10/2/84impression of that around--or there was during this period of time.The fed funds rate was higher than what one would have expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage mainly consists of the speaker expressing their confusion and lack of understanding about a certain situation, rather than presenting any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 81.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was back during the summer when wehad all that other stuff. What I don't understand is this last month.It's the same phenomenon in the exchange market. The same thing iskeeping the exchange market higher. It's a refusal to believe that[the numbers are] right--that the economy is slowing and that themoney supply has weakened. It has been [that way] in the last twoweeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the speaker's confusion and lack of understanding regarding a certain phenomenon.


Passage number 82.
MR. CORRIGAN. It doesn't work for the exchange rate, but Ikeep coming away with the feeling that the only plausible explanationin terms of the domestic market is that perhaps way beneath thesurface this precautionary [motive] is still quite operative. It'sthe only thing I can figure out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is sharing his personal thoughts and trying to come up with a plausible explanation. There is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 83.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that doesn't explain why. Youare talking about caution [by banks] about borrowing because theymight get contaminated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that indicates a lack of explanation for a given topic.


Passage number 84.
MR. CORRIGAN. No, not so much on borrowing but that there isjust a much more conservative attitude on the part of medium and largesize banks in terms on their whole approach to funding and moneymanagement, with some implication, obviously, for their willingness toborrow. But I don't know. It's the only thing that makes any senseto me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing their own perspective and expressing their belief or understanding of the situation.


Passage number 85.
MR. MARTIN. To those bankers who are aware of the wildnessand the degeneration in the financial position of the thrift industryin their state and their region and their market area, that surely isa factor because it is degenerating rather rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the financial position of the thrift industry.


Passage number 86.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if that's the explanation, thenwe should be in the beginnings of a reversal of that because all theanecdotal reports as well as the reduction in the spread between CDsand Treasury bills show that there has been less anxiety in thebanking system and in the markets generally in the last few days. Inthat case, if we were to continue, let's say, $750 million borrowing,we might end up with a much lower fed funds rate than one would expectat the present time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the possibility of a reversal in anxiety in the banking system and markets.


Passage number 87.
MR. PARTEE. I think there is less anxiety about the bankingsystem. I think what Pres was talking about is more anxiety by thebankers about their own situations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion that there is less anxiety about the banking system and that the President was referring to bankers' anxiety about their own situations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 88.
MR. MARTIN. In fact, they are aware that dozens of the S&Lsin their districts are going to fail and fail with a great publicsplash. And they are aware, if they are operating nationally, thathundreds of them are going to fail. I can see that in the bankers'psychology.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement or contention as the speaker suggests that the bankers are aware of the impending failure of many S&Ls, while implying that they may not be taking appropriate action.


Passage number 89.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Except that we have gotten reports inthe last few days that show so much more relaxation on the part ofbank management, particularly now that they feel that interest ratesare not going to go up. All I'm saying is: If that's theexplanation, then there are [unintelligible] conditions that willreverse that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their observation about the relaxation of bank management due to the belief that interest rates will not increase. They are simply suggesting that if this is the explanation for the relaxation, there could be conditions in the future that could reverse it.


Passage number 90.
10/2/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There may be some developments in comingdays that will increase the anxiety.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply says that there may be developments in the future that will increase anxiety.


Passage number 91.
MR. MARTIN. Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin's response is agreement or clarification that the statement made by the other person is correct.


Passage number 92.
 They will definitely increase their--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Another major bank has to show a bigloss or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 93.
MR. MARTIN. I'm not talking about a bank. I'm talking aboutthrift institutions. Some of them are in your backyard, good sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is simply clarifying his statement and emphasizing that he is referring to thrift institutions rather than banks. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting statement.


Passage number 94.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking about banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions banks without presenting any contrasting viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 95.
MR. MARTIN. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states "All right" which indicates agreement or affirmation. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 96.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just read the newspapers. A lot of thismay be the commentaries of all these people who make the newspaperevery day. They are always predicting every day that interest ratesare going to go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement "They are always predicting every day that interest rates are going to go up" indicates that there is disagreement or uncertainty about the direction of interest rates. Different commentators may have opposing views on whether interest rates will increase or not, leading to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 97.
 And I think that must be--MR. BOEHNE. Well, there still is burned very deeply in theminds of people in the country--not just people who watch thefinancial markets every minute and every hour--the very high interestrates of several years ago when we had a 20 to 21 percent prime rate.The burn scar from that is still very obvious. And the most frequentquestion that I get when I'm out just talking to people who arerunning small and middle sized businesses is: We're not going to have18 and 19 percent prime rates anymore are we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 98.
MR. PARTEE. What do you say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for someone's opinion or response.


Passage number 99.
MR. BOEHNE. It depends on how [unintelligible] interestrates. But the pain of that is still very close to the surface in alot of peoples' minds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the effects of the situation discussed (which is not clear from the given context) are still fresh in people's minds.


Passage number 100.
MR. ROBERTS. I hear a lot of talk from the smaller andmedium size banks about how they are more carefully limiting their fedfunds sales. Is there possibly a net shrinkage in the market here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Roberts is simply mentioning that he has heard smaller and medium-sized banks talk about limiting their fed funds sales, and he is questioning whether this could lead to a net shrinkage in the market.


Passage number 101.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether statistically itshows up as any net shrinkage, but I hear that too. They may put lessor are prepared to put less with individual institutions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is uncertain about whether there is any statistical evidence of net shrinkage, but they have heard that there might be less funding from individual institutions.


Passage number 102.
MR. ROBERTS. They are certainly more selective. Maybe theydistribute it out [more].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that "they" (presumably a group of people) are more selective and perhaps distribute something more. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 103.
MR. RICE. Shouldn't that show up in much higher excessreserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Rice, and there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 104.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The nationwide total for excess has not goneup, unless it's changing this very reserve period we're in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or observation about the nationwide total for excess, without expressing conflicting viewpoints or engaging in an argument.


Passage number 105.
 In thefull reserve periods that we have had, that had not shown any more--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Peter, you told me that there was atendency in the beginning of these periods for excess reserves to besomewhat higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 106.
10/2/84MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, a tendency within the period for moreconservative management but nothing for the period as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a tendency within a specific period but does not express any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 107.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess we'll turn to the businesspicture, which is crystal clear. We have to approve the operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. The speaker states that they will turn to the business picture, which implies a sense of agreement or consensus. They also mention that the picture is crystal clear, which suggests a clear understanding or agreement about the operations that need approval.


Passage number 108.
MR. MARTIN. Move approval.[SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin moves for approval and the Speaker seconds the motion.


Passage number 109.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the name "Mr. Kichline" and provides no information or context that would indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 110.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of Mr. Kichline's statement in the appendix suggests that there might be differing or conflicting views or evidence.


Passage number 111.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me raise a question about your initialcomment to the effect that no decline or stagnation is ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 112.
MR. KICHLINE. I think I said "appears" or "the staffbelieves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal thought or belief without contradicting anyone else's opinion.


Passage number 113.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. That's what I want to raise thequestion about. You said that things came in a little less strongly--or weaker or whatever adjective you used--than you had expected lasttime. That was only about 6 weeks ago and you were assuming that GNPwas going to rise 5 percent in the third quarter. Now you're down to2.7 percent. That's a heck of a big difference in six weeks, whichreflects the fact that all the news coming in has been veryappreciably lower than you were assuming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the difference in GNP growth expectations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 114.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes. I would say two things were going on,though. One is that the information that we had at the time of theAugust meeting generally is weaker today with data revisions. When wehad the August meeting, retail sales in July were reported to be down0.9 percent. With the revised data, they are now reported to be down2 percent. So, it is true that new information available for Augusthas been weaker, but I'd say the past also looks weaker forconsumption, residential construction, business-fixed investment, aswell as for the merchandise trade area. It has been very broadlybased. I think my briefing did not avoid the issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline states that the information available in August was weaker, but also mentions that the revised data shows even weaker results. This suggests a disagreement or contradiction in the information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just raising a question. You areamplifying what I am saying. The statistics are quite a lot weakerthan you anticipated six weeks ago. We started the summer on a highnote and we surely ended it on a low note. GNP couldn't be muchhigher in September than it was in June. It may be lower. I don'tknow. As we look ahead, it is very hard to see housing goinganyplace; and you say housing sales have leveled off. There was somefigure released this morning that I was told last night would show apretty sharp decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that the statistics are weaker than anticipated, while the other person is amplifying or supporting the speaker's statement. Additionally, there might be disagreement regarding the future of the housing market, with the speaker expressing skepticism and the other person suggesting that housing sales have leveled off. The mention of a sharp decline also suggests a potential disagreement.


Passage number 116.
MR. KICHLINE. I just received it. The house sales data wererevised down for July, and August looks quite a bit weaker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the house sales data were revised down for July and that August looks weaker.


Passage number 117.
MR. PARTEE. I should remark that the revisions are aninsider's leading indicator. If revisions are downward, thatindicates weakness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a statement.


Passage number 118.
10/2/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've had a lot of downwardrevisions. It's very hard to see housing going anyplace. I wouldthink an optimistic projection in the near term is stability. Plantand equipment orders have been down quite sharply over the last fewmonths. Backlogs are obviously up from where they were in therecession, but expenditures are not that much lower than orders atthis point. In fact, they are very close, and orders most recentlyhave been weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statements made are purely descriptive and do not present conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 119.
MR. MARTIN. We had the McGraw-Hill survey, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about having the McGraw-Hill survey.


Passage number 120.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't see that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "I didn't see that" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply implies a lack of observation or awareness.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 121.
MR. KICHLINE. It's dated as of yesterday. They aretabulating the October survey. The first reading for 1985 will beavailable late in October. They have a little under half of therespondents in and the total is running around an 8 percent increasein nominal terms, which is substantially weaker than the staffforecast. The survey is [still] fragmentary; we don't know how tomake a lot of sense out of it, but it is indeed a weak number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the survey results show a weaker increase in nominal terms compared to the staff forecast. This suggests a difference in opinion or expectations between the survey results and the staff forecast, indicating a disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 122.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is all accompanied by a great surgein imports, which certainly is eating into U.S. production. Thehowever many percent increase in the exchange rate recently can't helpthat situation in the future; there was an enormous surge in theexchange rate. I don't know what consumption is going to do but itwasn't very good over the summer. The auto sales look all right. Butthat's the only thing that looks pretty good. All of these otherthings raise some question about the vulnerability of inventories inthe sense of continuing large accumulation, which is the only thinggoing on now. So, why can't you make a pretty good case for no growthin the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The author mentions the increase in imports and the surge in the exchange rate, which they believe is eating into U.S. production. They also express doubts about consumption and raise concerns about vulnerability in inventories. These points indicate disagreement or disagreement with the current state of growth in the fourth quarter.


Passage number 123.
MR. GRAMLEY. How many times in the past have we seen periodsof economic expansion interrupted by a quarter of pause and then itgoes on. I would bet that over the postwar period you could find tenof those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact and offering a possible bet based on their observation.


Passage number 124.
MR. MORRIS. I think the pauses typically come about twoyears after the beginning of an expansion. We normally go into alittle slowing period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply expressing his opinion and discussing a common pattern of economic cycles.


Passage number 125.
MR. WALLICH. I find it hard to believe that with this budgetdeficit--even though we have very large negative net exports--we couldhave the economy sagging. There is just so much purchasing power putin. There's also the stimulation of [business] investment, whichsurely dominates housing. It's about 3 times as big as housing. So,as I look at the underlying factors, it seems to me it's a picture ofcontinued [unintelligible] pressure--not certainly strength.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing his belief that the economy is not sagging due to the budget deficit and negative net exports. He believes that there is enough purchasing power and stimulation of business investment to maintain pressure in the economy.


Passage number 126.
MR. RICE. We're talking about the fourth quarter and thiswould be a quarter of pause and it could be a big pause.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the fourth quarter being a possible pause or break.


Passage number 127.
MR. WALLICH. Well, that I could see. The things I'm talkingabout don't point to any particular quarter, but I do try to look alittle further ahead and ask myself: Where are we going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own thoughts and perspective on a topic.


Passage number 128.
-10-10/2/84MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage appears to be a name or a title without any context or information to suggest any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 129.
 Jim, have you looked at previous cycles to seewhether--MR. KICHLINE. There are many. A classic case is 1976 wherewe had a slowdown, particularly in consumer spending, and it looked atthe time as if the economy were perhaps falling apart. But it wasreally just one of these pauses that subsequently led to very sharpgrowth. I have an answer to your question from the model. We haveall sorts of things in the model, and the probability of negative GNPgrowth occurring in the fourth quarter of 1984 according to theBoard's econometric model is 25 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 130.
MR. PARTEE. It's what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: the data shows. No. The passage simply states a fact or observation based on data. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 131.
MR. KICHLINE. It is 25 percent. That probability has beenrising because of the factors you've been citing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kichline is stating a fact about the probability and attributes its increase to the factors that have been mentioned.


Passage number 132.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 133.
MR. BOEHNE. I wonder if we have an example here of centralbankers finding something going along about the way it ought to begoing along and finding a whole lot to worry about. It seems to methat several months ago we were concerned about the economyoverheating. We were going along well into a recovery and the concernwas that we were going to go off the ledge and that it wasn'tsustainable. We get some slowing over a period of several months andnow some concern about a recession. It seems to me that what ishappening is exactly what a majority of the Committee wanted to happenjust a few months ago--that we are seeing this adjustment to a slowereconomy. My own region happens to be a region that's fairly sensitiveto what is going on in the [overall] economy and historically it hastended to come down earlier than some other regions. I must say as Italk with people in various sectors that the evidence suggests someslowing [in the expansion] but there's not very much that wouldsuggest that we're heading into a slide. There is less strength inmanufacturing but the retailers report that things are going alongreally rather well. We've had some weakness in tourism largelybecause of the dollar and the fact that Canadians are not coming intothe District. There is weakness in residential housing but commercialconstruction is going along reasonably well. The bankers report someslowing in C&I loans but not as a forerunner of a recession.So, where I come out is that the economy is doing exactlywhat we wanted it to do. We wanted [the expansion] to slow down someso that we could have a more sustainable growth. It seems to me thatwe are not as recession prone as I would have thought at this point inthe recovery. I think inflation is under much better control and Ithink monetary policy has been conducted on a better basis this timearound. We tightened earlier in a recovery than any time I recallsince being in this room and I think we have begun to ease earlierthan we normally have; so I think policy is considerably less pro-cyclical than it has been historically. I would come out thinkingthat what has been happening is pretty good for the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, is expressing his opinion that the current state of the economy is in line with what the majority of the Committee wanted and that it is a positive development. He also believes that inflation is under control and that monetary policy has been conducted well. Overall, Mr. Boehne's view is positive and optimistic.


Passage number 134.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Rice or any arguments or disagreements involving him.


Passage number 135.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, the staff's revisions to theforecast for 1985 seem to be more than usually sensitive to the dollar-11-10/2/84exchange rate. We know what the various possibilities are there andwe also know the difficulty of assessing the probabilities associatedwith forecasting the exchange rate. But I don't think many peoplewould argue that the basic long-run strength in the economy is beingthreatened. I don't know of many people who have forecast a recessionin 1985. I think the central question for us right now is: What isgoing to happen in the current quarter and possibly the next quarter.The question is whether the economy is going to continue to deceleratebelow the current level of activity estimated for the third quarter orwhether it's going to stabilize at levels around those of the thirdquarter or whether it's going to rebound as projected by the staff. Ithink the scenario outlined by the staff for the fourth quarter is avery plausible one and I certainly hope that it is realized. If it isrealized, we'll have pretty much what Ed Boehne was hoping for--thatis, we will have the kind of situation that we want.However, I think we have to recognize and pay some attentionto the kinds of factors that the Chairman pointed to just a momentago: that there is evidence of considerable weakness and that thestaff forecast is based on pretty wobbly foundations--primarilyconsumer behavior and the expected rebound in consumer spending. Now,at a time when investment spending is also decelerating somewhat, thisrebound in the current quarter seems to me crucially [dependent] on asubstantial rebound in consumer spending. And from past experience, Ithink we have found that predicting consumer behavior in the short runon a quarterly basis is a very hazardous business. In other words, itseems to me highly possible that, in light of the very rapiddeceleration that we've seen in the last quarter, this could carryforward to very low levels of expansion. I would expect positiverates of growth, but conceivably fairly low rates of growth--marginally positive rates of growth--and that, in my judgment, wouldnot be a desirable outcome. And I think we have an opportunity now toforestall that without any risk of threatening a sustainableexpansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker discussing different possibilities and potential outcomes for the economy.


Passage number 136.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without any provided passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Additionally, "Governor Martin" is not a specific enough context to ascertain the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 137.
MR. MARTIN. I appreciated Jim's comment on the 25 percentprobability from the model of zero growth in the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage states that Mr. Martin appreciated Jim's comment, suggesting agreement rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 138.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Minus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "minus" typically indicates subtraction or negation, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 139.
MR. KICHLINE. Zero or negative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 140.
MR. MARTIN. It seems to me that when we refer to theslowdown in growth we're talking about a change from 10.1 percent realGNP growth in the first quarter to 2.7 percent in the third quarter.I suppose that's a slowdown rather than a jamming on the brakes, butit is reasonably significant. Henry's point is well placed withregard to consumer behavior and the probability of the consumer comingback, particularly in the durables area. The other side of that coinis the consumer coming back to a saving rate that might reflect thenews that I expect to occur with regard to failing thrift institutionsand commercial banks as the year wears on. [When] the November 14report of Financial Corporation of America comes upon the media andother institutions show difficulties, it could even be that theconsumer will feel that saving may be a little more desirable. Idon't know what the probability of that is but there is some10/2/84probability. Of course, then the question is raised as to saving intowhat. As to the notion of a return in the nondefense capital goodsarea to a much stronger rate of spending, I think there is a greatdeal of uncertainty there and that uncertainty stems from the verypoint that the Chairman underlined previously, which is that interestrates are still relatively high and profit margins, due to foreigncompetition, are the narrowest in many, many industrial categoriesthat they have been in several decades. And that certainly tends toweigh a bit upon a board of directors realizing that because of thefinancing gap they have to go outside. They can't do as they did inthe earlier stages of the expansion and finance from internal sources.So, it seems to me, though I don't know what the probabilityis, that there is a risk--not the risk that we will have such a badfourth quarter or first or second quarter going forward, but the riskof an earlier end to this expansion than would be desirableconsidering the need to face fiscal policy decisions in '85. Andthose are decisions that can best be made in [an environment] of atrend rate of real growth or even a 3 to 4 percent rate of growthrather than an expectation that the recession is around the cornerand, therefore, it's too late to do anything in the fiscal policyarea. I reiterate my concern about financial institutions and theirlack of financial soundness and the vulnerability that the expansionhas to the fact that this will be developing later this year and intonext year. So, it seems to me that the Chairman needs to haveflexibility and that we need to build into our thinking quite a bit offlexibility so that we can move, particularly to offset downwardpressures, in the short- or intermediate-term future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is expressing his concerns and opinions about the current economic situation and the potential risks and challenges ahead. He is not presenting any opposing viewpoints or engaging in a debate with anyone.


Passage number 141.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Miss Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 142.
MS. SEGER. As someone who was pessimistic rather early on, Iguess I'm pleased to see the statistics finally supporting my woman'sintuition in that the statistics across the board are certainlylooking much weaker than they did back in July when I arrived here.I'm also viewing this as a good sign, as are people in Philadelphia,and not a bad sign. I think it's healthy that we are looking at somedownward revisions in our forecast for the rest of this year and for1985 because it's important to keep inflation under control and havingthese signs takes some of the heat off here to jam on the brakes. So,I'm pleased to see that this is happening. Also, I'm optimistic--maybe more optimistic than most people here--about some of thefundamental changes going on in the economy. I have mentioned thesebefore, particularly those things that are influencing productivityfavorably. There are other [developments] that influence themanagement of companies and increase their commitment to doing thingsefficiently, which of course is tied in to productivity. Theirstronger moves in labor negotiations, some innovations, and moreemphasis on R&D are the kinds of things that I think will pay bigrewards longer term. I'm also concerned, though, about the problemsof the thrifts. Maybe it's because I just gave a talk a week ago tosome treasurers of savings and loans and I'm carrying those cards, butthere are big problems there. There are big problems there even ifinterest rates don't rise, but the numbers I heard with even a modestincrease in interest rates in the future are terribly scary. I thinka very large group will be going down the chute rather than a somewhatsmaller group. So, those are my concerns. But, as I said, overallI'm rather pleased with what is going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses her own opinions and observations, but does not engage in any argument or debate.


Passage number 143.
-13-10/2/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It appears to be a date and a name without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 144.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I too am rather pleased aboutthe ways things have gone. I don't really see the risks being on thedown side either for the fourth quarter or for 1985. I was a littlesurprised at the 2.7 percent staff projection. I would have thoughtit would be a little higher. I think the Commerce flash report of 3.6percent is probably closer to the mark and, in fact, market watchersare expecting that to be revised upward somewhat. Also, the numbersthat I've seen for September, in my District at least, are indicatingsome rebound in the economy from the slowing in the summer.Speaking specifically about my District, we are seeing theslowdown, but in all areas the strengths are still outweighing theweaknesses in the economy. So, I would think, Mr. Chairman, that therisk is that we will have a rebound in the fourth quarter and thatthat will carry over into 1985. I say risk not because I think it'sgoing to be terribly significant but because the numbers will probablybe lower. But I certainly don't see any negative growth or even zerogrowth in 1985. I think the institutional problems certainly willhave an effect on consumer attitudes and consumer expectations but, atthe moment at least, I sense a less nervous attitude on the part ofpeople with respect to the banking system. I don't think the thriftproblems have really surfaced very well in peoples' consciousness.Now, if FCA or some other thrift were to go belly up, we might have adifferent situation. But, for the moment at least, I think the marketnervousness and consumer nervousness about the banking system hasabated to some extent.Basically, as I look at the situation, I think we are in apause. I expect the fourth quarter to come in a little better thanthe staff has projected and, as I said earlier, I think that willcarry over into 1985. The wild card in all of this is the question ofthe dollar. And I would just like to raise at this point--if it'sappropriate, Mr. Chairman--the question of how significant in ourdiscussions today the question of the dollar should be. Perhaps wecan talk about this later, but I wonder with respect to the dollarwhat might happen if this significant decline in the dollar [were tooccur] whether this situation should be reflected in some way in thedirective. I just throw that out as a point of discussion. Whathappens to the dollar can obviously affect these projections very,very significantly. If anything were to happen soon in terms of amarked change in the dollar, it could affect what happens in thefourth quarter or certainly in 1985. But with the exception of thedollar consideration, I would think the economy is on a pretty goodtrack and I would be more concerned about inflation in 1985 ratherthan slow growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker does not express any disagreement or contention in this passage. They are discussing their positive view of the economy and their concerns about the dollar, but there is no conflicting viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 145.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You refer to evidence of a rebound in yourDistrict in September. What is that evidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply asking for clarification about the evidence of a rebound in the district.


Passage number 146.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, retail sales have come back in earlySeptember. Housing is back a bit more. It is still down from earlierlevels, but better than the July numbers had suggested. Consumerspending generally is a little better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the current state of retail sales, housing, and consumer spending, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 147.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. I heard a lot ofstories about retail sales improving late in August and in early-14-10/2/84September. More recently I hear stories that they disappeared again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and recounting differing information they have heard.


Passage number 148.
I don't know whether--MR. ROBERTS. That's what I am hearing also--that they havebecome sluggish again after a little pickup in late August and earlySeptember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their uncertainty about a certain topic, and Mr. Roberts affirms that he is hearing similar information.


Passage number 149.
MR. MARTIN. They could come back, [given] the discountingtechniques to move the merchandise. I've heard [that their approachis]: Never mind what the price is; [unintelligible]; let's dosomething else here to move the merchandise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and sharing what they have heard about the approach to move merchandise.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 150.
MR. FORRESTAL. One of the interesting things that I find isthat the retail sales reflected in the statistics are not borne out bythe retailers that I talk to. We see evidence in the numbers ofrelatively weak retail sales, for example, yet when I talk to variousretailers they say they are doing great. There is some discrepancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is a disagreement or discrepancy between the retail sales statistics and the observations of the retailers. The retailers claim that they are doing well, while the statistics show relatively weak retail sales.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 151.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You must have been talking to differentones than I was talking to or I wouldn't have [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The statement implies that there is a disagreement or contention about the people they were talking to, suggesting that the speaker and the person they're addressing have different perspectives or experiences in their conversations.


Passage number 152.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's one thing about retailers: You canalways find a retailer to support your position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 153.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 154.
MR. BOYKIN. In the Eleventh District, Mr. Chairman, we areseeing some slowdown. Primarily what we see is a climate of weaknessin the energy industry, particularly the processing portion. Refiningand [unintelligible] actually are showing absolute declines both inemployment and production. This summer drilling also declined on ayear-over-year basis, although very recently there has been a littlepickup there. Housing is ebbing. Non-residential construction isflattening out, and I really don't think that's too bad down our way.We do have a number of areas of strengths. On unemployment, ofcourse, we're below the national average, which really still suggeststo us a fairly tight labor market. This is borne out at our own Bankwhere we continue to see our turnover rate increasing. It's alwaysfairly large, but it is picking up again. The excessive inventoriesin oil field equipment are being worked off and production andemployment as a matter of fact are beginning to increase there.Defense contracting is helpful as is electronic equipment. In retailsales, we continue to make gains but anecdotally some retailers wetalk to seem a bit pessimistic. The toldme that they were getting increases of 17 and 18 percent and now itlooks like 7 or 8 percent and he's not too sure what will occur as wego through the year. On the agricultural side in our District, whileprices aren't that good, increased production has pretty well offsetthat. At least for this year, we think the District agriculturalsituation is not going to be all that bad overall, although it's notuniform. The drought areas, of course, are severely hurt. My bottomline is that this seems to me more of a pause right now, and I agreewith those who think that maybe that's not too bad a development. Iwould anticipate that the fourth quarter might be a little better andthat 1985--barring all these really terrible things that have beenmentioned--shouldn't be all that bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily provides an overview of various economic factors and trends in the Eleventh District.


Passage number 155.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions Mr. Keehn without providing any details or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 156.
-15-10/2/84MR. KEEHN. Well, in the words of one of my associates: "TheMiddle West has dropped out of the economic expansion." But as I hearthe comments, maybe we aren't the only ones to have dropped out. Ithink it's now clear that overall economic activity in the Middle Westhas been at least leveling off since the early part of the summer.Steel production is down and down significantly. Imports are taking avery much larger part of that market. The heavy capital goods sectorcontinues to be relatively weak. One part of that sector, indeed, hasturned around: Orders for large trucks, which had been very strong,have now turned around and are on the way down. Residentialconstruction is down, the result of high interest rates. Our gains inemployment rates have slowed down. Our unemployment rate is down, butit's probably more a factor of people just dropping out of the workforce and not the result of higher employment numbers. Retail salesare uneven. There was a pickup during the back-to-school period.Nonetheless, the September numbers, according to what we're hearing,are again on the soft side. In the agricultural sector, the outlookcontinues to be relatively poor and the land values are continuing togo down. The outlook for farm incomes is not positive and that isbacked up even more in the farm equipment sector where production isbeing further curtailed. Some major manufacturers are continuing tolay off workers. Broadly, the news is a bit more modest. I would notsuggest by any of this that we are heading back into a recession. Ithink it would be far too early to suggest that. But certainly, atleast in our area, the expansion has faded. And I think we are goingto have to watch the numbers pretty carefully in the upcoming period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents evidence and observations that suggest a decline in economic activity in the Middle West. This contradicts the idea of continued economic expansion.


Passage number 157.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided a passage to analyze. Could you please provide the passage so I can assist you further?


Passage number 158.
MR. CORRIGAN. In general, Mr. Chairman, I have a lot ofsympathy for what Mr. Boehne said. At the same time, there is noquestion that the tone of things has changed. From my ownperspective, two months ago I would have put about a zero probabilityon a fourth quarter of zero or something worse than that. I'm notsure where my own mental calculus would take me right now--maybe tothe 25 percent the model has, or maybe a little less than that. But Istill think the best bet, by a comfortable margin, is that we will seea pattern of economic growth emerge in the fourth quarter and in early1985 along the broad lines suggested in the staff forecast. Havingsaid that, there is no question that right now it's darn hard to readthrough the numbers. Clearly, for example, the way that imports areworking their way into the economy is just off the charts in terms ofour appreciation of what it means for domestic income, employment, andall the rest of it. On the other side, it's awfully hard to know whatthe underlying demand for automobiles is. We get reports through ourdirectors and otherwise suggesting that the supply constraints in theautomobile industry are very real and that the cars that people wantsimply are not available. The inventory situation is a very, verytough call. It could go either way. Again, the general attitude weseem to run into everyplace among business people is that they arebeing very aggressive and they are not terribly uncomfortable withtheir inventory situations even right now. On the housing sector, Ithink the general view that it's going to stand still is probablyright. But there's one potential little problem there. I get thesense that these adjustable rate mortgages that were put out in suchenormous quantities earlier in the year and late last year could be apotential problem in their own right that could possibly have someunsettling influences on the mortgage market, leaving aside the-16-10/2/84problems of the thrifts. The inflation outlook, I think, is clearly aplus, both in terms of attitudes and psychology as well as reality.While we may be a little surprised by the business numbers, in someway the biggest surprise is the continued very, very satisfactoryshowing on the inflation side, which is reflected in recent [wage]settlements as well.Just a word on the agricultural situation: The credit sideis no better than it was in May; it's probably worse notwithstandingthe fact that production yields are going to be pretty good. Onbalance, I think the credit side is probably worse. But all in all,as I said, I think the best bet by a comfortable margin is a reboundalong the lines of the staff forecast. The biggest wild card by faris the financial situation, despite the progress that was made withsome of the LDC debt problems and so forth. I think the real wildcard is the possibility of some more uncertainties or unsettlingevents in the financial situation quickly spilling over into aquestion of confidence about dollar-denominated assets in general. Itcould have very adverse implications for the dollar. That would bethe worst of all worlds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges the changing tone of the situation and expresses uncertainty about certain factors but ultimately agrees with the staff forecast of economic growth. There is no direct disagreement or conflict presented.


Passage number 159.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage "Governor Partee" without any additional context or information provided.


Passage number 160.
MR. PARTEE. I want to agree strongly with Ed Boehne. Infact, I would underline his comments by saying "Thank goodness we havehad a slowdown," because throughout 1983 the expansion was more rapidthan we expected. We certainly didn't have in mind anything like that10 percent increase for the first quarter; that was several percentagepoints above what we expected. The second quarter was alsoconsiderably stronger than originally forecast and than what wethought appropriate. Finally we have gotten a quarter on the lowside. It's the first quarter I can remember in the recovery that's onthe low side of the projection and it's about time that we start tosee some balance. Somebody earlier was talking about putting somerisks back into the situation. Well, I think that's necessary for thebusiness situation as well as the foreign exchange value of the dollar--that there be a two-sided view as to what may be occurring. I'minclined to think that this is temporary. Despite Emmett's commentsthat consumer spending is variable in the short run, I would say thatthere tends to be an equating of spending with income streams, andincome streams are still good. So, the chances are very, very strongthat there will be a recovery in consumer spending in the fourthquarter. Whether it will be as strong as the staff has projected, Idon't know, but I would say the chances are good that there will be alarger increase in GNP in the fourth quarter than in the third.I'm a little more concerned about 1985. I noticedparticularly the tremendous rate of increase in imports, and I thinkthat is beginning to sap the economy. If that continues in 1985--which, incidentally, the projection doesn't forecast--we could get aconsiderably weaker year than has been forecast from the standpoint ofdomestic activity. But that's some time in the future and a lot willdepend on the value of the dollar. And who knows what that may be.Just to take a figure, it may be 40 percent lower by the first of theyear. Who can say where the dollar will be. I do think that ourgreatest threat, looking ahead over the next couple of years, is thepossibility that we may find ourselves in a position where interestrates have to be substantially higher than they are now. And that's-17-10/2/84because of the thrifts, Martha, and the farmers, Jerry, and the smallbusinessmen who have been referred to, and the LDCs, and the conditionof financial institutions generally. A repetition of the 18 percentrate level that we saw before would be very, very destructive on theeconomy. As I see it, that need may still develop in the course ofthis cycle as we get farther out, and it's very important to try tokeep the pressure off so that won't occur. That's the big thing wehave to watch out for, and that's why I say "Thank goodness for theslowdown.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement and providing reasons for that agreement, as well as expressing concern about future developments. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 161.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Additional context is needed.


Passage number 162.
MR. WALLICH. I feel very much the same way. Of course, I amin some way impressed by the immediate events, but we can't influencethem very much. In other words, what we do now is not going to haveany immediate effect even on the fourth quarter except maybe forhousing. And looking at the longer run, it seems to me that inflationcontinues to be the main problem. I know it's boring to talk aboutinflation since it is finally doing so well. But really, that is tobe expected. Here we are well above the natural rate of unemploymentand inflation is going down, and that's what it's supposed to do.What puzzles me is that so many people expect rising inflation at atime when we have a very high level of unemployment. Maybe theseexpectations are [related to a view] that the dollar will go down ormaybe to the fear of financial calamities. But basically we seem tobe taking 5 percent [inflation] for granted. If it stays that way,then the problem is out of the way. I think we're living on borrowedtime here with respect to the dollar. We don't know when it will comedown. It's very unlikely to me that it will always stay at theselevels. We have had remarkable wage moderation; it's hard to explain.Most expectations were for very high settlements, and surely thatunderlying feeling of "restore and more" must still be there. I amgrateful to have had such good settlements. If you look at our moneysupply target, we have pulled that down on average 1/4 or 1/2 point atmost for 1985. Nominal GNP is likely to go from about 10 percentgrowth to about 7.5 percent. So, if this change in the relationshipof money to nominal GNP isn't going into output, maybe it will go intoslower velocity but maybe it will go into higher prices. At least themakings of that are there. As I look at the outlook, I look more atmid-1985 and later in 1985 than at the fourth quarter [of 1984]. Ithink there's enough reason to believe that the fourth quarter isn't acause for immediate alarm and to allow one to take this longer-runview. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and observations, without challenging or contradicting any other perspectives.


Passage number 163.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide any analysis without a specific passage.


Passage number 164.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I came into this meeting feelingvery optimistic because we've been able to move the economy to aslower growth mode without pushing interest rates higher than we did.I was afraid a few months ago; I didn't know what level of the fundsrate would be required to slow down the economy. I have no concernabout a prolonged period of stagnation, much less a recession, simplybecause I think the fundamental underpinnings to the economy arestrong and I think the economy would be very responsive to even amodest downward movement in interest rates, which any prolongedstagnation would tend to generate. The main thing I've been concernedabout in the near term is the foreign exchange market because it seemsto me that there is a speculative bubble in that market. It's just-18-10/2/84like the tulip bulb mania. Whenever you see a market defying all thefundamentals, which it is doing now, you have to think the time isapproaching when a correction has to be made. And, obviously, I'mconcerned about the interest rate effects of a decline in the dollar.So, I think it is very fortunate that if the dollar should startdeclining fairly soon, it will do so in an economy that is movingahead at a more reduced rate and the strains on the financial marketswill not be as great as they otherwise would. I see that as our majorproblem coming up--how we respond in policy to the financial strainscaused by a weaker dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris expresses his optimistic view about the economy and his concerns about the foreign exchange market and the impact of a weaker dollar.


Passage number 165.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we all have been saying for ayear or more. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing agreement among a group of people. It states that "That's what we all have been saying for a year or more," indicating that there has been consensus on the matter. The mention of Governor Gramley does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 166.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'm very much in the Ed Boehne/Chuck Parteecamp. I do think something rather fundamental has happened to thebasic expansion and I think we should be thankful for that. I wouldnote again that we've been through a lot of periods of economicexpansion--Jim mentioned 1976, which was one, but there have been manyothers--in which the growth of employment, industrial production, andreal GNP slowed for awhile and then picked up again. Jim was askedwhat the probability of negative GNP in the fourth quarter was and hegave the answer .25. A more meaningful question in my judgment wouldbe: What is the probability of two successive quarters of negativeGNP growth. And the answer the model cranks out on that is .05, whichis negligible. And that agrees with my own perception.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement and support for the views of Ed Boehne and Chuck Partee. They also mention their own perception, which aligns with the model's conclusion.


Passage number 167.
MR. PARTEE. At this time. Did you have that run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 168.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes. That's a regular output run of the modeland I get the model forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply confirming that they receive the model forecast as a regular output run.


Passage number 169.
MR. PARTEE. One in 20.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a statement being made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 170.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes. If you look over the basic factors thathave been driving the economy, and many of them have been mentionedhere, they all seem to me to be conducive to continuation of economicexpansion. Budget policy is expansive. Monetary policy has not beenunduly restrictive--we're looking at a growth of real money over thefirst three quarters of around 2 percent, which is quite high byhistorical standards. Consumer confidence is high. Consumer balancesheets are in quite good shape--income ratios have gone up but tonowhere near where they once were. Net worth has improved recentlywith the pickup in stock prices. As for incentives for businessinvestment, surely we can't expect to see 20 to 25 percent rates ofreal business fixed investment taking place, but profits are high, thetax incentives are still there, and capacity utilization is up. Asfor the inventory situation, one can see problems in some areas likechemicals and fibers, textiles, and metals, but overall inventorysales ratios are quite low. My perception is the one that Jerrymentioned--that most businesses are quite comfortable with theirinventory positions. So, I think the staff has it about right. Ithink we will see a pickup in the fourth quarter, and if not then, wewill see it in the first quarter. And then if we can see growth stayin the range of 3 to 3-1/2 percent, it's certainly going to be quitebeneficial in terms of the impact on interest rates and aspects offinancial markets and the problems we have there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, agrees with the factors mentioned that are driving the economy and states that they are conducive to continuation of economic expansion. He supports the staff's view and predicts a pickup in growth in the fourth quarter.


Passage number 171.
-19-10/2/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 172.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Focusing on ourregional economy, it's not unlike what has been described in someother areas, particularly where there is a fairly dramatic divisionbetween urban and rural areas. In the urban areas, retail sales haveleveled off; the housing starts, not unlike what has already beendescribed, are falling off somewhat. On the other hand, commercialconstruction, particularly in Omaha, Kansas City, and Oklahoma City isbooming. It started late and it will continue on for another coupleof years simply to complete the projects that are underway. In theenergy area, as Bob Boykin has indicated, there's been an uptick inrig count operations. In Oklahoma, Colorado, and Wyoming, the numbersare reasonably substantial as a matter of fact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing information about the regional economy without any clear indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 173.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought he said the oil business wasdepressed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states the speaker's belief or interpretation of what someone said.


Passage number 174.
MR. BOYKIN. I said during the summer there was an uptick inTexas; the actual rig count was still down a little in New Mexico andparts of the country he's talking about. There have been rathersubstantial increases over the last month and we have begun to get alittle uptick even in Texas. But comparing now to a year ago, it'sstill down a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating facts about the oil rig count in Texas and New Mexico.


Passage number 175.
MR. GUFFEY. I think our numbers would reflect somethingmodestly different from that; the uptick compared to a year ago wouldbe somewhat greater than Bob has just described. In auto production,they are working very near capacity on the auto assembly lines.Aircraft, on the other hand, is almost a dead industry at the moment.They can't sell aircraft, particularly business aircraft. That is oneof the things that businesses apparently defer and there's an overhangon the market of used aircraft. And that's rather an important partof our industry in the Tenth District. The agricultural scene is notunlike what already has been described. It's bad now and theprospects of it getting better any time in the near future are notbright--non-existent as a matter of fact. Russian grain sales aretaking place now, but they're taking place in [the context of] aninventory overhang and as a result the prices do not reflect it nordoes it pass through to the producer. And that, of course, has acontinued impact on the financial side; the agricultural banks aresort of hanging on. The question is what they will do with collateralthat supports those loans when the loans cannot be serviced--interestcannot be paid. As a result the best estimate is that if there is abottom to be reached, it won't be reached until perhaps the firstquarter of 1985. The question of what will happen from now to then isuncertain. But I think it should be important to this Committee tounderstand that unless we have a dramatic decrease in interest ratesthere will not be any salvation for the agricultural sector. Thecurrent rates, or modestly lower rates, will not be an answer to thefinancial problems in the agricultural sector.With respect to the staff forecast, I would agree with EdBoehne and others who have expressed the view that we ought to behappy with the slowdown. As I look into the fourth quarter andparticularly into 1985, I have some question about the staff forecastin that I think the economy will be somewhat weaker than theyforecast. In the numbers that they used, retail sales are very-20-10/2/84important; auto sales, for example, are extremely important in 1985.The staff is looking at an 11 million unit rate for auto sales in1985. The fourth quarter of 1985, for example, is in the area of 11.2million--greater than any time in 1983. That suggests to me that ifthere is any retrenchment because of problems in the financial sectoror otherwise, that forecast is more expansive than I would feelcomfortable with. With respect to the dollar's strength, it'sanybody's guess. But as it relates to inflation it would seem to methat so long as the dollar is strong imports are strong, and we couldlook at lesser real growth and lesser inflation and, thus, theforecast for nominal GNP in the period ending in the fourth quarter of1985 would be somewhat less than the staff is projecting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing his own opinions and observations about various industries and economic forecasts.


Passage number 176.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: To provide an accurate answer, the passage in question needs to be supplied.


Passage number 177.
MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, in the Eighth District, economicactivity is still strong--I think a little stronger than the nationalaverage--but we are clearly seeing signs of a slowdown. Buildingactivity is high but housing starts are declining. Builders arecomfortable with where they are but are worried about what will happenin the fall and generally are anticipating that the high interestrates will severely and adversely affect them. Consumer spending isstrong in our District; sales of consumer goods haven't really sloweddown. We have gotten a lot of information from national retailersthat sales, after flattening out in the summer, picked up in lateAugust or early September and, as I said, have become sluggish again.Locally, there is less of that sluggishness. Except for in thenorthern part of our District, the agricultural situation hasimproved; there is some reduction in the financial pressures that thefarmers have been feeling for the last two years.I made a comparison here of weak points and strong points andwhat I ended up with is that the same industries and the sameactivities are on both the weak and the strong side. For example, inagriculture we have a very weak situation in northern Missouri. Inthe case of soybeans, it costs more to produce them than they can besold for at the moment even though we are getting a lot of production--in the area of 50 bushels an acre. The value of the dollar is anadverse factor in exports, and cotton and rice are export crops inpart of the District. On the other hand, they have the biggestproduction in history--greater than 1982. So, how that will come outis a close call in terms of the effects on them. Construction is at ahigh level but the outlook is for a weakening. In production,generally we're at a very high level. Automobile sales arecharacterized by the major dealers as red hot. They can't handle thedemand, particularly for some of the larger cars. So, that looksgood. On the other hand, we've had some plant closings in theDistrict. International Harvester, a producer of farm implements,just closed a plant with 1500 workers; a small foundry closed; we sawthe first AT&T effect in telecommunications with a small plantclosing. In terms of the confidence factor, there is considerableconcern about the thrifts. I had an interesting coincidence of threevisits in the last two weeks by bankers who are concerned about thecondition of thrifts. Now, why they are [concerned] may be a productof industry discussions, but they foresee major failures withoutidentifying them. As I talk to the thrift people, they are concernedabout the negative interest arbitrage but they haven't seen anydeterioration in quality, including in the variable rate loans. The-21-10/2/84consumer's confidence is reflected in our District in rising consumerloans; the consumer is still borrowing. All in all, what I see is aslowing at a high level--not a lot of imbalances around that we couldreally do anything about. Agriculture is an example. There is someeffect of the high dollar, but no big inventory problems that haven'tbeen resolved. Our expectations are that nationally we'll probablysee a continuation of about 3 percent growth next year but withinflation rising, probably on the order of 5-1/2 or 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a description of various economic activities in the Eighth District.


Passage number 178.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no passage provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 179.
MS. HORN. As for business conditions in our District, theanecdotes would support an economy that is levelling off but notdeclining. And we would view that as basically a good development. Iwould like to comment on inflation. A couple of speakers havecommented on it and, in my opinion, it is an ongoing problem. Thereis, of course, a good side of this. We hear a number of anecdotes onproductivity as well in our District--that it may be increasing andthere may be some significant changes. On the negative side, leavingoff fiscal policy from the discussion and turning to the exchangerate, I think there is a genuine concern that if the exchange ratewere to be reduced significantly, that would show through to pricesvery quickly. In the Cleveland District we have a large number of thetypes of firms that are finding themselves subject to importsubstitution. And it's that pressure that has kept their margins inan area where they are just completely uncomfortable with them. Theyare just waiting for the moment to move [prices higher]. We hearmany, many stories of these types of firms being poised to move theinstant they can. So, that adds to my concern about inflation as thelonger-term problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker suggests that the economy is leveling off but not declining, which is viewed as a good development. However, they also express concern about inflation and the potential for prices to increase quickly if the exchange rate is reduced significantly. This conflicting view on the state of the economy and the potential impact of inflation demonstrates disagreement or contention.


Passage number 180.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else want to comment at thispoint. Mr. Griffith, if you want to, we'll give you 30 seconds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no direct contention or disagreement in this passage. The first sentence is asking if anyone else wants to comment, indicating an invitation for participation. The second sentence is addressing Mr. Griffith and offering him a specific amount of time to speak. It does not imply disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 181.
MR. GRIFFITH. Well, I can't add anything other than to saythat we support the Ed Boehne concept. We think things are goingreally well. There's nothing wrong with sitting here right on target.Our staff forecast has, as does the Greenbook, fourth-quarter growthmore in the 4 percent range. And we're optimistic about 8 percentnominal GNP growth next year. I would only add to two things thathave been talked about earlier. In our District we also haveagricultural problems, and I concur with Roger that these problems aregoing to show up in the first quarter of '85 and later. And, ofcourse, the thrift industry problems--and it seems we must have halfof them, all arising at one time--are, as I think Jerry pointed out,in fact causing great concern in the financial community. Bankers arehuddling for strange reasons. They have strange views aboutborrowing; they have strange views about a lot of things; and they'revery nervous about the thrift industry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Griffith, is expressing support for the Ed Boehne concept and agrees with the optimistic economic forecast. He also acknowledges the agricultural and thrift industry problems that others have discussed.


Passage number 182.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe you can give us a quick recital, Mr.Axilrod, and we'll [have coffee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statements that could indicate contention or disagreement. It simply suggests a suggestion for Mr. Axilrod to give a quick recital followed by having coffee.


Passage number 183.
]MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any statement or context that indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 184.
][Coffee break]-22-10/2/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might say that I don't have all thesefigures precisely in mind, but the latest indications on the moneysupply suggest that September is going to come in lower than wasassumed. And the quarterly figure for June to September will be inthe neighborhood of 2 percent or a little more, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 185.
MR. AXILROD. It will be below 2-1/2 percent and could be aslow as 2 percent. The numbers are variable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is providing information about the potential range of numbers and does not involve conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 186.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. October will start off appreciably belowthe September average. It's rather a very sluggish ending. The otherfigures for the 3 months are without any clear change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply describing the expected trend for the month of October without any conflicting information or contrasting opinions.


Passage number 187.
MR. PARTEE. That is, growth from June to September would be2 percent instead of 2-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact or an alternative scenario.


Passage number 188.
MR. AXILROD. September could be as much as 1-1/2 pointslower than we had, so that takes off 1/2 point for the quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a potential decrease in the growth rate for September, based on Mr. Axilrod's estimation.


Passage number 189.
MR. PARTEE. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Partee. There is no indication of contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 190.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may be worth pointing out that reserveshave done nothing over the summer. A question was asked about thedollar earlier, and I'm not going to deal with all the questions ofwhat happens if the dollar declines because I don't know. I've beenworried about that for a year and it hasn't happened yet. Instead, ithas been going up and going up very rapidly recently, as you know.That is a factor in my thinking at least. I suggest that something isthe matter here in terms of some notion of longer-term equilibrium andis a factor in the business picture and, as I indicated earlier, asource of some alarm abroad. I certainly put that in my thinking as afactor to supply more reserves rather than less during this period.That factor alone is not the only factor, but I think at this stage itis not an insignificant one. Well, with that much introduction, whowould like to say something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 191.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It seems to me that we ought tomaintain the present borrowing level of $750 million. I do think it'sworth commenting here, though, that I've been surprised that you havebrought borrowings down from $1 billion to $750 million without anyconsultation with the Committee. Even though I think that was thecorrect thing to do and a certain amount of discretion is indicated inthe directive, it seems to me that at some point you would want tocheck with the Committee to make sure that others share that view onhow to use that discretion. The question could arise again, possibly,over the next few weeks: If we were to start with a borrowing level,let's say, of $750 million, at what point would you feel that youshould check with the Committee if both money and the real economyturn out weaker and, therefore, you were reducing the borrowing levelor increasing the nonborrowed reserve path.Turning to the decision for today, I'd start from theassumption that even though there may be weakness in the fourthquarter, that just does not mean an incipient recession. It seems tome that we already have been perceived in the markets as being fairlyaggressive in easing and I think we ought to be somewhat cautious,particularly between now and the election period. Unless there arevery clear economic reasons to do otherwise, we ought to continue to-23-10/2/84be fairly cautious rather than move toward a pronounced easing. Asfar as the targets go, alternative B strikes me as fine. I wouldleave the funds rate range where it is. There is one last point:It's not too likely, but if we were to get a restoration of confidencein the banking system in a way whereby the management of these banksbegan to follow a somewhat less cautious policy in reserve management,then with a borrowing level of $750 million, we might find fed fundsdropping to as [low] as, say, 10-1/4 percent. And a question I thinkthe Committee ought to consider is: Do we want that much of a drop.If this contingency were to arise--though I don't think it will--wouldwe want to see that much of a drop. There could be an understandingthat the Chairman would be in touch with the rest of the Committee atthat point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses surprise and concern that the borrowing level was reduced without consultation with the Committee, indicating a disagreement on the decision-making process. Additionally, the speaker suggests caution and reluctance towards further easing, while others may have a different view on the matter.


Passage number 192.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions "Mr. Morris" without providing any further information or context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 193.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would support alternativeB with the understanding, as during the last period, that theborrowing limit could be lowered if the aggregates come in extremelyweak. But I think an 8 to 12 percent fed funds range is no longerappropriate. When interest rates were moving up, the lower end of thefunds range didn't have much relevance. When they start moving down,then it seems to me the lower limit becomes the more relevant one.And to me an 8 percent lower limit is simply too low, certainly atthis juncture. I would hate to see us make the sort of mistake we didin 1981 of pursuing vigorously an M1 that was showing some weaknessand pushing rates down and getting an enormous surge of response fromthe economy again. I think that would be very unfortunate. It seemsto me that we need to probe down on interest rates and not let themmove down too sharply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris disagrees with the idea of having an 8 percent lower limit for the funds range and expresses concerns about pushing interest rates down too sharply.


Passage number 194.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you referring to in 1981.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking for clarification on a specific topic.


Passage number 195.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide an answer without the passage. Could you please provide the passage you are referring to?


Passage number 196.
 Well, in '81--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In '80 when we had an 18-1/2 percentfunds rate in June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a historical fact about the funds rate in June 1980.


Passage number 197.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was an entirely different situation.A drop in the economy and the money supply decreased [unintelligible].It was a mistake in retrospect, but I don't think we have anythinglike that now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is highlighting that the situation mentioned previously was different from the current one and expressing their belief that there is no similar issue currently.


Passage number 198.
MR. MORRIS. The context is different. What I'm trying tosay is that I don't think in the present context we ought tovigorously pursue a sluggish M1 if it means pushing interest ratesdown very sharply. And, therefore, I think it would be a mistake tohave the directive give the Manager leeway to move interest rates downthat far. I would suggest a 10 to 12 percent range on the funds rateas being much more realistic, and that would require the Committee tomake another formal judgment before we went below ten percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

In this passage, Mr. Morris is expressing his opinion and suggesting an alternative approach, but there is no clear contention or disagreement with any specific point or person. He is presenting his viewpoint and proposing a different range for the funds rate, but there is no direct disagreement with a specific statement or individual.


Passage number 199.
MR. RICE. I would just like to point out that evenalternative A contemplates a funds rate no lower than 10-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Rice, without any conflicting views or arguments being presented.


Passage number 200.
MR. PARTEE. Well, assuming that the aggregates come in thatway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply makes an assumption without stating any opposing views or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 201.
-24-10/2/84MR. MORRIS. It just seems rather silly to me in thissituation to have a number as low as 8 percent when the lower limit isthe relevant one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 202.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say 8 percent. This is a piece of theframework that I hadn't even considered--that the funds rate might bedown around 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that the possibility of the funds rate being around 8 percent was not initially considered.


Passage number 203.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or even 10 percent. I would haveproblems with 10 percent in the next few weeks. I assume you would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own personal opinion and assumption, without directly engaging in a disagreement or argument with anyone else.


Passage number 204.
MR. MORRIS. I'm not sure I would have a problem with 10percent, but certainly anything below 10 percent I think would be alittle precipitous right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, expresses uncertainty about a certain percentage but does not engage in any argument or conflicting view with anyone else.


Passage number 205.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a question of what kind of signals wewant to give. After all, we're very close to the 12 percent and we'renowhere near the 8 percent at this point. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is stating facts and discussing a specific situation. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 206.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I think that the growth in M1 andthe growth in M2 over the last 4 months or so deserve some underlininghere. The lack of growth in the monetary aggregates and the flatconfiguration of the curve of reserve growth argue, as one of ourcolleagues here indicated, for probing in the direction of restoringM1 and M2 to a somewhat higher configuration over the next weeks. Italso seems to me that the slowing of the economy's rate of growth andthe uncertainty with regard to nondefense capital spending suggest aprobing in that direction. I would join Governor Gramley in hisassertion that a 25 percent annual rate of growth of capital spendingis not appropriate at this stage of the cycle, but I would also pointout that we've had some minus figures in the nondefense capital areafor two months and that the purchasing agents indicate strongly thatthis continued for a third month in September. I'm not sanguine thatthe consumers are going to come back that quickly. On top of therationale stemming from the aggregates and from the reserve growthpattern you add the high uncertainties with regard to a possiblegrowth recession--whatever that is--in the fourth quarter or the firstquarter or both. We can certainly have two quarters of very, very lowgrowth with the implication that says to the Congress when they comeback--after all, we're talking about policies that will have someimpact four or six or eight months from now just at the time when theCongress is back--and the question of taking some responsibility forfiscal policy is in the offing. If we have 1 or 2 percent real growthat that time, what prospect is there for some degree of responsibilityfor fiscal policy.And finally, it seems to me that the behavior pattern thatSteve described with regard to borrowing, with regard to fed fundsprovision, and with regard to excess reserve positions on the part ofthe banking community will probably be reinforced. This aberrantbehavior, if you will, that has kept the fed funds rate where it isdespite almost daily intervention by us, despite the reserve position,and the borrowing position of the banking community, is going to bereinforced by the bad news that's going to come out of commercialbanks and thrift institutions instance after instance. And we knowthis bad news is coming and that it is certainly not going to buildconfidence. It seems to me we should probe from the current level of$750 million of borrowing, from the current 11 to 11-1/2 percent level-25-10/2/84of fed funds, and from the current level of excess reserves carefullydown toward the levels specified in "A." In other words, I recommendwe start at the current levels and move very carefully toward "A,"consulting as you will with this Committee, Mr. Chairman. But,certainly, a $600 million level of borrowing is not out of thequestion; and if it takes a $500 million level of borrowing to get tothat 10 to 10-1/2 percent range for fed funds, then so be it. A thirdreason for probing and moving in that direction is, of course, thedollar situation, which has been thoroughly discussed here and whichis giving our central banker colleagues in Europe and Japandifficulties. To me, the aggregates, the economy, and the dollarargue for a careful probing movement in the direction of whatever ittakes to bring the rate down in the direction of the level specifiedin "A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Martin argues for a careful probing movement to restore M1 and M2 to a higher configuration, while also expressing concern about the slowing economy and uncertainties in nondefense capital spending. He suggests lowering the fed funds rate and borrowing levels, which may be in disagreement with other perspectives.


Passage number 207.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But not necessarily the money supplynumbers specified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any specific money supply numbers or any disagreement or contention related to them.


Passage number 208.
MR. MARTIN. But not necessarily the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "MR. MARTIN. But not necessarily the money supply."


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 210.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Tony Solomon hasstated a position that I would like to join, with just a modest changefor maybe different reasons. Rather than adopting "B" as proposed inthe Bluebook at a 6 percent M1 level--and I'm not talking about eitherM2 or M3 or the federal funds range--I would prefer that the Committeeadopt a shading toward "C," to the 5-1/2 percent level, the same levelwe adopted for the third quarter. In other words, as the record ispublished it would reflect that there has been no change in theobjective of the Committee with respect to money growth. Thedifference, obviously, is that we did not achieve 5-1/2 percent growthin the third quarter, but only 2 percent on a quarterly basis. Itwould give us the latitude to move down. My concern is, much as whathas already been expressed, that the fed funds rate range have someflexibility in it but that within the next six weeks there not be anymajor move to a lower level. I think the chance of moving to lowerinterest rate levels is quite likely consistent with the comments thatI made earlier in that I don't believe that the economy is going to bequite as strong as the staff is forecasting for the fourth quarter. Ithink we'll see some easing. But for the record I would like to seeus re-adopt the same money targets that we had in the third quarterand try to achieve that 5-1/2 percent growth for M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey is proposing a change to the proposed "B" option in the Bluebook, suggesting a shading towards option "C." He also expresses his concern about moving to lower interest rate levels in the next six weeks, while also expressing skepticism about the strength of the economy.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage as it only mentions Governor Partee without any further information or context to suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 212.
MR. PARTEE. I like the specifications of alternative B. Iwould neither want to raise the M1 number above 6 percent, which Ithink is a good center number to have in mind, nor to reduce it,especially following on the shortfalls that we already have had, whichI think would signal a more restrictive stance. I like thespecifications and I would leave the funds rate at 8 to 12 percent.It comes as somewhat of a shock to me that anybody would consider the8 percent a relevant number. I see the point about not going to 8percent in the short run, but I think the public relations effect ofraising it from 8 percent to 10 percent would be too difficult for usto deal with, so I wouldn't do that. Now, I must say that I don'tthink there has been anything very aggressive about monetary policy in-26-10/2/84the last 6 weeks when you remember that we are significantly--significantly by several points--short of the targets we set just 6weeks ago for the third quarter. We are three points short in thecase of M1, 2-1/2 points or more short in the case of M2, and 2 pointsshort in the case of M3. I'm surprised that policy didn't flex moretoward an easier money market stance than it did over this period.So, far from wondering why there wasn't a conference call to seewhether we should go that far, I'm wondering why there wasn't aconference call to see if we should have gone further in this periodthan we did. As I said, there's nothing wrong with these targets, butthe trouble is that our most recent record is that we don't meet thetargets. It may be that we will meet them readily or it may be thatwe won't meet them readily in the quarter to come, since we have justreceived this news about M1 perhaps falling even further short.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the opinion of the speaker, Mr. Party, who is expressing his thoughts and preferences about monetary policy.


Passage number 213.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 214.
 Please remember this is Tuesday and borrowingon Wednesday--MR. PARTEE. Well, I know. That's why you're proposingWednesday meetings, which is a very good reason for Wednesdaymeetings. But I am remembering that it looks as if we are going tohave a shortfall [in M1] and it might carry through into M2 also; Idon't know. I've been a little unhappy about an initial borrowinglevel as high as $750 million and it strengthens my view that we oughtto cut it to $650 million to start with. I see nothing wrong with a10 percent funds rate, although I guess I would have to agree that ifit goes significantly below 10 percent for a period of time, thatsignals something new and I would want to talk about it before it gotbelow 10 percent. But if reducing the initial borrowing number to$650 million happened to give us [a funds rate] moving down toward 10percent, I wouldn't be at all concerned about it. Maybe that's theproblem we're going to have, Mr. Chairman: that we all will choosealternative B but we all will have different ideas as to where [thatmay lead].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses his concern about the borrowing level and suggests cutting it to $650 million. He also mentions his view on the funds rate and that if it goes below 10 percent, he would want to discuss it. This indicates that there is disagreement among the participants about the optimal borrowing level and funds rate.


Passage number 215.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 216.
MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Looking at the GNPI'm a bit more optimistic than some of the comments that I have heard.I think the third quarter may very well wind up stronger than the 2.7percent that the staff has projected and that the fourth quarter, andindeed most of 1985, will be a little stronger as well. Also, I thinkthe money supply is about where we want it, notwithstanding some ofthe recent weakness. There, too, I think we will have a bit of arebound, as suggested by the Bluebook. So, the policy considerationthat flows from those hypotheses would indicate to me that a statusquo policy is appropriate, and for that reason I would opt foralternative B with a borrowing level at $750 million. I think itwould be appropriate for consultation to occur if the fed funds ratewere to drop below 10 percent. I have some sympathy with the remarksthat were made earlier about the range of the fed funds rate. Ireally don't know what 8 percent means except for public relationspurposes, but it doesn't seem to me to be very relevant in thisenvironment. If the dollar were to surge again, I would assume thatthat would cause a different policy direction, and again perhaps aconsultation would be appropriate.10/2/84Mr. Chairman, the question that I raised earlier about thedollar in terms of any significant deviation upward or downward reallywent beyond consideration of policy at this meeting. I have a concernthat we're all expecting at some point some decline in the dollar--andhopefully it would not be a precipitous decline--but nobody reallyknows and nobody knows when it's going to come down. I suppose wecould say we'll have a winner one day--that it probably is going tocome down. The question in my mind is: Is anyone looking at what ourresponse should be if there is a precipitous decline or do we dealwith this on an ad hoc basis. Maybe some planning is going on thatI'm unaware of, but I raise the question of whether there is acontingency plan and, if not, should we be looking at some kind ofcontingency plan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, expresses optimism regarding the strength of the third and fourth quarters of the year, as well as the money supply. However, he also raises a question about the response to a potential precipitous decline in the dollar and whether there is a contingency plan in place. This implies that there may be differing opinions on how to handle such a situation.


Passage number 217.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if you specify the conditions thatyou are imagining, I will develop a contingency plan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply requesting more information in order to create a contingency plan.


Passage number 218.
MR. FORRESTAL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Not enough information is provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage. Please provide the specific passage or context to evaluate this.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 219.
 I don't know what the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Neither do I. That's the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "Neither do I" suggests disagreement or lack of knowledge, indicating a difference of opinion or understanding between the speaker and the other person. The expression "That's the problem" further emphasizes the existence of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 220.
MR. FORRESTAL. [Unintelligible.]SPEAKER(.). The Secretary of the Treasury takes care of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 221.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, two things occur to me: One isintervention and one is a change in policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Forrestal is simply mentioning two things that occurred to him, intervention and a change in policy.


Passage number 222.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the conditions would be.I suspect it will go down some day. I don't know whether it will bein 1984, 1985, or 1986. I suspect when it comes down it will comedown precipitously. You tell me whether the economy is vigorouslyexpanding at that point or whether it's weak and what the inflationrate is then and what the budgetary situation is and I would be gladto develop a contingency plan. But I named three variables, none ofwhich I know about at this point, and all of which would affect mycontingency plan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have enough information to develop a contingency plan because they do not know the conditions of the economy in the future.


Passage number 223.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I guess if I were doing it, I would layout various scenarios.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a personal opinion or suggestion about how they would approach a certain task.


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I invite anybody who wants to engagein that exercise to engage in it. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply inviting anyone who is interested to participate in the exercise. There is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 225.
MR. BLACK. Being more confused than usual about the economicoutlook, which is a state I imagine most people around this table find[themselves in], it's hard to contemplate but I didn't say very muchduring the first part of the meeting. [Unintelligible] Boehne,Partee, and Gramley axis, for lack of a better term. But I think apoint that Henry made does deserve stressing and that is that if weare fortunate enough to get the 4-3/4 percent inflation rate that thestaff is projecting for next year, that would look good only inrelation to the late 1970s and early 1980s; in any other time thatwould have been considered a major economic problem. So, informulating our short-term objectives, I think we need to keep thatlonger-term objective in mind and try to hit our targets for whatwould be the 18th month in a row right on the button. If we couldcome out near the midpoint of the target, I think we would do-28-10/2/84something that would be very beneficial from the standpoint of thewhole economy.To get to the bottom line: Like Chuck, I would go with allthe provisions and specifications of "B." Unlike Chuck, though, withM1 growth picking up in September albeit not as much as I thought,given [the report] this morning that it's apparently somewhat moreelastic with respect to interest rates than we thought earlier, Ithink it's unlikely that we've seen the full response to this declinein the fed funds rate that we had earlier. So, I would be inclined tolet it sit there for a while or maybe move it down a tad at most andthen wait and see what happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without additional context.


Passage number 227.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would buy the specs of "B": $750 million onborrowing, 6 percent for M1, and leave the fed funds rate range whereit is. Basically, I want to try to stay where we are. I would agreewith Chuck that what we have done couldn't be considered aggressiveeasing, but I think we have eased significantly. The principalconcern on my mind is that if I'm right and the staff is right on theoutlook, the greatest danger at this point is that we mightinadvertently ease too much, which would then give rise to the needfor higher interest rates later. In this connection, it seems to methat none of us knows for sure whether or not this pause, if it is apause, is going to continue through October or through the first partof November or exactly how long. That may mean that we're going to belooking at some rather weak money numbers for a while and I don'tthink we ought to panic. We ought to move gingerly toward a lowerlevel of adjustment borrowing, if that's necessary. I would be quitereluctant, for example, to see us move down to $500 million, giventhat we've moved to $750 million within the past few weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing his opinion and concerns about the current monetary policy, but there is no direct contradiction or disagreement with anyone else mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 228.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 229.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree pretty much with whatPres Martin said. It seems to me that all of the recent developmentspoint to a need to ease monetary conditions somewhat--the behavior ofthe aggregates, the level of the exchange rate, the level of thedollar, and the outlook for inflation. Hardly anyone expects aninflation rate next year above 5 percent. The consensus outlook amongeconomists, as I read it, is between 4 and 5 percent. We ourselvesrevised our inflation forecast down. So, from almost everybody'spoint of view, the outlook for inflation is improving and is muchbetter than it was just a month or so ago. If you add to that thecondition of the thrifts, I think this is a time when we couldreasonably hope for a somewhat lower level of interest rates. I thinkthe case is as strong as it has been in recent years for some easing.Call it a probing easing if you like, but I think we ought to try toease some. Now, the good thing about the present combination ofcircumstances is--at least it seems so to me--that we can do it withvery little risk. If the economy surges in the fourth quarter orearly next year--we expect it will not, but if it does--we are in avery good position to reverse without any damage to the economy tospeak of. So, it seems to me that we can at this time think very muchin terms of reducing the reserve pressures somewhat. I would go for aposition somewhere between alternatives A and B, although GovernorPartee's specifications for alternative B are very close to what I-29-10/2/84would be willing to go along with. We could call it "B" with GovernorPartee's specifications. But I would like to see a level of borrowingaround $600 million and I'd leave the funds rate range pretty muchwhere it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 230.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 231.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, in my view, it's a littlepremature to try to do any further easing right now. The status quohas a lot of appeal to me. Therefore, alternative B as specified inthe Bluebook, with a $750 million dollar borrowing assumption, wouldbe very acceptable to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boykin expresses his opinion about the current state of affairs and states his agreement with alternative B.


Passage number 232.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 233.
MR. BOEHNE. I would go along with the specifications ofalternative B, including an initial borrowing level of $750 million.However, it seems to me what is really crucial in this decision is howwe--how you, Mr. Chairman--respond to incoming information over thenext several weeks. I would respond more quickly to a continuation ofweak aggregates and a weaker economy than I would the other wayaround. So, if we got surprised with stronger aggregate growth or astronger economy, it would take more evidence to respond than it wouldif they continue to be on the weak side, just simply because of theaccumulation of information that has come in on the weak side. Withthis kind of approach, we are more likely to end up a month from nowwith lower rates than we have now, but I think it would depend onincoming information as we proceed through the period, much as hasoccurred during the last 6 or 7 weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 234.
MR. PARTEE. Would you change "would" to "might" to have anasymmetrical directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Would you change 'would' to 'might'" is a request or suggestion for potential modification, rather than a conflicting or opposing statement.


Passage number 235.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I suppose that is more literally what I'msaying. I could live with a symmetrical directive as long as we had aslightly asymmetrical interpretation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing that he would be okay with a symmetrical directive as long as there is a slightly asymmetrical interpretation.


Passage number 236.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 237.
MR. CORRIGAN. I would take the specifications of "B" as is,with borrowing at $750 million. That view is partly conditioned on myview of the economy and partly conditioned on my thought that thetrajectory we are facing going into 1985 with money growth isimportant. It's also based on a belief that if incoming developmentsdid warrant some further easing, we could get a pretty quick responsein the real economy. On that I happen to agree with Frank Morris.But it's also based on not very scientific observations that suggestthat the law of averages with regard to the money supply is nowworking against us. We have gotten surprised on the down side forseveral months running and I have this fear that one of these months,for no necessarily obvious reason, we could have a big surprise on theup side. And, in that kind of circumstance, I think there is a verygreat risk of interest rates moving down much too fast--the risk ofthe whipsaw effect. I'd hate like the devil to find ourselves in aposition later this year or early next year, for whatever reasons--theeconomy, money supply, the exchange rate--where we had to reversequickly. Indeed, I would argue that that might be more damaging tothe thrifts than staying where we are in the intervening weeks and-30-10/2/84months. So, I do see a real risk of a whipsaw effect that could bevery damaging if we get too far out in front of this thing.I'd like to think that there was something that could be donewith open market operations to facilitate a soft landing of thedollar, but I guess I don't. I do have an open mind as to what kindof contingent language, symmetrical or otherwise, might be in thedirective that would permit some further reduction in the borrowinglevel if the economy and so forth warranted it. But I would be verymuch on the side of a gingerly response rather than any veryaggressive probing. I would draw that distinction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual expressing their view and explaining the rationale behind it.


Passage number 238.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 239.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I would go with Alternative B. I'mpuzzled by the behavior of the aggregates. There has been more thanthe usual variation in very short-run velocity. I know that short-runvelocity doesn't mean anything, but it is puzzling to observe the upsand downs over the first half. So, the specifications seem all rightto me and borrowing of $750 million seems all right to me. On thefunds rate, I would like to put a lower limit on it. I recognize thatdoing this in the public record might have adverse repercussions. Forinstance, it might affect interest rate expectations adversely. So,perhaps we could have an understanding that we would have a telephoneconference. As for symmetry, I would prefer to stay symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Miss Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage only mentions a person's name, "Miss Seger," without providing any information or context that indicates the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 241.
MS. SEGER. I'm leaning toward the A alternative, with myfirst reason being the performance of the monetary aggregates in thethird quarter. When I look at what the various alternatives areexpected to produce in the way of monetary growth in the fourthquarter and for the 12 months in 1984, it looks as if even withalternative A the results would be within the longer-run targets withthe exception of M3, which would be just outside by a very smallamount. Also, as I mentioned earlier, the economy is definitelyslowing. I don't believe we are heading straight for a recession butI think there has been a significant slowing. I happen to agree thatit's going to continue to be on the moderate side of the spectrum andthat would suggest that some easing, as in alternative A, isappropriate. To repeat what a number of people have mentioned, thestrong dollar is a consideration here and I hope that we can dosomething to maybe at least stop its strong advance.Finally, I repeat my continuing concern about the thrifts andthe health of the financial system in general. When I look at wherethe fed funds rate would likely go based on alternative A, as I readthe statement here, it looks as if it would go somewhere between10-1/4 and 10-1/2 percent; and I don't see that as a precipitous dropin interest rates. Maybe it's my bias, having seen a lot ofvolatility in interest rates, but from where the fed funds rate is nowI would say that's on the modest side. Also, I am thinking of thesignals that we sent to money market participants this summer whenmany of them assumed that the Fed had in fact tightened. I don'tremember sitting here and voting for tightening. [That was] theconclusion that many of them drew from asymmetrical language.Consequently, I think we got an upward movement in the fed funds ratethat in fact exceeded what we were talking about here at the time--at-31-10/2/84least what I thought we were hoping for. Having said all that, Iwould prefer to go with some easing and in general what is shown herein alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is the speaker expressing their leaning towards Alternative A and providing reasons to support their position.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage mentions Mr. Roberts without providing any further context or information about him. Without more details, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 243.
MR. ROBERTS. I would prefer that we use alternative B butmake certain that we do everything possible to accomplish the M1growth projected for the fourth quarter. I think the recentexperience has demonstrated that when we have too many targets we canget inconsistencies in borrowing and interest rates and money and itprobably is too big a pot. I would concentrate on money and if thatcaused us to lower the borrowing level or lower interest rates inorder to accomplish that, I would be in favor of that. It seems to methat we have a broadly based economic expansion that has reached ahigh level and is turning a little sluggish but still doing all right.Price [increases] have slowed down. Interest rates have come downsignificantly. And we're dealing here with lags. What we have at themoment reflects the past monetary growth and what we do now willaffect the future. And contrary to what Emmett mentioned, myobservation is that people at the Conference Board, Chase, DRI,Morgan, and Citicorp, all are looking for 4-1/2 to 6 percent inflationnext year in the projections that I see. And that's the range that Isee also. We're right in the middle of the ranges on the money supplyand I think we ought to try to stay right there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 244.
MR. RICE. The Association of Business Economists, anorganization of 200 people, is looking for an inflation rate somewherebetween 4 and 5 percent. I also noticed yesterday that our shadowsexpect an inflation rate between 3 and 4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply sharing two different sources' expectations for the inflation rate.


Passage number 245.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a little dangerous that they saidthey were content with policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 246.
MR. GRAMLEY. They also said that underlying policy isconsistent with 6 to 7 percent inflation and that unless we bringmoney down, we might get worse results.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that "underlying policy is consistent with 6 to 7 percent inflation" and that bringing money down might result in worse outcomes. There is no explicit indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 247.
MR. PARTEE. And they were talking about 10 percent [on thefunds rate] by the end of this year, weren't they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about a previous conversation.


Passage number 248.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I also heard that they approved whatwe have done this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement simply states that "they" approved what "we" have done this year, without providing any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 249.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what it said in the paper. Mr.Griffith.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 250.
MR. GRIFFITH. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District supportsthe specifications of "B" and very much what Ted just said and whatBob Boykin said. We think it's premature to make any change rightnow. We don't [know] exactly where the stop point is. And the pointthat Jerry Corrigan made our staff thinks is very important: that if[rates] were to go down too much too quickly, we could find ourselvesstarting off 1985 with the whipsaw effect. And for that reason wefeel very strongly about the specifications of "B" as written.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Griffith, expresses agreement with the specifications of "B" and with the statements made by Ted and Bob Boykin. He also mentions concerns raised by Jerry Corrigan and agrees with them. Overall, there is a consensus in this passage.


Passage number 251.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 252.
-32-10/2/84MR. KEEHN. For reasons that have been well stated, I thinkalternative B would be the most desirable alternative at this point.Clearly, there has been a moderation in the rate of economic growth.I think there is a disagreement around the table as to whether or notwe are headed toward a more negative environment or indeed just downto a more sustainable rate of growth. But it does seem to me thatfrom a monetary policy point of view, things are lined up awfully wellat this point and the fundamentals are really right and that it wouldbe premature to be making any kind of significant change. We are in aperiod where we would want to watch it pretty carefully but,fortunately, we have another meeting coming up in a fairly briefperiod of time. As a consequence, at this meeting alternative B seemsto me to be the most appropriate alternative with borrowing of, say,$750 million, but I'd have a high element of flexibility on thatborrowing. And I would attempt very hard to achieve a growth rate ofM1 in the 6 percent area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and stating their reasons for preferring alternative B, but there is no mention of any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 253.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 254.
MS. HORN. I support alternative B and I share very stronglythe concerns that Jerry expressed and that were expressed by someother people around the table. Maybe I will just state it in aslightly different way. I would not like to give the market the wrongsignal through borrowing and the fed funds rate. Now, if I only knewwhat the wrong signal was--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Horn is expressing her support for alternative B and saying that she shares the concerns expressed by Jerry and others. She is also stating that she does not want to give the market the wrong signal but acknowledges that she is unsure of what that wrong signal might be.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Exactly. We could all share that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Exactly. We could all share that" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply agrees with a previous statement or sentiment.


Passage number 256.
MS. HORN. But, since I don't, moving slowly seems to me thebest approach. And I would support "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's opinion on a subject without any opposing views or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 257.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you have identified theright question. There is clearly a strong consensus for "B" with acouple of exceptions. That is not surprising when we are talkingabout numbers for the money supply, which look nice. Most people havesuggested not changing the fed funds rate [range]. That sounds rightto me too; I don't see how we can raise the lower limit withoutgetting peculiar interpretations. I thought we had a very fulldiscussion at the last meeting of what to do in terms of contingenciesand I must say I don't ever remember being in a position [during anintermeeting period] when every indicator that I looked at appeared tobe in the same direction and neatly fit the directive for moving down.Whether I looked at M1, M2, M3, reserves, the exchange rate, theeconomy--what else have I left out here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges a consensus for option "B" with a few exceptions. They also mention agreement on not changing the fed funds rate and not raising the lower limit. The speaker further expresses their satisfaction with the discussion and the alignment of indicators pointing in the same direction.


Passage number 258.
MR. PARTEE. Prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions Mr. Partee and prices, without indicating any conflicting opinions or contradicting statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 259.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Prices--except for that last consumerprice index number. That was the only fly in the ointment. But theproducer price index and everything else seemed to fit exactly in acontingency that we considered and discussed at some length at themeeting as to how we would react under those circumstances. The onething that was really surprising and added a little edge to the way weoperated was the exchange rate. One could have argued that we shouldhave been a little more aggressive in our monetary policy [response].At least that's my thinking. In any event, that's behind us.-33-10/2/84We seem to have votes for "B," which I interpret as includingboth the funds rate range and the aggregates. There are somedifferences of opinion on how that is to be dealt with. I wouldremind you of what Si Keehn just said. We meet again in 5 weeks; it'sa relatively short period of time. I didn't hear anybody talkingabout a higher borrowings number. Some people were talking about alower one and a number of people were talking explicitly or implicitlyabout not being too slow to move lower, if the evidence suggests that.Someplace in this area we ought to be able to reach some kind ofconsensus operationally. I don't like the directive as Mr. Sternlightand Mr. Axilrod wrote it, I must say. It starts out by saying policyis unchanged. I'll be more correct in my words; it says the"implementation of policy has been unchanged" when it obviously waschanged in the last month. If we were to read all of our directivesin succession, they would never say anything was changed, although infact they were changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage regarding the monetary policy response and the wording of the directive. The speaker suggests that they should have been more aggressive in their monetary policy response, while also expressing dissatisfaction with the wording of the directive, which states that the implementation of policy has been unchanged, despite the fact that it was changed in the last month.


Passage number 260.
MR. PARTEE. That's traditional.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply presents a statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 261.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I recall we had an argument aboutthis once before. But it seems to me that the first sentence ought toacknowledge that we have somewhat less pressure on reserves than wedid at the time of the last meeting [when we adopted a directive] thatsaid no change unless something happens. Well, something happened.That's a more or less technical point. The real question is what wedo thereafter. I certainly share the view that some have expressedthat if things continue coming in on the low side and/or the exchangerate continues very strong, we shouldn't be very reluctant to easefurther in the kind of range that has been discussed here. I, myself,am somewhat indifferent as to whether or not we do that right now. Idon't think it is necessary [to take action now]. We have a verypeculiar technical situation now where the funds rate is very high--and borrowings have been very high just in the last few days--relativeto what one would think it would be with this borrowing level. Theactual borrowing level we're going to publish is going to be way aboveour target. It's going to confuse people. And we are looking towarda great excess of reserves later in the week that may or may not bereflected very promptly in the funds rate. How we will handle that Idon't know, but we are well above any borrowing number--about twice--that anybody has been talking about for the first week of this two-week period. And getting it down to any of these borrowing numbers inthe course of this week is inconceivable. It would have to go to zeroright away. So, during this period, we're going to have a much higherlevel of borrowing than any of these numbers we are talking about.Whether there was anything that could have been done about that, Idon't know, but it's too late now. We are going to start off thefirst week of this five-week period with a very high level ofborrowing relative to what we're presumably aiming at, which may meanthat the funds rate temporarily will go quite low later in the week.In that case we obviously will be selling--not necessarily this week,but later in the two-week averaging period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing a situation and expressing their own thoughts and uncertainty about it. They mention points made by others but do not directly argue against them.


Passage number 262.
MR. PARTEE. Is this the first week of a two-week period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 263.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, this is the first week of the two-week period. Just as a guess, the funds rate isn't going to declineall that precipitously later in this calendar week but the banks mayhave such an accumulation of excess reserves by the early part of next-34-10/2/84week that it may plunge. And they will be even further confused bywhat we're trying to do. I have my doubts about these two-weekaveraging periods the more experience we have with that; the banksdon't seem to have a very good idea of where the funds rate should beand it moves all over the lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 264.
MR. GRAMLEY. Maybe we should go back to lagged reserveaccounting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a suggestion made by someone named Mr. Gramley.


Passage number 265.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how much that affects it. Itmay be that the contemporaneous reserve accounting makes them so muchmore uncertain about their reserve positions that it contributes toit. It may be a combination of the two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting two possible explanations for a certain situation, but there is no disagreement or contention mentioned. It simply acknowledges that there could be multiple factors at play.


Passage number 266.
MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is unintelligible, so it does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In any event, in substance I will attemptto interpret what people are saying or some mean of what people aresaying. We start where we are, or close to where we are, and arepretty prompt to move lower if the money supply weakness is furtherconfirmed, if the dollar is strong, and if economic weakness isrelatively further confirmed. All these signals would have to bepretty strong to carry us to borrowing as low as $500 million, Ithink, but not so strong to carry us down to $650 million or $600million. The signals would have to be clear, but not extreme. BeforeI talk about language, how does that sound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the interpretation of signals related to money supply, the strength of the dollar, and economic weakness.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 268.
MR. GRAMLEY. I for one would repeat my own concern aboutmoving too far too fast because I don't think we know when the economyis going to start picking up again. I thought I heard a fair numberof people share that concern; maybe not. There were a number ofpeople who were worried, as I am, about the possibility that ifinterest rates come down too much and if the economy then recoversrates would go bouncing back up again. And that's not a desirabledevelopment, in my judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Gramley expresses concern about moving too fast in lowering interest rates, while acknowledging that not everyone may share his concern. This indicates a disagreement or difference of opinion on the matter.


Passage number 269.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what we want to examine is how muchis too much too fast. I would remind you, we now have a borrowinglevel that is down by $250 million, presumably, in terms of theprevious target, with the fed funds rate as of the last few days downpractically not at all. A lot of other things are going on. I don'tknow what you're thinking of. Putting it in terms of interest ratesis easier to describe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information and expressing uncertainty, but there is no argument or conflicting views presented.


Passage number 270.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage is a statement, without any apparent disagreement or contention.


Passage number 271.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have in my mind a 10 percent fundsrate at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a straightforward expression of the speaker's current thought and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 272.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think we are talking about very much,Lyle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion or observation without conflicting with others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 273.
MR. GRAMLEY. If the funds rate were to get down into the10-1/4 to 10-1/2 percent range, I wouldn't be acutely uncomfortable.If it gets down to 10 percent, having been up to 11-1/2 percent only afew weeks ago, that just seems to me to be too big a move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses a disagreement or contention regarding the potential decrease in the funds rate. They state that a 10% funds rate would be "too big a move" compared to the previous rate of 11-1/2%.


Passage number 274.
-35-10/2/84MR. PARTEE. But the 11-1/2 percent was an aberration to aconsiderable degree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the 11-1/2 percent being an aberration.


Passage number 275.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, yes, except it stayed up in that 11-1/4to 11-1/2 percent range for quite some time. To go down more than afull percentage point in a matter of 6 to 8 weeks--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit contention or disagreement. It provides a statement or observation without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, nobody knows. And we get dailyfluctuations in the numbers; we already have. But to give you thestate of my mind: I'm not thinking of a 10 percent funds rate at thispoint as a likely outcome without a good deal more weakness than whatwe've already seen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker does not believe a 10 percent funds rate is likely without further weakness.


Passage number 277.
MR. CORRIGAN. There is one thing I'm very uncomfortableabout. As you stated, when you start out at $750 million, you'rewilling to go to $650 million and if the funds rate comes down alittle more in the circumstance that you described, I think that'sprobably all right. My hunch is that, absent this precautionarypremium or whatever we want to call it, the funds rate probably wouldmove down by itself in the fourth quarter in the context in which wehad money growth around 6 percent and borrowings around $750 million.But my real concern is the other contingency: that events could verywell precipitate an increase in that precautionary premium. Then, wewould end up with a situation in which at any borrowing level, thefederal funds rate would tend to be higher. And then we would be leftwith a Catch-22 situation where money growth, wherever it may be,could be in some structural sense out of line with what is observed inthe federal funds market and what is observed with the level ofborrowing. And I just don't know what to do about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure what contingency you'retalking about. There could be a million of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and acknowledging the possibility of multiple contingencies.


Passage number 279.
 Are you saying theimplication, if the money supply should be high, is that--MR. CORRIGAN. Now, that would be the worst. I'm saying thatthe contingency I'm concerned about would be if this precautionaryatmosphere that we see in the way banks are managing their money isintensified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement and the other person is simply expressing agreement and further elaborating on the topic.


Passage number 280.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand that, but if that gives atight [funds] market and money supply growth is relatively low,presumably we would ease the pressures on reserve positions. That'sfairly easy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their understanding and suggesting a potential solution to ease pressures on reserve positions.


Passage number 281.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but my concern is that we might get thatin a context in which money growth is strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Corrigan is expressing his concern about a potential situation where money growth is strong, but the passage does not indicate any conflicting perspectives or arguments.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, then you've got a differentsituation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply acknowledging that a different situation has been presented.


Passage number 283.
MR. CORRIGAN. Then we have a real problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that there is a problem without expressing any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 284.
MR. PARTEE. But we have these guides in the directive forthe money supply growth, if it is strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 285.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but he's saying he doesn't like that,presumably, when something looks contrary or peculiar. If we hadrising interest rates and high money supply growth, then I think we-36-10/2/84would have to rethink it. I don't know how you write that in thedirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about how to convey a specific idea or statement in the directive, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 286.
MR. MARTIN. You can't cover every eventuality.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a general statement expressing the speaker's opinion about the impossibility of covering every eventuality. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 287.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is clearly one where we'dhave to rethink it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "we'd have to rethink it" suggests that there is disagreement or uncertainty about a particular issue, leading to the need for reconsideration.


Passage number 288.
MR. CORRIGAN. I think there's a good chance we may beconfronted with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a personal opinion or observation by Mr. Corrigan, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 289.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we may; I don't know what we woulddo about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses uncertainty about what action to take, without indicating any conflicting opinions or disagreement with others.


Passage number 290.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have to be careful not to go backand overemphasize the importance of short-run money supply numbers.They may not be telling us anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not involve any form of contention or disagreement. It simply emphasizes the need to exercise caution when interpreting short-run money supply numbers and states that they may not provide significant information.


Passage number 291.
MR. PARTEE. Or they might be telling us something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a possible scenario without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 292.
MR. MARTIN. When we've had them for four months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage given.


Passage number 293.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But, normally, we look at longerperiods, and in longer periods we seem to be all right. I understandthat a lot of the recent economic indicators are somewhat weaker, butas long as we're doing so well in the long run [with respect to] theannual money targets why should we be that concerned about correctingthe short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about looking at longer periods and suggests that as long as the long-term targets are being met, there may not be a need to worry about fixing any short-term issues.


Passage number 294.
MR. MARTIN. [Is] the short run 3 to 4 months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a factual statement about the short run being 3 to 4 months.


Passage number 295.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know what that lag is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states confusion or lack of knowledge about a particular lag, there is no disagreement involved.


Passage number 296.
MR. PARTEE. I agree with you, Tony, but I do think that asthe evidence accumulates we have to begin to recognize it. We had theweak July and then the staff said that August would snap back. ThenAugust was low and they said that September would be good. NowSeptember seems to be revising down, and in this case they don't seemto have much hope that October is going to be strong. Maybe, tocomplete the whole circle, October will be very strong. Right now itdoesn't seem to look it. So, we're starting to develop [a pattern of]some months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging a pattern of poor economic performance based on previous months' data.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 297.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If October is going to be strong, it'sgoing to have to show up, I suspect, in the figure for October 8th,which we won't have for a while. And, if it doesn't show up then,we'll be in trouble in October because we'll have a couple of weeks inOctober below the September average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker suggests that if October does not show improvement by October 8th, there will be trouble in October. This implies a potential disagreement or concern about the performance of October.


Passage number 298.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't generate a response without more information about the passage you're referring to.


Passage number 299.
 Well, the $8 billion increase that's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, they usually come in the first orsecond week in the month; that's why I say that. If it doesn't comeby October 8th, I think we're unlikely to get an increase like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 300.
MR. PARTEE. So that becomes four months of low growth. Fourmonths is not as long as a year, but it's approaching six months and-37-10/2/84one starts to take it into account a little. At least that's the wayI look at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their perspective on the length of time mentioned.


Passage number 301.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As in September, if we had a great bigincrease that first full week in October, it wouldn't mean much; itmight be necessary to put October at 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a conditional scenario without expressing any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 302.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Which would be all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Which would be all right." This statement is neither expressing a conflicting opinion nor contradicting any other information. It simply states that any option or choice mentioned would be acceptable.


Passage number 303.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which is what happened in September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 304.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Coming back to the question that youposed, I would agree with the basic strategy as you formulated it interms of continuing where we are on the borrowing level, thealternative B numbers, and using your discretion that if everythingcomes in weak to go down to $600 or $650 million [on borrowing]. Butit seems to me that a large number of us are concerned too about theperception as well as the substance of a large drop in interest ratesengineered by the Fed in the next critical 5 to 6 weeks. And it seemsto me that, under those circumstances, there would have to be a strongenough case for you to call a Committee consultation if you want to gobelow $600 million. If it's something in that area, that seems to mean appropriate way of touching different bases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the basic strategy but raising a concern about the perception and potential consequences of a large drop in interest rates. They suggest seeking further consultation if the borrowing amount goes below a certain level.


Passage number 305.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have any great problem with that,but my only connection with all the various political or semi-political sensitivities that have been mentioned is that, justspeaking personally, I'm not very impressed with any of them I mustsay. I don't necessarily agree with the Vice Chairman's fiscal policystrategy. I'm not sure we'd know how to play that one. I'd just playit straight. And, in connection with the next few weeks, I'd play itstraight too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their lack of connection or impression with various political sensitivities, mentions their disagreement with the Vice Chairman's fiscal policy strategy, and states their preference for playing it straight in certain situations.


Passage number 306.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the title "VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON" but does not provide any context or mention any specific actions, statements, or events that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 307.
 Yes, if there's an overwhelming casefor--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply implies that there is a strong case for something without any opposing views or conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 308.
 Well, you say overwhelming--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or clear case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It is a statement expressing agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 309.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A reasonably clear case. That's all I'msaying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "A reasonably clear case. That's all I'm saying" expresses a clear and definitive viewpoint without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 310.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The markets don't have as pessimistica view as I think you and Pres Martin and maybe Emmett have beenreflecting today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: unclear


Passage number 311.
MR. RICE. I don't have a pessimistic view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice simply states that he does not have a pessimistic view, without indicating any opposing or contradictory viewpoint.


Passage number 312.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I misunderstood you. I think themarket view is quite clearly one that this is a temporary weakness--this 3-1/2 percent that we see on the third-quarter flash [GNP report]--and that the fourth quarter will continue with moderate strength.And I think it's important that we have a clear case before we'reperceived as doing some very substantial easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 313.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a matter of degree. But Ithink it can be overemphasized. The market may be wrong and then-38-10/2/84we're going to look like damn fools, and pretty quickly. The marketcouldn't understand that we were easing earlier. But I think it'sfully accepted and it's very hard to [find] fault with it, I think, intheir view. I don't get any sense of complaint about it or wonderingabout it at this stage, although they didn't quite anticipate it.There was a kind of disbelief for some weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing the market's perspective, but there is no direct disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 314.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think you did the right thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The question is how the economy and thedollar and all the rest will behave. And none of us knows that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing uncertainty about the future behavior of the economy and currency.


Passage number 316.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think you did the right thing, butI guess I'm surprised also. For a man who's as skeptical as you areand most of us are about what the economic indicators are telling usabout the real economy, don't you think it is dangerous to try tofine-tune an interest rate response so quickly. After all, we onlybegan to see these weaker economic indicators that I'm talking aboutin the last few weeks. I think your judgment has been vindicated, butwe only began to see a few weeks ago these indicators showing moreweakness. And they could possibly have been wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing surprise and questioning the decision made by someone, but there is no direct disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 317.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It wasn't just the numbers on the economy.I think they began showing up immediately after the last meeting. Wehad an extreme movement in the dollar and continued weakness in themonetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is not indicating any form of contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a sequence of events related to the economy without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 318.
MR. PARTEE. There were shortfalls in all of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a factual statement about the existence of shortfalls in all of the mentioned cases.


Passage number 319.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but since we ignored thestrength of the dollar previously in domestic monetary policy, I guessI don't quite understand why this last speculative bubble had thatmuch more impact on this situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their confusion about the impact of a speculative bubble on the situation, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 320.
 Although I agree with thedirection of it, the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was pretty extreme. In terms of myforeign colleagues, outrage is a little strong, but [their reactionverged] on outrage that we didn't pay more attention to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 321.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I know. But then I heard verycritical comments from the key actors on the European side--centralbankers I'm talking about--that our intervention was so feeble that itdidn't really mean anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there were critical comments from central bankers about the intervention being feeble.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't disagree with that, but there wasvery little support for intervention without monetary policy action onthe part of the United States.Well, I think we are in an asymmetrical position; that'swhere my gut tells me we are. [The issue is] whether or not we put itdown in the directive. I would. If the economy suddenly reboundedand the money supply began running significantly higher thanalternative B, I would question what we do, particularly in thecontext of the dollar not strengthening further. I can imaginecircumstances in which one might want to tighten, but I'd be prettyhard pressed to imagine what those circumstances would be in the nextfive weeks. It does not strain my credulity at all to think that wemight want to go at least modestly in the other direction in the next-39-10/2/84five weeks. And I would think that the directive ought to reflectthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions, but there are no conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 323.
 But just how it reflects that is--MR. PARTEE. Well, as I suggested, we could just change the"might" and "would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering a suggestion and there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 324.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know. We could do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges and understands what is being suggested and agrees with it.


Passage number 325.
MR. PARTEE. Or we could change the order of the two parts ofthe sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is suggesting a potential change in the sentence structure by swapping the order of the two parts.


Passage number 326.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That, I think, is the minimum that oneought to do. Mr. Axilrod could distribute this [draft] that really isasymmetrical, if you're interested in looking at it. It would startout by saying "In the implementation of policy in the short run theCommittee seeks to maintain the lesser degree of restraint on reservepositions sought in recent weeks." That's more or less technical; itacknowledges that we did something. Then, we'd put in the sentencewith basically the alternative B [specifications]. It would go on tosay that a somewhat or slightly further lessening of restraint onreserve positions would be acceptable in the light of significantlyslower growth in the monetary aggregates, particularly in the contextof continued moderation in economic activity and inflationarypressures. Then we'd go on with the standard language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting what should be included in a draft and explaining the reasoning behind their suggestions.


Passage number 327.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought it would be "only" in thecontext. That implies that even without any weakening in the realeconomy there would be even less restraint just because of weakness inthe monetary aggregates--that that alone would trigger it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a personal thought and observation, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 328.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says "particularly in the context of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In order to answer this question, the relevant passage or information needs to be provided.


Passage number 329.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON" does not indicate any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 330.
 Whereas the one we had before thatsaid--MR. PARTEE. It said "only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 331.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. --"only in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context or specific information.


Passage number 332.
"MR. MARTIN. Continued moderation in economic activity andinflationary pressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a continuation of moderation in economic activity and inflationary pressures.


Passage number 333.
MR. GRAMLEY. You're dropping out the tightening[alternative] altogether.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is simply stating a fact.


Passage number 334.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In this version. We can put it back in,but I'd put it in another sentence--unless you want to use somethinglike "particularly." Otherwise, we could just drop the next sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting an alternative placement or rephrasing of a sentence, without expressing any disagreement or contradictory opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 335.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, or leave the next sentence and drop thelast phrase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker acknowledges a potential disagreement or alternative viewpoint by suggesting that the next sentence could be removed if necessary.


Passage number 336.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The one thing that bothers me about thisis that there is then no mention, except in another paragraph, ofcredit market conditions and the exchange rate. That is obscurely inthere now with financial market conditions. That could be worked insomehow, I suppose. Let's put a comma, and then "taking account offinancial market conditions and the rate of credit growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concern about a lack of mention regarding credit market conditions and the exchange rate, suggesting that it could be incorporated somehow.


Passage number 337.
"-40-10/2/84MR. GUFFEY. Doesn't that appear in the sentence immediatelyabove the start of the operating paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply providing a reference to a specific sentence and asking a question about it.


Passage number 338.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It does, but it doesn't get much attentionthere. It's not in the operative part of the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that something does exist but it does not receive much attention. There is no conflicting information or contrasting viewpoints provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 339.
 I don't haveit in front of me, but you are right that there is a--MR. PARTEE. My point, Paul, was that we could drop thatwhole phrase starting with "particularly" and instead make it a phrasesuch as "evaluated in relation not only to indicators of the strengthof..." and just continue right on. Now, that makes it a one-sideddirective, but I think it would solve Tony's problem that we wouldonly look at easing in the context of weak money numbers and theconfirming business and inflationary and credit situations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. This can be seen through the disagreement between Mr. Party and Paul regarding the phrasing and approach suggested for evaluating a certain situation. Mr. Party proposes dropping a specific phrase and replacing it with a different phrase, which Paul does not appear to agree with.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 340.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it's a mistake not to havesomething on both sides. We can achieve the purpose you want bysimply revising the existing sentence and putting the easier restraintfirst and then leaving the rest of the directive exactly as it is.So, it would read: "Somewhat lesser reserve restraint would beacceptable in the context of significantly slower growth of theaggregates or somewhat greater restraint would be acceptable in theevent of more substantial growth. In either case..." and so on. Itjust seems to me that, with a couple of months of weakness in economicactivity, to send a signal out that we have completely ruled out ofour thinking any possibility that we would react to events on theother side is wrong. It's not the way to do things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of not having something on both sides and argues for revising the existing sentence to include options for both lesser restraint and greater restraint. The speaker believes that completely ruling out the possibility of reacting to events on the other side is wrong, indicating a disagreement.


Passage number 341.
MR. BOEHNE. I'd like to piggyback on that. I think anasymmetrical directive, or at least a tilt in that direction, makessense. But I think the image that this directive will create, incontrast to the last directive, is a stronger change than I wouldthink the Committee would want to convey. After all, the lastdirective, which was symmetrical, enabled a rather significant drop inthe borrowings, which I happen to think was a wise thing to do. But Ijust wonder if one has to move that far in this directive. Some tiltor some small signal, yes; but this just seems to me to highlight itand it's awfully strong for my taste.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing his thoughts and questioning whether the directive goes too far in terms of creating a stronger change compared to the previous directive. However, he does not explicitly state opposition or disagreement with the directive.


Passage number 342.
MR. WALLICH. I think it would indicate a real policy shiftif we dropped the up side of the symmetry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 343.
MR. GUFFEY. I would agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement.


Passage number 344.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And I would agree, obviously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement expresses agreement with a previous idea, suggesting there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 345.
MR. CORRIGAN. In the context of what I thought you weresaying before, Mr. Chairman, in terms of borrowings that could getdown to, say, $600 to $650 million and a federal funds rate that couldget down to 10 percent or 10-1/2 percent or something like that, Ithink that contingency could be covered easily in a directive thattilts rather than falls. Again, I must say that the danger thatreally bothers me is this whipsaw phenomenon I spoke of before. If wewent through a period where we had, say, a 150 basis points swing upand down in short-term interest rates in a period of three months orso, I think that would be very, very damaging to the real economy andfor the thrifts, for the banks, and for everybody else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Rather, it is expressing concerns and opinions about the potential impact of certain interest rate fluctuations on the economy and various entities.


Passage number 346.
-41-10/2/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the name and title of Chairman Volcker without presenting any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 347.
 I don't see why, but that's--MR. CORRIGAN. I would say the reason why is that if we startto move in that direction in a context in which it's perceived thatthere is a potential for a rather large move, the markets will respondvery aggressively. We'll get another surge of all this crazy activityin the mortgage markets and then it will just get stopped dead in itstracks if interest rates have to turn around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is more of a statement followed by an explanation or elaboration.


Passage number 348.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree with Jerry completely. Themore they see us responding quickly to short-run changes in themonetary aggregates, the more people in the market are going to say"Are we going to go back to the extreme swings that we had where rateswere running between 8 and 20 percent.". I think we have to becareful of that; we ought to be moving very gradually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker explicitly states that they agree with Jerry completely and shares their concern about the potential for extreme swings in interest rates. They emphasize the need to proceed cautiously and gradually.


Passage number 349.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you are assuming much morecontrollability of the market than in fact we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not exhibit contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the assumed level of control that exists in the market.


Passage number 350.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 351.
 I don't have any problem--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This great 1-1/2 percentage pointreduction in long-term rates took place without any change in ourborrowing assumption at all. We reduced the borrowing by $250million--this massive move that you talk about--and long-term ratesare practically where they were before we started moving borrowingdown. And how far down the federal funds rate is, I don't even know.It depends upon whether you look at it on Friday or Monday orWednesday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about interest rates and borrowing without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 352.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that's because of specialfactors that you talked about earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation for a previous point made in the conversation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 353.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it depends upon so many other factorsthat thinking we can predict this with any assurance is a bit beyondour capacity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "thinking we can predict this with any assurance is a bit beyond our capacity" suggests that there are doubts or disagreement about our ability to accurately predict something due to numerous unknown factors.


Passage number 354.
MR. CORRIGAN. I don't have any trouble with the substance ofwhat I think you're saying. I don't even have any trouble with thesuggestion that it would take some considerable set of circumstancesto envision a tightening move in the next five weeks. But what I dohave trouble with is creating a perception that what we have in mindis more than what I think you're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan is expressing agreement with what he believes the speaker is saying, but he is expressing concern about the perception that is being created.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 355.
 Most people are saying--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you're assuming conditionsthat I'm not assuming on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker implies that they disagree with the assumptions made by others, suggesting a difference in opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 356.
MR. CORRIGAN. I may be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: unable to attend the meeting tomorrow due to a scheduling conflict. 

No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply states that Mr. Corrigan may not be able to attend the meeting tomorrow due to a scheduling conflict.


Passage number 357.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All this easing that you're talking abouttakes place in the context of continuing quite sluggish businessnumbers, a strong dollar, and low money growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating facts about the current economic situation, such as sluggish business numbers, a strong dollar, and low money growth.


Passage number 358.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided about the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 359.
 Well, in those circumstances, if the borrowinglevel goes down in this five-week period, or even early in the five-week period, to this $650 or $600 million--10/2/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Earlier you said you had no objectionto making it double-barrelled as long as it's only tilted, but Iassume that you don't object to putting back in some contingencylanguage on the other side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 360.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it's too formalistic, I think we'rejust doing a very formalistic thing and not being very enlightening.But I don't have any objection to dealing with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. Instead, it presents a personal opinion and a willingness to address a possible issue.


Passage number 361.
MR. BOEHNE. May I suggest that you keep the sentence thatyou have there beginning with "A somewhat further lessening ofrestraint" and drop that last sentence. But in its place, we couldhave a sentence that would go something like this: "Some increase inreserve restraint might possibly be appropriate in the context ofsubstantially greater growth in the monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is a suggestion made by Mr. Boehne, but there is no clear contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 362.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no objection to something likethat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the speaker has no objection to something, indicating agreement or lack of disagreement.


Passage number 363.
MR. WALLICH. Other than "possibly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 364.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I don't know whether you want theword "possibly" in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about including the word "possibly," but it does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 365.
MR. GRAMLEY. Why not just take the existing sentence andreverse the order.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. It is a straightforward statement without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 366.
MR. GUFFEY. Indeed. That's a good suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey acknowledges that the suggestion made is good.


Passage number 367.
MR. BOYKIN. Yes, that's what I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their personal opinion.


Passage number 368.
MR. PARTEE. Well, if we want to tilt it, we could say "wellabove" instead of "high growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting an alternative word choice, but there is no disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 369.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is a very minor thing, but I wouldnot just take this existing sentence and reverse the order because itsounds so formalistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating an opinion about a minor point.


Passage number 370.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is "Yes." There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker responds with "Yes" to indicate agreement with a potential disagreement or conflicting view.


Passage number 371.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have changed nothing and peopleare supposed to read great meaning into the changing of the order of asentence without one iota of change in the substance. That sounds alittle too much. But if you put in an adjective or two, I don't mindthat if you prefer it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a willingness to make a minor change (adding adjectives) if the listener prefers it, but does not have any issue with the original suggestion.


Passage number 372.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A moderate adjective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply describes something as "moderate," which suggests a neutral or balanced characteristic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 373.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This time I'm partly objecting because itrather sounds to me like we're playing games instead of reflectinganything substantive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is objecting to the idea they are discussing because they feel it sounds like they are playing games instead of having a meaningful and substantive discussion.


Passage number 374.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think perhaps you have a strongerview from the down side of the economy than most of us have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is expressing a subjective opinion about one person's perspective on the economy. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 375.
MR. PARTEE. If you really want to change the structure, Iwould go back to my proposal that we use your first sentence and thensay "evaluated in relation not only" and so forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a suggestion by MR. PARTEE to change the structure of a proposal.


Passage number 376.
 Then we could have-43-10/2/84another sentence that says "Conversely, if the monetary aggregates arestrong and there is associated strength showing in the economy"--MR. CORRIGAN. I could easily support that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no apparent contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the previous sentence by saying "I could easily support that."


Passage number 377.
MR. WALLICH. "Conversely" strikes me as balancing it in theright direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Wallich expresses his opinion on a particular point by using the word "conversely." This indicates that he sees it as a way of bringing balance to the topic, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 378.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sounds a little less formalistic to methan just reversing [the order].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 379.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it is. It really does change it somewhat,I think, but not a great deal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion without disagreeing with anyone else.


Passage number 380.
MR. GRAMLEY. But wouldn't you want to put that sentencebefore the "in any event" sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is simply making a suggestion or offering his opinion about the sentence placement in a neutral manner.


Passage number 381.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, he's combining those two sentences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 382.
MR. PARTEE. No, I'm combining them and dropping that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is just explaining a decision being made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 383.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way he would have it read is "Asomewhat further lessening of restraint on reserve positions would beacceptable in the event of significantly slower growth in the monetaryaggregates evaluated in relation not only to the indicated strength ofthe business expansion and inflationary pressures, but also tofinancial market conditions and the rate of credit growth." That's arather cumbersome sentence, but it's all right. "Conversely, greaterrestraint might" or "would be acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The excerpt simply presents two different possibilities and does not express any conflict or disagreement between them.


Passage number 384.
"MR. PARTEE. "Might," I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty by using the word "might" instead of making a definitive statement.


Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is "acceptable" the word. We'd say"acceptable in the event of"--well, "significantly" is the obviousword to put in here but we used "significantly" up above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 386.
MR. PARTEE. "Monetary growth well above the numbersexpected." Is that what we call it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee about monetary growth being higher than expected.


Passage number 387.
MR. GRAMLEY. "Well above these expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a quote from Mr. Gramley with no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 388.
"MR. AXILROD. "Growth substantially more rapid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 389.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Substantially more rapid monetarygrowth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact or observation without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 390.
" Is that--MR. PARTEE. That would be all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or suggestion being made by someone named MR. PARTEE.


Passage number 391.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "And indications of"--we can't exactly saya rebound. "Indications of stronger".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is stating that there are indications of something stronger without providing any contradictory information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 392.
MR. PARTEE. "New strength" or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 393.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Economic growth and credit expansion."[Unintelligible] Jack Kemp's concerns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Economic growth and credit expansion" does not indicate any specific argument or disagreement. Additionally, the mention of "Jack Kemp's concerns" does not provide enough information to determine any contention.


Passage number 394.
MR. PARTEE. "Indications of stronger expansion in economicand financial developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 395.
"-44-10/2/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Sounds great. Real prose--poetry, infact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses enthusiasm or agreement with the statement mentioned.


Passage number 396.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I need more context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Could you provide more information or the full passage?


Passage number 397.
 Or "stronger economic and credit market"--MR. AXILROD. Add "inflationary pressures." I wrote"indications of significant strengthening in economic activity andinflationary pressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is simply adding a phrase related to inflationary pressures to the previous statement about a stronger economic and credit market.


Passage number 398.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think it's good to get the[reference to] inflationary pressures in there--"of economic activityand inflationary pressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing agreement and support for including inflationary pressures in a certain context.


Passage number 399.
"MR. PARTEE. It's hard to imagine we'll have evidence of allthis in five weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing doubt or difficulty in imagining that they will have evidence of everything within five weeks.


Passage number 400.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the statement "I think that's right." The phrase simply expresses agreement or affirmation of a previous statement or idea.


Passage number 401.
MR. BLACK. More than fragmentary indications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not providing any evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Black has more than fragmentary indications, without further information or context.


Passage number 402.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I know what I have now, and what'sthe rest of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their confidence in knowing what they currently have, and acknowledging that there is still more to come.


Passage number 403.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The usual boiler.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply states that the subject is "the usual boiler," without challenging or debating this statement.


Passage number 404.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The usual last two sentences, or just thelast sentence. It goes directly to the last sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 405.
MR. GRAMLEY. Sometime we ought to put out a directive whichsays "Complete with the usual boiler plate".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that a directive should be issued with a standard phrase or text commonly used in such situations, indicating no hint of conflict or difference of opinion.


Passage number 406.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just read it: "In theimplementation of policy in the short run, the Committee seeks tomaintain the lesser degree of restraint on reserve positions sought inrecent weeks. This action is expected to be consistent with growth inM1, M2, and M3 at annual rates of 6, 7-1/2, and 9 percent,respectively, during the period from September to December. Asomewhat further lessening of restraint on reserve positions would beacceptable in the event of significantly slower growth in the monetaryaggregates, evaluated in relation--." Why don't we take out this "notonly" bit to simplify the sentence.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting removing a certain phrase to simplify the sentence.


Passage number 407.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --"evaluated in relation to the strengthof business expansion and inflationary pressures and financial marketconditions and the rate of credit growth." Am I right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 408.
MR. AXILROD. Did you want to put "financial and exchangemarket conditions".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if "financial and exchange market conditions" should be included.


Passage number 409.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Domestic and international." Put ineverything but the kitchen sink. "...domestic and internationalfinancial market conditions, and the rate of credit growth.Conversely, greater restraint might be acceptable in the event ofsubstantially more rapid monetary growth and indications ofsignificant strengthening of economic activity and inflationary-45-10/2/84pressures. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation" etc.And we leave in 8 to 12 percent [for the funds rate range].SPEAKER(.). Sounds right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Sounds right" indicates agreement and alignment with the speaker's opinion.


Passage number 410.
MR. MARTIN. Then we want 8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 411.
MR. GRAMLEY. Would you read that significant strengtheningin economic activity [part].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that asks the reader to read a particular phrase or part of a text.


Passage number 412.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...strengthening of economic activity andinflationary pressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating the potential consequences of the "strengthening of economic activity" which leads to "inflationary pressures."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 413.
"MR. PARTEE. That's right. The current range is up to 12percent. That's just as well, isn't it, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker's statement "That's just as well, isn't it, Steve?" suggests that there is a difference of opinion or perspective between MR. PARTEE and Steve.


Passage number 414.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that is satisfactory, we will vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a condition and outcome.


Passage number 415.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not mention any specific person or topic, so there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


