Passage number 1.
 Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on January 29–30, 2013  January 29 Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everybody.  This being January, this is our annual organizational meeting.  So let me be the first to welcome Presidents Bullard, Evans, George, and Rosengren to the Committee.  The first item on the agenda is the election of Committee officers.  I need a nomination for Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides a summary of the meeting agenda and welcomes the new members. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 2.
 MS. YELLEN.  I would like to move the nomination of Ben Bernanke as Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker would like to move the nomination of Ben Bernanke as Chairman.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Other nominations for discussion.  [No response]  Without objection.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements are all polite expressions of gratitude and agreement.


Passage number 4.
 MS. YELLEN.  I would like to move the nomination of Bill Dudley as Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, expresses her intention to move the nomination of Bill Dudley as Vice Chairman.


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other nominations or discussion.  [No response]  Without objection.  Thank you very much.  For agenda item 1.C, “Staff Officers,” the names were distributed with the agenda.  Debbie, do you have them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is no response or objection, thanks the participants, and then moves on to discuss the next agenda item.


Passage number 6.
 MS. DANKER.  Yes, I do.  Secretary and Economist, Bill English; Deputy Secretary, Debbie Danker; Assistant Secretaries, Matt Luecke, Dave Skidmore, and Michelle Smith; General Counsel, Scott Alvarez; Deputy General Counsel, Tom Baxter; Assistant General Counsel, Rich Ashton; Economists, Steve Kamin and David Wilcox; Associate Economists from the Board, Tom Connors, Mike Leahy, Steve Meyer, Dave Reifschneider, and Bill Wascher; Associate Economists from the Banks, Jamie McAndrews, Geoff Tootell, Dan Sullivan, Chris Waller, and Troy Davig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply listing the names of individuals in different positions within an organization. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Comments.  [No response]  Without objection.  Thank you.  Item 2 is “Selection of a Federal Reserve Bank to Execute Transactions for the System Open Market Account.”  New York is, fortunately, willing to serve.  Comments.  [No response]  Without objection.  Thank you.  Item 3 is the selection of a Manager for the SOMA.  Simon Potter has indicated he’s willing to serve.  Questions.  [No response]  Without objection.  Thank you.  The Federal Reserve Bank of New York will have to formally approve that as well.  What are the odds there, Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement of the selection process for the Federal Reserve Bank and the willingness of individuals to serve in certain roles.


Passage number 8.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Pretty good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "pretty good" does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It is a subjective opinion that suggests a moderate level of satisfaction.


Passage number 9.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Item 4, “Proposed Revisions to the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations.”  These were circulated in a January 23 memo from Simon Potter.  A couple of revisions are proposed.  Simon, would you like to briefly describe them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 10.
 MR. POTTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At its first meeting each year, the Committee reviews the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations, the Foreign Currency Directive and related procedural instructions, and the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations.  With regard to the domestic open market operations, I recommend that the authorization be renewed with two changes. The first proposed change entails a broadening of the authority under paragraph 6.  As currently drafted, the Domestic Authorization authorizes and directs the Desk, on instruction of the Chairman, “to adjust . . . the degree of pressure on reserve positions and hence the intended federal funds rate.”  This authority enables the Chairman to take action during an intermeeting period, when it is not feasible to consult with the full Committee before action is needed.  With the current high level of excess reserves, it is possible that U.S. dollar funding markets may be disrupted in a manner that does not directly affect reserve positions or the federal funds rate.  Given that this is the case, I am requesting that the authorization be altered in order to allow the Chairman to instruct the Desk to undertake open market operations to address such market disruptions in exceptional circumstances.  For example, if, as a result of a natural disaster, secured funding rates increased to high levels while the federal funds rate remained within the target range, there could be a risk of a broader, more systemic disruption to the functioning of asset markets.  In this case, conducting repurchase operations with dealers could potentially alleviate such market strains and warrant immediate action. The second proposed change is to address an inconsistency in the language describing the Committee’s long-run objectives as stated in the Domestic Authorization relative to those stated in the FOMC statement, the Committee’s public statement of its longer-run goals, and section 2A of the Federal Reserve Act.  As is, the Domestic Authorization refers to “the Committee’s long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth” rather than “to foster maximum employment and price stability.”  I recommend a change to the language of the Domestic Authorization to the latter clause to be consistent with these statements. In addition to these changes, I would also like to update the Committee on two items related to the Domestic Authorization.  First, as you know, the System Open Market Account contains a significant amount of agency debt and agency MBS, and it continues to conduct transactions in MBS securities as part of the ongoing purchase program as well as the reinvestment policy adopted by the Committee.  As such, I recommend a continued suspension of the Guidelines for the Conduct of System Operations in Federal Agency Issues.  Second, the current authorization allows the Desk to utilize third-party agents, such as asset managers and custodian banks, in its agency MBS operations.  Although the Desk conducts all agency MBS trading internally, we continue to require services for a variety of clearing, settlement, custodial, and analytical activities, and thus the language about the use of agents in the authorization remains necessary at this time.  No Committee vote is needed related to these two actions. Turning to foreign currency operations, the Desk conducts such operations under the terms of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations, the Foreign Currency Directive, and the Procedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency Operations.  I recommend that the Committee approve the Foreign Currency Directive as it currently stands.  However, I recommend that the Committee approve the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations and the Procedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency Operations with one amendment to each.  Please note that the vote to reaffirm these documents will include approval of the System’s warehousing agreement with the Treasury. The proposed amendments to the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations and the Procedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency Operations would allow the Desk to undertake small-value operations against the full range of foreign transactions that the Desk is authorized to conduct.  This change would be made for the purpose of allowing for prudent testing of operational readiness and is similar in purpose to the amendment that the Committee approved to the FRBNY’s Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations in June 2012.  The change would cover small-value currency swap operations with foreign central banks, including those to facilitate provision of U.S. dollar liquidity to central counterparties abroad, as described in an October 2012 note to the FOMC.  Small-value transactions of this type would help ensure that no technical obstacles exist should such facilities need to be activated.  The proposal also establishes that the Desk will provide notice to the Committee prior to conducting such transactions and limits the total amount of these transactions to $2.5 billion per year.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 11.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Let’s break these up.  Item 4 is the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations.  As Simon mentioned, there are two proposed revisions:  One is to give the Chairman the ability to respond to extraordinary circumstances in funding markets, and the second is really just a language change to harmonize the language in the authorization with our statement of longer-run goals.  Are there questions.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the proposed revisions to an item and asking if there are any questions.


Passage number 12.
 MR. FISHER.  I support these recommendations.  I’m just curious:  If the Chairman is indisposed, is it the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors or the Vice Chairman of the Committee who would substitute for the Chairman.  Those are exceptional circumstances, but does anybody know the answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is simply asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 13.
 MR. ALVAREZ.  Yes, the Vice Chairman of the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Alvarez is the Vice Chairman of the Committee.


Passage number 14.
 MR. FISHER.  So the head of the New York Federal Reserve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply mentioning the position of the head of the New York Federal Reserve.


Passage number 15.
 MR. ALVAREZ.  Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Alvarez is simply making a statement or confirming something.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions on this issue.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions that there are other questions on this issue and introduces President Lockhart without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 17.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the circumstances that you describe, you cited a natural disaster.  If we had the situation of financial instability similar to the fall of 2008, what distinguishes this authority from 13(3) authority.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states two different situations (a natural disaster and financial instability) and asks a question about the authority in each situation.


Passage number 18.
 MR. POTTER.  First, because it’s an open market operation, it doesn’t require the Board’s involvement; it’s an FOMC authority.  I think this would be very rare; it has to be an unanticipated event.  There was an unanticipated nature to the situation in August 2007.  At that time, the fed funds rate moved well above its target, and the existing directive worked fine for the intervention that Bill took at that point.  Here we’re thinking of something more like the blackout that happened in 2003.  In the current situation, what might happen is that the blackout could produce big operational problems in the repo market.  We might not observe that in the fed funds market, and this revision would make it easier at that point for us to ease pressures that might occur.  But our estimate is that this is very unlikely to happen; it’s just a contingency we put in place.  If you look at what happened during Hurricane Sandy, there was a lot of pricing pressure; however, everyone could fund themselves.  When we assessed what was happening, even though the repo rate averaged at a high level, there was one funder who was paying a very high price.  That was their issue, and it wouldn’t have been appropriate for us to intervene in that circumstance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is mainly providing explanations and examples to support the speaker's point.


Passage number 19.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  There are no extraordinary powers involved here.  This is just the directions of the FOMC on open market operations to the Desk.  Other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Are there any objections to the Domestic Authorization.  [No response]  Seeing none, okay.  Thank you. Now we turn to the Foreign Currency Operations.  The only revision there—correct me if I’m wrong, Simon—is to amend the authorization and procedural instructions to allow small-value testing in foreign currencies.  Any questions.  [No response]  Seeing none, any objections.  [No response]  Okay.  Thank you very much. Let’s turn, then, to item 6.  We’ll break this up.  There are a number of different documents.  Let’s start with the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.  The revisions to this that were circulated are entirely about the fact that this is now the second year rather than the first year.  There was no change to any wording or anything that bears on the substantive aspects of the statement.  We did not get any comments on the circulated statement.  Are there any questions or comments at this point.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 20.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, my comments are not about the specific changes, but rather about the statement in its entirety.  I supported the statement, what I’ll be calling the “principles statement,” a year ago.  Today I’d like to reaffirm my support, but even more enthusiastically.  By design, the principles statement encompasses a wide number of approaches to the making of monetary policy.  Nonetheless, over the past year, I have found it to be sufficiently specific to provide valuable guidance when thinking about the appropriate stance of policy.  To explain my thinking, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s helpful for me to refer back to a speech that you gave in December 2004 called “The Logic of Monetary Policy.”  In that speech, you contrasted two approaches to monetary policy.  Under what you called the “simple feedback” approach, the central bank responds in a relatively automatic fashion to the evolution of current and past variables.  The Taylor rule is one example of this approach.  In contrast, under the second, the “forecast-based” approach, the central bank chooses the action that it forecasts will produce the best overall results, taking account of the risks to the economy.  Thus, if the central bank judges its results relative to targets for inflation and unemployment, it chooses the policy that is forecast to bring the economy closest to those targets.  Lars Svensson has been a particularly vocal proponent of this approach. As I’ll describe, my reading of what will now be the penultimate paragraph of the principles statement is that it is firmly grounded in the forecast-based approach.  Correspondingly, that paragraph has led me to put considerably more weight on the forecast-based approach in my own thinking about policy.  The opening sentence of that key operational paragraph says that we should begin by asking, will the current path of monetary policy result in deviations between inflation and the longer-run goal of 2 percent.  Equally, will it result in deviations between employment and its maximum level.  The current policy path does imply such deviations.  Then that same first sentence prescribes that we should adopt monetary policy actions to mitigate them.  Suppose, for example, that given the current policy path, inflation is expected to run below its longer-run target over the next year or two and employment is expected to run below its maximum level.  Then that first sentence implies that we should seek to mitigate those deviations by adding accommodation.  Of course, decisions are more difficult when only one of the two variables is expected to be below its desired level.  For example, suppose the current policy path is expected to lead to inflation of exactly 2 percent over the next few years, but also to lead to employment being below its maximum level.  Here the second part of the paragraph provides the needed guidance.  It espouses a balanced approach in the situation, and this means, I think, that we should add accommodation to mitigate the employment deviation.  So I posited that inflation was exactly 2 percent.  Adding accommodation would end up resulting in inflation running somewhat above target.  But this is, I think, what a balanced approach has to mean:  that monetary policymakers are willing to follow policies that give rise to slightly positive inflation deviations in order to mitigate negative employment deviations.  The Committee has, of course, explicitly evinced that kind of willingness in the December 2012 FOMC statement. To sum up, Mr. Chairman, I have now lived with the principles statement for the past year.  During that time, I have found the forecast-based approach that I read into the key operational paragraph to be a powerful and valuable tool in my thinking about policy, and I’m delighted to have this opportunity to reaffirm my support for the overall statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing support and enthusiasm for the principles statement and the forecast-based approach to monetary policy.


Passage number 21.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Other discussion.  [No response]  Hearing none, okay.  Formally, this is a vote of the Committee, but given the nature of this statement, I would like to take a straw vote of all participants.  Let me first ask those in favor of reaffirming this to raise your hands.  [Show of hands]  Any opposed.  Abstentions.  [Show of hands]  One abstention noted.  Thank you. All right.  Moving on, the next four items are the Policy on External Communications of Committee Participants, the Policy on External Communications of Federal Reserve System Staff, and the Rules of Procedure, and the Program for Security of FOMC Information.  The first three items each have an amendment.  Please correct me, Scott or Debbie, if I misstate this.  For the External Communications, both of them, I think the only amendment is to clarify the exact timing of the blackout period.  Scott is nodding his head “yes.”  On the Rules of Procedure, I believe that the only change is to amend the quorum rule so that a quorum of the FOMC requires at least one Reserve Bank president.  Without this rule, the seven-member Board would be a quorum of the FOMC.  Finally, for the Program for Security of FOMC Information, no amendment is being proposed at this time, though, of course, our discussion of this is ongoing, and it’s not something that has to wait till January to be amended.  Are there any questions or discussion on any of these items.  [No response]  Is there anyone who would like to break out any of the particular items.  [No response]  Seeing none and hearing no objection, these items pass unanimously.  Thank you. On the topic of communications and FOMC security, as you know, Scott Alvarez and Bill English have been conducting their ongoing investigation of the information leaks that occurred last fall.  It has been a very extensive effort on their part.  They’ve been very thorough, but I thought I would call on Bill at this point just to give us an update.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a speaker providing information and updates to the audience.


Passage number 22.
   MR. ENGLISH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As you know, Scott and I are conducting a review of the possible leaks of FOMC information related to the September 28 Wall Street Journal article by Jon Hilsenrath and the October 3 Medley Global Advisors piece by Regina Schleiger.  In conducting our review, we’ve collected information from the questionnaire that we sent to all of you, as well as to a broad range of staff with access to FOMC information.  We followed up by interviewing all FOMC participants, as well as most senior staff who got our questionnaire.  We’re also interviewing a large number of other Board and Reserve Bank staff, including all staff members who had access to FOMC Class I information and had interactions with Hilsenrath or Schleiger that could have informed their articles.  Our interviews with staff aren’t yet completed, but we hope to wrap them up soon, and we will then provide a report to the Chairman and consult with the Chairman, as indicated in the Program for Security of FOMC Information, regarding next steps.  We expect that we will complete our review and report prior to the next meeting.  Scott and I would be happy to say more if you’d like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the progress and plan of the review being conducted.


Passage number 23.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Questions for Bill.  [No response]  I’m sorry that this has taken some time.  It has been, obviously, a very extensive effort, and I hope that it will be more than just a narrow determination of the facts, and that perhaps it will be useful to understand the whole process as a way of informing our thinking about possible amendments or changes to our current program.  Okay.  We are organized, insofar as it is possible.  We turn now to item 7 in the agenda, “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations,” and I’ll call on Simon Potter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 24.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a brief expression of gratitude followed by a request for questions and the mention of a position or role, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 25.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  Simon, I had one question on reconciling charts 10 and 11.  Chart 10 seems to show that the forward fed funds rate has gone up, but if you look at the dealer probability distribution, the latter seems like it’s extended.  How do you reconcile those two.  Is it because the volatility is expected to increase and, therefore, the risk premium imbedded in the forward fed funds rate has gone up.  I’m not really sure how to reconcile those two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 26.
 MR. POTTER.  That would be the easiest reconciliation.  Implied vols, I think, have marginally increased—is that fair, Bill.—but I don’t think they have increased enough to explain some of this.  If you look at the modal path that’s in the Tealbook, where they use flows and caps, I don’t think it has changed as much as this.  So it could be something about how we translate from the Eurodollar market, although I believe that OIS shows something similar to this.  Again, we don’t have good control of matching these two, which is another way of saying we don’t have a good explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's observations and opinions on the subject, without any conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 27.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "okay" is simply an expression often used to indicate agreement or understanding. There is no contention or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The provided passage does not contain any content that can be evaluated for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 29.
 MR. FISHER.  First, just an observation from looking at your chart 1 of what’s happened with equity markets for 3.8 years in.  The average duration of a bull market since 1932 is more than 4.7 years.  And we’ve had longer ones, so, so far so good.  However, last year, just for entertainment value, was an interesting year, because in only one year before this have we seen the first trading day of the year be up more than 1 percent than the last trading day, and that year was 1929.  Just to cheer people up on this sunny day. My question is about figure 7 and figure 9.  I hope this is the right time to raise it because I think it would be very helpful, Simon, in terms of getting to the Chairman’s question of how we prepare for March.  I believe that we pretty much know where we’re going, but let’s assume we maintain the current course as indicated in alternative B, which we’ll talk about tomorrow.  It would be interesting to see what happens with our portfolio under different time frames as rates go to 3 percent, 4 percent, 5 percent, and 6 percent.  By my calculation, when the 10-year goes to 4 percent, the price will drop to 81—this is rough because it depends on which minute you look at it.  That would be roughly a 16 percent depreciation; that’s one-sixth of value or something.  I’m just trying to get a sense, as we talk about costs, of what the tradeoffs are if rates reach certain levels.  We broached this at the last meeting, but I think it would be especially helpful coming from the Desk, which can do these numbers.  And I’d say take rates up to 6 percent, just so we get a sense of this whole issue of remittances or deferred assets for the Treasury.  And I would like to formally request, unless the Chairman of the Committee disagrees, that the Desk give us a little bit of analysis because I think you’re the place to do it and where it’s most easily done.  It would just help frame the argument. We spent a great deal of time at the last meeting on efficacy, which the Chairman particularly stressed in the paper that was handed out.  So what surprised me in your presentation, in chart 9, was the way the dealers look at efficacy in terms of what might motivate us and how they expect us to be driven by efficacy or costs.  Obviously they view us as being driven by the employment numbers; I believe that’s what that table says.  I just wonder, for the Committee to consider, whether or not we should be concerned about that; I don’t know.  Mr. Chairman, you made a very good presentation at the last meeting with that handout.  We talk a lot about efficacy, and we are assessing costs always.  Again, this is a population group that may be driven by its own concerns, but it doesn’t look like the benefit–cost tradeoff is really yet something that we have been able to communicate relative to being driven by the employment target.  Am I misreading that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making observations and asking for analysis and clarification, but there is no argument or disagreement between multiple parties.


Passage number 30.
 MR. POTTER.  Well, you are reading the table in the right way.  It shows the number of dealers that think that the purchases would end because of the efficacy.  In the written comments and dealer commentary, you see more nuance in that.  “Efficacy” could mean a lot of things for them, and it is a little bit hard to unbundle that from how much the labor market does improve.  But I would say that I wasn’t particularly surprised by this, given the way that we asked the question.  We could ask the question a slightly different way, which would be more leading perhaps, and then you might see a different answer.  But we are just asking for, really, one point here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the nuance and potential interpretations of the data and suggesting that a slightly differently worded question may yield a different answer.


Passage number 31.
 MR. FISHER.  The reason I raised the question is simply because if this is something that we do take into serious consideration, might this be telling us—and, again, it’s the way you ask the question—that we need to communicate this in a different way or perhaps even more effectively than I think it has been communicated so far.  It’s fairly effective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher is simply suggesting that the message may need to be communicated differently or more effectively.


Passage number 32.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Duke without providing any further information or context. Without more details, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement involved.


Passage number 33.
 MS. DUKE.  I just want to make sure I understand your answer a little bit, Simon.  It seems to me that somebody could answer, “I think that the purchases will end because of the labor outlook,” because they think the labor outlook will get better before you hit a cost or efficacy issue, or they could say that because they think you are more serious about the labor outlook and less serious about costs and efficacy.  So was there anything in the comments to distinguish the two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The passage is simply discussing different possible reasons for someone to believe that the purchases will end due to the labor outlook. It does not suggest any conflicting viewpoints or arguments between individuals.


Passage number 34.
 MR. POTTER.  There are some dealers who think that the labor market outlook improvement will be hit before the efficacy declines.  I think people are reasonably humble on the efficacy.  There is more feeling, from reading the written comments, that the mortgage purchases might be more efficacious.  But they are, most of the time, trying to answer what they think you will do.  And that can be hard for them because they have their own strong views as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. It discusses the opinions of different dealers and acknowledges that there may be differing views and uncertainties about the labor market outlook and efficacy of mortgage purchases. However, there is no specific disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions Governor Tarullo, without providing any information or opinions that could generate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 36.
 MR. TARULLO.  I had the same question as Betsy.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Tarullo is simply expressing agreement with Betsy's question.


Passage number 37.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Simon, I have a question about the expectations for the path of the 10-year Treasury rate over the next few years.  It appears from the 10-year Treasury forecast on page 95 of Tealbook, Book A, that the Board staff is predicting a distinctly steeper yield curve than the Blue Chip consensus over the forecast horizon.  For example, at the end of 2014, the Tealbook has the 10-year Treasury a bit below 3½ percent, while the Blue Chip has it slightly above 2½ percent, which leaves a difference of about 75 basis points at the end of 2014.  Does the Desk have any insights as to whether market participants are more in the Blue Chip forecast camp.  And, if the yield curve does steepen more along the lines that the Board’s staff is forecasting, do you see any financial stability issues arising from such a sharp and unanticipated climb in that 10-year Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker is pointing out that the Board staff's prediction for the 10-year Treasury rate is different from the Blue Chip consensus, which indicates a disagreement between the two.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 39.
 MR. POTTER.  The Blue Chip economists and the Blue Chip financial are a little bit more sanguine on the future path of the 10-year compared with where the Tealbook is.  I won’t speak for the Tealbook, but I believe they are taking into account the term premium and where short rates will be; and that is a rigorous modeling exercise.  I am not quite sure how the people who contribute to the panel derive theirs; they might have lots of different considerations.  In talking to market participants who are not forecasters, you do see rising concerns, as we have for the last four years, that rates will be moving up and will lead to financial stability issues.  I would say it is a little bit more intense this year—I don’t know if Bill would probably agree with me. However, this year there is some feeling that money will be moving into the stock market and that the kinds of risks that are out there don’t seem as salient as they have more recently, which seems a more positive story.  We haven’t heard any compelling financial stability issues or problems that would come right now from a mild increase in interest rates.  However, for a sharp one, I think there is a lot of uncertainty out there because we have had low rates for such a long time, so just the fear from that might cause some disruptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

The disagreement arises from the different outlooks on the future path of the 10-year compared to the Tealbook. The Blue Chip economists and financial experts are more optimistic, while the Tealbook takes into account the term premium and short rates. Additionally, there is some disagreement on the intensity of concerns about rising rates and potential financial stability issues, with Mr. Potter suggesting that it is more intense this year while acknowledging that Bill's perspective may differ. However, there is also some agreement that there haven't been any compelling financial stability issues from a mild increase in interest rates, but uncertainty arises from the fear of a sharp increase after a prolonged period of low rates.


Passage number 40.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Again, we will talk more about it, obviously, when we talk about some of the costs and risks.  But from your comments, I am concerned that financial firms may not be as well prepared to weather the kind of increases that we are forecasting in the Tealbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Ms. Pianalto expresses her concern about the preparedness of financial firms to handle forecasted increases, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 41.
 MR. POTTER.  I believe the stress tests will look at this a little bit in one part of the sector.  I don’t know if someone else from the Board staff wants to talk because I know there is a lot of work going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is simply stating his belief that the stress tests will examine the specific aspect mentioned, and mentions that there is a lot of work happening but does not express any disagreement or contention with it.


Passage number 42.
 MR. ENGLISH.  We are going to be looking into this for the March meeting and plan to report on what we think in terms of institutions’ sensitivity to increases in long-term rates and to think a little bit about the odds of a big increase in long-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. English and his team will be investigating the sensitivity of institutions to increases in long-term rates and the likelihood of a significant increase in those rates.


Passage number 43.
 MS. PIANALTO.  That would be very helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Pianalto is simply expressing that the mentioned action would be helpful.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 44.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman, a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage.
The phrase "a two-hander" indicates that there are two people involved, suggesting that they may have opposing views or conflicting ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 45.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  My view would be that the market doesn’t have a huge vulnerability to an increase in long-term rates, but the risk of a big increase in long-term rates is probably considerably higher than normal.  It’s more a fear about the big increase as opposed to the fact that people have particular vulnerabilities to long-term rates going up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The author presents their view that the market doesn't have a significant vulnerability to an increase in long-term rates. However, they also mention that there is a higher risk of a big increase in long-term rates compared to normal. This suggests a difference in opinion regarding the level of vulnerability and the potential impact of rising rates.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fear is a good thing.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement expresses President Plosser's belief that fear is a good thing, but it does not mention any opposing views or arguments, so there is no contention or disagreement evident.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 47.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I have a question.  At the last meeting in December, we switched our forward guidance from dates to economic-state-contingent policies.  And it seems to me that we ought to try to think hard—and I am going to talk a little bit about this in the SEP discussion tomorrow—about not using questions or data that focus on the dates and try to move our presentations of both data and questions toward what we want them to focus on, which is economic conditions.  With that in mind, it seems like question 11 on the dealer survey focuses on when they think liftoff is going to be.  So it gets the dealers thinking about dates instead of economic conditions.  My question for the folks on the Desk would be, as you form these questions, does it make sense to reconsider how we are asking them and what questions we are asking in order to get things aligned with the way we are trying to conduct policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates disagreement or contention because Mr. Plosser is suggesting that the current approach to asking questions in the dealer survey is not aligned with the way they are trying to conduct policy. He believes that the questions should focus on economic conditions rather than specific dates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 48.
 MR. POTTER.  That is a really crucial issue that we think through, and we don’t want to ever signal anything with the survey.  We did ask an extensive question on the economic thresholds, and we learned there that the most likely economic situation when the fed funds liftoff happens is around 2 percent for the PCE inflation rate and around 6½ percent for unemployment.  We investigated a little bit whether people interpret it as a threshold or a trigger.  They definitely, on average, seem to interpret it as a threshold.  However, you get some dealers who have quite different views about how we will react.  One dealer, despite being questioned many times, really thought the first liftoff would occur at 5 percent for the unemployment rate, basically independent from inflation, and thought that the participation rate was a driver there.  What is in chart 11, I think, captures some of that nuance.  So as an unconditional distribution, in that sense, I think it is useful for us.  Plus, we can use it as a metric to compare with previous meetings.  But when it comes to the asset purchases, I think one thing we could do is ask a probability distribution question that doesn’t have the end of the year in it.  Using the end of the year, we thought, was reasonably neutral, but one could try to redo that.  Most of the questions do not have specific dates in them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that some dealers have different views on how the Fed will react to certain economic thresholds, suggesting that there is disagreement among market participants on this issue.


Passage number 49.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Right.  I actually thought that chart 8, where you asked about asset holdings, was a better way to ask that question—not asking, “So when will they end.” but “What do you believe the size of the balance sheet will be at some date.”  I was just wondering whether we could do something similar to this other question, keeping with the same spirit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Plosser is suggesting an alternative way to ask a question, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 50.
 MR. POTTER.  We will definitely look into it, subject to the disclaimer that policymaker input is not used in this survey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, states that they will look into the matter, but also clarifies that their input is not used in the survey.


Passage number 51.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Bullard without providing any information or context about his actions or opinions, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 52.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to ask a question about exhibit 2, chart 8, which President Plosser was just referring to.  You characterized this, Simon, as saying that there is a lot of uncertainty about the ultimate size of the asset purchase program.  But would you say that that’s sort of consistent with the amount of uncertainty about the outlook for the economy, so that’s why you get a dispersion.  It’s just because different dealers have different views about the evolution of the economy; therefore, they have different views about the eventual size of the balance sheet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question being asked for clarification.


Passage number 53.
 MR. POTTER.  So, remember, the decomposition that we do calculates disagreement.  And the disagreement would have different point views regarding where the economy is going to go.  And then you take the uncertainty around each of those points.  And for this one, I think it’s around $300 billion because this is the end of 2013.  So I believe that it is a combination:  The main driver is economic uncertainty, and then there is some uncertainty about what the reaction function of the FOMC is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing an explanation of how the decomposition they do calculates disagreement and uncertainty around economic forecasts.


Passage number 54.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not include any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is expressing gratitude, which does not indicate any controversy or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 55.
 MR. POTTER.  It is still substantial:  A $300 billion standard deviation is, if you multiply by two, a big plus or minus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a fact about a $300 billion standard deviation and mentions that it is considered significant.


Passage number 56.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m sorry.  Which graph was that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification.


Passage number 57.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s figure 8.  And then, it’s hard to see because we do some analytics to get each dealer’s average uncertainty out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a process (doing analytics to get each dealer's average uncertainty out) and there is no conflicting opinion or argument presented.


Passage number 58.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. President Kocherlakota is simply expressing gratitude by saying "Thank you."


Passage number 59.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I will be brief because I think I am just going to follow along with what President Bullard and President Plosser have just been emphasizing.  With thresholds, you would expect the univariate measures of uncertainty to expand.  If people thought that the date was relatively a commitment, and now they think that the date will be moving with economic conditions, there will be more variance.  What we are actually hoping for is that there will be the right kind of covariance—that they are thinking that the date will be further out when conditions worsen and closer in when conditions get better.  So I will just echo what President Plosser was saying, knowing that you are bound not to take my input on the survey.  I would, nonetheless, say that anything you can do to try to get at the covariance as opposed to simply the variance, I think, would be helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with the previous speakers' emphasis on the importance of considering covariance in addition to variance when assessing uncertainty.


Passage number 60.
 MR. POTTER.  Okay.  We will try, subject to human capacity to write down a covariance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting ideas or arguments. It simply states that they will try to write down a covariance, acknowledging the limitations of human capacity. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 61.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Doesn’t the question about what the conditions will be at the time of liftoff address that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is a question seeking clarification or further information about whether the conditions at the time of liftoff will be addressed.


Passage number 62.
 MR. POTTER.  It partly does, but it doesn’t get at the covariance unless you can somehow use the distribution of dealer responses for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Potter about the limitations of the available information.


Passage number 63.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I see.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "I see. President Evans" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple observation or acknowledgment.


Passage number 64.
 MR. EVANS.  There is a lot of commentary about the way they’d like this chart to be displayed.  I just want to indicate that I am not so bothered by this bar chart around dates.  I interpret it as giving me some information about the threshold that they think is going to be the appropriate margin for liftoff—although I take President Kocherlakota’s point that, is that really in line with the distribution that is underlying their forecast.  I don’t know, so clarifying that would be useful, but I wouldn’t necessarily go away from this.  These are the dealer economists.  I assume that somewhere else they probably have an unemployment rate forecast—which they may or may not live and die by—that you can correlate with this to see if it’s informative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and observations about the chart and suggesting that further clarification would be useful.


Passage number 65.
 MR. POTTER.  I think Bill showed that in his last briefing.  And I’m not sure if he’s showing it this time.  I think you are—is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about whether someone named Bill is currently demonstrating a certain quality, but there is no clear disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 66.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I am showing the unemployment rates at the expected end of the purchases.  You will see that either later today or tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 67.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Well, thank you very much.  Now we need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations since the December meeting.  Without objection.  [No response]  Thank you.  Are we ready.  Excellent.  We turn now to item 8, “Economic Situation,” and I will call on Eric Engen to lead it off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is giving instructions and receiving confirmation or lack thereof, without any indication of disagreement or tension.


Passage number 68.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions for our colleagues.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude and a request for questions from colleagues.


Passage number 69.
  MR. LACKER.  Yes, thank you very much.  I want to question Beth Anne about exhibits 7 and 8.  This is based on work of yours that I’m familiar with and have cited in speeches; I very much appreciate it, and so, first, compliments.  Although you didn’t emphasize this, your work is a great rebuttal to the widely cited Rogoff–Reinhart stylized facts that are based on setting everybody equal to 100 at the peak rather than the trough.  And on that basis, it’s a very good contribution.  One little technical question, and then a follow-up on that:  You have 95 percent confidence intervals here.  So you have a regression framework, and I take it that there are sampling errors in the regression coefficients.  In addition, you have, of course, shocks on the right-hand side.  So am I right that the 95 percent confidence interval includes both the coefficient sampling error and the error that would be attributed to the shocks for the equation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing appreciation for the work and compliments the person being questioned. They also ask a technical question and seek clarification on the methodology used. There is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 70.
 MS. WILSON.  Right.  It is a measure that looks at the variance around the prediction, so it includes the variance of the coefficients.  It also includes the deviation of the observation from its actual mean.  So it takes into account both the behavior of the independent variables and where that falls and the variance of the regression prediction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains how a measure takes into account the variance of coefficients, deviation of observations from their mean, and the variance of regression predictions.


Passage number 71.
 MR. LACKER.  All right.  So my follow-up is that, in the United States figure on exhibit 7, we fall woefully short, but on exhibit 8 in the lower-left side, the benchmark is different if you restrict attention to housing-slump recessions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 72.
 MS. WILSON.  Right.  As you know from the work, we have done it a couple of ways.  One is to include depth and duration and whether or not you have a housing slump.  If you include housing slump and the regression for predictions, the weakness in the United States is more explained but still falls on the low end of the range of experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting two different ways they have approached their work and discussing the results of those approaches.


Passage number 73.
 MR. LACKER.  In terms of the confidence band, do you have that off the top of your head.  My impression was that it was pretty close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and expressing their impression.


Passage number 74.
 MS. WILSON.  It is on the bottom end of the confidence band so you are in the lower range of what would be expected, given depth and duration of the recession and the fact that we have had a housing slump.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It provides a statement of fact about the position within the expected range of results.


Passage number 75.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay, all right.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply indicates that Mr. Lacker is expressing gratitude or agreement.


Passage number 76.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Plosser without providing any context or information about their actions or statements. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 77.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to echo Jeff’s remarks about how interesting I think this is, and I want to compliment the staff.  I want to take off on the staff memo about the weakness in general and explaining the weakness.  As most of you know, I have long been a skeptic about our ability to estimate potential output in real time.  I worry about basing policy decisions on our ability to do that without understanding the importance of the uncertainty surrounding those estimates for the output gap, and we should think about that.  So I think the staff memo does a good job of looking at the implications of the revisions in the potential output for the forecast going forward.  Exhibit 2 of the staff memo shows that cumulative since January 2010, the revisions both in the level and the growth rate of potential output have been pretty sizable.  Now, you have made them in gradual steps over a period of time, but cumulatively they have been quite big.  I think in January 2011, for example, we thought the output gap in 2011 was going to be about 5 percent; now it’s 3½ or 3.7, something like that.  So it has been pretty big, and the whole level of the path is lower. My question is, have we gone back and done an exercise in how our optimal policy calculations that we do for Tealbook, Book B would have looked had we used the current supply-side estimates that you have of potential output.  How different would they have looked had we known what the policy path would be.  Have we done that kind of experiment.  Or could you, even in those policy experiments, sort of bootstrap yourself up to produce some sort of confidence bands about those optimal paths that we look at.  While we tend to look at these paths as if they are lines, there is a lot of uncertainty about them.  So I’m wondering whether there is a way for us to get more information about how these revisions would have affected the policy paths that we were looking at before and then help us get a handle on uncertainty.  That’s my question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of agreement and a request for further information.


Passage number 78.
 MR. ENGEN.  We did not do that.  That is a very interesting suggestion.  We could, I think, go back and look at how at different time periods, starting, say, in January 2010, when our forensic analysis started, would change from a policy perspective.  I would mention that you are right that these changes to potential took place over time.  A big point in time when things really changed was in the summer of 2010, when we got the BEA’s revisions for GDP that showed both that the recession was deeper and that the recovery up to that point was a lot shallower.  That was really a trigger point for kicking this off.  We have then continued to make adjustments as information has become available and has made us rethink our supply-side assumption, as we did in this Tealbook.  But we could go back and look at the question you raised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging the suggestion as interesting and agreeing with the idea of going back to look at different time periods to analyze policy changes.


Passage number 79.
 MR. PLOSSER.  That’s why I brought it back to, let’s say, January 2011.  That is when the revisions had already kicked in; so what happens after that.  I think it would be an interesting experiment.  It would be interesting to understand how that would have shaped our policy perspectives going forward under these different circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion about conducting an interesting experiment and understanding the potential effects of certain revisions on policy perspectives.


Passage number 80.
 MR. ENGEN.  Yes.  And within the experiment, it is the case that when we impose the staff’s reestimate of potential on the model and then see how the FRB/US model would then explain any other errors—say in consumption or investment, for example—we do impose a monetary policy rule as well as the zero lower bound, as has been the case over this time period.  So there is a feedback effect in calculating where errors do pop up—say, in consumption or investment or housing—once we have controlled for the supply-side effects.  And that policy response to the different supply-side conditions is part of the process for figuring this decomposition out.  But we could maybe break it out a little bit more to focus a little more directly on your question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is explaining the process of calculating errors and policy responses in relation to supply-side effects.


Passage number 81.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I think it would be interesting to see.  And wouldn’t it be true, for example, if you were in, let’s say, January 2011, and you calculated from FRB/US what the unconstrained interest rate rule would be, having changed the supply-side assumptions to what they are now, that those numbers would look different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity about the potential differences in interest rate calculations based on different assumptions.


Passage number 82.
 MR. WILCOX.  There is no question there is a huge amount of uncertainty here.  I do also want to just point out that there is one aspect of the analytical situation that I think tempers the effect of these revisions on our optimal policy prescriptions.  And I’m going to see if I can get this right before a live audience.  When real GDP comes in weaker than we have projected, and particularly when it is weaker over a sustained period of time—and labor market conditions, of course, by definition have not been revised because they are measured in a separately conducted household survey to derive an unemployment rate—one of the ways that we respond is we infer that the latent variable, potential GDP, must have been weaker in order to generate that constellation of outcomes.  So the GDP gap revises by much less than one would infer from the downward revision to actual GDP.  Dave Reifschneider is going to elaborate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing a situation and explaining a concept, but there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 83.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  I want to add that this is an experiment that we have talked about, and we could send something to the Committee about it.  Following on the point that David just made, the optimal control exercise has as its inputs inflation relative to 2 percent and the unemployment rate relative to the staff estimate of the natural rate.  Although we did raise our estimate of the natural rate, the unemployment gap did not narrow a lot because what has happened over time is that we have been continually surprised at how persistently slow the recovery has been and how slowly the unemployment rate has come down.  If you went back to 2010, you would find that the optimal control’s viewpoint in 2010 was:  “Oh, you don’t have as much of a problem as you think you have because we are going to get out of this.  The unemployment rate is going to come down, albeit at a gradual pace.”  But in hindsight, things turned out worse than anticipated.  It illustrates your point about uncertainty:  In real time, the optimal control exercise would have said, “We’ve got a bad problem, but it’s not that bad.”  And then, going forward month by month, the problem looked worse and worse, in terms of the continuing weakness in the data.  So you have to take into account, as Eric and Hess did in the memo, the implications of commingling revised estimates of potential output with the data on real GDP and the unemployment rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the optimal control exercise and the challenges in estimating potential output and unemployment rate in relation to inflation.


Passage number 84.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I will have to think about that some more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker simply states that they need more time to consider the topic, indicating no disagreement or contention.


Passage number 85.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the presence of laughter during President Evans' speech.


Passage number 86.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of questions, probably for Eric.  During the briefings I had in Chicago about the economy, I was reminded that the outlook for nondurables and services consumption has been somewhat weak recently.  In the Tealbook and in our own forecast, consumption is a big part of the private domestic final purchases that we have been pointing to as a stronger indicator of where things are going.  And the rise in nondurables and services consumption has been well under 2 percent in 2012, and the outlook is for about the same in 2013.  We know that, given the downturn and the recovery, there is a good bit of pent-up demand for durable goods consumption, so the headline consumption numbers are somewhat stronger.  But nondurables and services consumption is more likely to be the part that is governed by the permanent income hypothesis, so it gives a feeling about the way things are playing out.  It seems to be a little more of a negative counter to some of the more glad tidings I read about in the Tealbook, which pointed to rising household wealth, rising consumer confidence, and an improving labor market.  I wonder if you have any thoughts about whether that is indicative of something more underlying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It presents some information about the weak outlook for nondurables and services consumption and raises a question about its implications.


Passage number 87.
 MR. ENGEN.  Certainly it is the case, as you pointed out, that particularly the services component of PCE has been weak.  Big components of that weakness are the BEA’s calculation of housing service flows, which has been affected directly by housing market developments; another weak component has been financial services.  Certainly we have been following that and are aware that services has been a component of the weakness in household spending, unlike, say, the more typical recession where durables is the big cyclical component and the rest, as you described, probably is more governed by permanent income.  Certainly, in order to get the pickup in GDP over our projection, PCE is obviously going to have to contribute to the pickup, and, if our projection is right, we are going to have to see not just a durables-led increase in spending but a broad-based increase in spending that is going to reflect several factors:  increasing wealth, increased expectations of what households’ permanent income is going to be, diminished uncertainty, and increased confidence.  We are certainly going to have to see a pickup in those weak components of PCE in order to get our forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting information and discussing the factors that have contributed to a weak services component of PCE. They also mention the need for a broad-based increase in spending and various factors that would contribute to that.


Passage number 88.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Thank you.  One other question.  This picks up a little bit on some of the questions to Simon about the dealer survey and what they are pointing to in terms of the markers for ending asset purchases.  In the Tealbook, you have again made the assumption that the open-ended purchase program ends in June, and I’m wondering how the Tealbook reconciles this with the language in the statement that talks about a substantial improvement in the labor market outlook, price stability, and efficacy.  Looking at the Tealbook forecast, payroll employment is increasing about 165,000 a month for six months.  Maybe it’s the reduced variance in that.  Six solid labor market reports could be one indication of more solid labor improvement, yet the unemployment rate is at 7.7 percent in the Tealbook.  On the other hand, perhaps there are other margins that you are looking at regarding the efficacy.  After all, President Pianalto did point to the 10-year Treasury rate increase being steeper in the Tealbook.  Of course, that is incorporated into your analysis already, so that is not a surprise there.  I’m assuming you don’t have financial stability issues at work there either.  I wonder if you could help me out with how you reconciled that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a request for clarification and understanding.


Passage number 89.
 MR. WILCOX.  I will do the best that I can.  I don’t have a lot to say beyond what I have said in prior meetings.  We are doing the best we can to, I think, emulate scriptural scholars.  We are taking the printed word very seriously.  The printed word is a substantial improvement in labor market outlook and something about efficacy and costs.  The first concept that we tried to incorporate is, well, substantial improvement relative to what.  So we needed a benchmark.  I think it is arguable as to what the best benchmark is, because that wasn’t specified in the Committee statement.  The case can be made for September because that was, as we noted, the first time that this was laid out in the Committee statement.  I am going to very deliberately and overtly leave it to you all to determine what constitutes a substantial improvement.  A memo by a number of Board staff authors before the last meeting provided our best counsel about some indicators that you could use.  And we laid those out in a new exhibit in the Tealbook, and many of those are repeated here in Eric’s exhibit 3.  I think first among those, we highlighted the unemployment rate; if you were going to the proverbial desert island, it would be the single indicator that we would suggest that you take.  But if your luggage can be a little heavier, by all means, we would recommend packing a variety of other items in your bag, including payroll employment and labor force participation.  We are also doing some preliminary work with a factor model that takes a first principal component of a number of different labor market indicators and attempts to extract a signal from those. Now, in terms of what meets the standard of substantial labor market improvement, I think that a reasonable case can be made for a pretty wide range of different stopping points.  I would advance the argument that a reasonable case can be made for the assumption that we have put forward.  What will be the case by the middle of this year.  Well, a couple of developments will have happened.  One is—if there is any mercy in the world—a substantial portion of the domestic fiscal agenda will have been put behind us.  So not only will we have the fiscal cliff done, but we should have government operations for the rest of this fiscal year appropriated, and maybe even a start on budgeting for 2014.  The sequestration should have been resolved and, perhaps as part of that, some disposition of the debt ceiling.  So some reduction of downside risk from domestic fiscal policy issues in our baseline forecast, and continued improvement in the European situation—those two great big sources of downside risk—should have been removed.  The tilt in the unemployment rate trajectory over the remainder of this year is very gradual in our baseline projection.  But more substantial improvements will be coming into view, and here is where we leaned a lot on the scriptural word being labor market “outlook,” so that by the June meeting, a more substantial reduction in the unemployment rate should be in closer view.  And I would want to aggressively assert, of course, the uncertainty surrounding our projection.  We’ve gotten a bigger reduction in the unemployment rate over the past year than we had projected, and something along those lines could very possibly occur again.  The pickup in payroll employment by that point will be modest, but, once again, as Eric’s upper-right panel shows, there will be some modest acceleration in payroll employment gains that should be in prospect on our baseline projection.  Now, whether that meets your standard, I don’t think that’s within my power to divine.  But that will be up to you to ascertain whether that meets the definition of a substantial improvement in labor market conditions. The last thing I would observe is that, from my point of view, a really important criterion in setting these kinds of assumptions is that I obviously want to be in the realm of reasonableness; I don’t want to put a projection in front of you that is distracting because of its irrelevance in terms of the assumptions.  In my view, there is a considerable attraction to putting a fixed, rigid yardstick in front of you.  I don’t know what I’m going to do for the March meeting, but for this meeting, there was considerable attraction in simply maintaining $500 billion, just like we did last time.  Next time, I reserve the right to change my mind, but I will factor into that decisionmaking process the virtue of trying not to put chatter into the picture, so that I can give you as clear a basis as possible for making the policy determination that you need to make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing information and giving their opinion, but there is no indication of disagreement or debate.


Passage number 90.
 MR. POTTER.  In terms of the dealers, I believe a Federal Reserve Bank president was very influential in the statements of those 18 who think it’s about 200,000 over six months.  But they have a much lower unemployment rate, so mapping the Tealbook forecast is more like the end of 2014 in their viewpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 91.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  I appreciate greatly that very detailed and careful response.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker expresses appreciation for the response, indicating a positive reception and no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 92.
 MR. WILCOX.  We have given it a considerable amount of thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the subject, Mr. Wilcox, has given something a considerable amount of thought.


Passage number 93.
 MR. EVANS.  I had no doubt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses his certainty without any conflicting opinions or opposition.


Passage number 94.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only mentions President Bullard without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 95.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question is on exhibit 4, the last two charts:  “Core PCE Price Forecast” and “PCE Price Forecast.”  These charts have confidence bounds around them that are calculated from the FRB/US model—and these are 70 percent confidence intervals, not 90 percent confidence intervals.  So my question is, if I look at something like the end of 2013, how much of the probability mass lies above 2 percent, and how much of the probability mass lies below 2 percent.  Another way to state it would be, are these forecasts statistically different from our inflation target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply asking a question about the confidence bounds and the probability mass of the forecasts.


Passage number 96.
 MR. ENGEN.  I don’t know—roughly 40 percent, maybe, would be above, something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is providing an estimate of around 40 percent, indicating uncertainty rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 97.
 MR. BULLARD.  And for PCE as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement about PCE (Personal Consumption Expenditures) without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 98.
 MR. ENGEN.  Probably pretty close to that.  I don’t have the exact decomposition of forecast errors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement without any conflicting opinions or contrasting ideas.


Passage number 99.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Thanks.  And on exhibit 6, the “Foreign Potential Output Gaps”—I’m just curious—it says that advanced foreign economies’ potential output growth in 2012 is estimated to be 1.3 percent.  The United States is higher than that, I guess.  So how low are they for, say, Europe and Japan and other countries.  I mean, what kind of numbers are we talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification about the potential output growth rates of different countries.


Passage number 100.
 MS. WILSON.  Well, Japan is really low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement of fact about Japan being low.


Passage number 101.
 MR. BULLARD.  Like zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is not expressing any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 102.
 MS. WILSON.  It’s like half a percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a straightforward statement without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 103.
 MR. BULLARD.  Half a percent.  And, this 1.3 percent is GDP weighted, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a percentage and expressing uncertainty or confusion about the specific way it is calculated.


Passage number 104.
 MS. WILSON.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage doesn't provide enough context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. It only states that Ms. Wilson responded with "Yes," which could indicate agreement or affirmation rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 105.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or arguments that could lead to contention or disagreement. It appears to be a neutral statement indicating agreement or understanding with the speaker.


Passage number 106.
  And Europe is also— MS. WILSON.  On the low end, 1 percent or around 1 percent, so pretty low.  What is holding it up a bit is Canada.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information about the percentage of something without expressing any disagreement or conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
 MR. BULLARD.  The United Kingdom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is likely contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the full context of the passage, it is difficult to determine the specific nature of the contention or disagreement.


Passage number 108.
 MS. WILSON.  The United Kingdom is also low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the United Kingdom being low in something without any opposing views or conflicting perspectives presented.


Passage number 109.
 MR. BULLARD.  Everything is low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Everything is low" does not present any conflicting opinions or opposing perspectives.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 110.
 MS. WILSON.  Some of that is cyclical.  In other words, we don’t expect that to last; going forward, we expect that to improve somewhat.  In recessions, especially severe recessions, you see some decline in potential output related to capital deepening and a big pullback in investment.  That has lasted a lot longer and been a lot deeper than we had anticipated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The speaker acknowledges that there is disagreement or discrepancy between their initial expectations and the current situation. They mention that the decline in potential output and pullback in investment have lasted longer and been deeper than anticipated. This indicates a contention or disagreement.


Passage number 111.
 MR. BULLARD.  I thought part of the hypothesis here was that countries for which the financial crisis was more severe are going to have a longer period of subdued potential output growth.  So are you saying that the financial crisis had differential effects across those countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage shows a clarification question asked by Mr. Bullard to seek further information or confirmation about the hypothesis being discussed. There is no contention or disagreement apparent in this statement.


Passage number 112.
 MS. WILSON.  The severity of the individual countries’ recessions varied.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the fact that the severity of the individual countries' recessions varied without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
 MR. BULLARD.  I see.  But you didn’t have an independent measure of financial crisis entered into this.  It’s just the severity of the recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage because Mr. Bullard points out a potential flaw in the argument by stating that the severity of the recession does not necessarily provide an independent measure of the financial crisis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 114.
 MS. WILSON.  If I include a financial-crisis variable, it shows up as insignificant, and in some cases with a positive coefficient—that is, both with the wrong sign and insignificant.  Even if I just run a regression in which I have recovery level, and I just put a financial-crisis dummy in, it doesn’t show up as significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is disagreement or contention. The speaker, MS. WILSON, is stating that including a financial-crisis variable in a regression model shows it as insignificant or with the wrong sign and insignificance. However, it is not clear who the disagreement or contention is with.


Passage number 115.
 MR. BULLARD.  I see.  Thanks very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing gratitude or appreciation for something.


Passage number 116.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions the position or title of "President Kocherlakota" without providing any information or indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 117.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I have a quick question on the United Kingdom.  You know, as I referred to earlier, in our own statement, we have evinced a willingness to have our outlook for inflation to rise above 2 percent.  One of the concerns associated with that is that longer-term inflation expectations could become unanchored.  In the United Kingdom—you can correct me if I’m wrong on this—my recollection is that inflation has been running above target for quite some time.  I was wondering what has happened to longer-term inflation expectations in the United Kingdom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Kocherlakota about the state of inflation and inflation expectations in the United Kingdom.


Passage number 118.
 MS. WILSON.  They have been fairly well-anchored.  They are higher, but they have been fairly well-anchored.  And one of the reasons that they keep missing are special factors:  taxes, increases in tuition, oil pass-through, the depreciation of the exchange rate.  So it looks like people are looking through some of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating reasons why certain factors may be causing people to overlook or not pay attention to something.


Passage number 119.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I have to say that the cynical audiences I speak to would discount those special factors.  But thanks, that’s helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is expressing gratitude for the helpful information received.


Passage number 120.
 MR. POTTER.  They haven’t been as well-anchored as U.S. inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply stating a fact or observation about U.S. inflation.


Passage number 121.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  They have not been as well-anchored.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 122.
 MR. POTTER.  Definitely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 123.
 MR. KAMIN.  I would add that when 12-month inflation comes in above 3 percent, the Bank of England Governor has to write a letter to the U.K. Treasury explaining this.  And they have had to write quite a few of these letters.  And frankly, inflation has been quite high, really, for a number of years.  And to be honest, it is straining my belief that it could be a sequence of special factors year after year that is producing it.  Not just the analysts in our division, but most analysts do seem to attribute the persistently high inflation to the combination of the fall in sterling; a continual series of utility price hikes; and, most recently—and we mention this in the Tealbook—an increase in university fees.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their opinion and observations about inflation in the U.K.


Passage number 124.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Right.  I saw them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 125.
 MR. KAMIN.  You know, bringing to mind the question at our conference tables, “Geez, is an education really that important there.”  But as I say, the Bank of England anticipates that the U.K. inflation rate will fall back to target; that’s in our forecast, too.  They do have rather poor economic performance and a reasonable amount of slack, so we do think that eventually it will come down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and stating their own opinion on the topic of education and the U.K. inflation rate.


Passage number 126.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 127.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the passage.


Passage number 128.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On the consumer sentiment piece, can you disaggregate for us the recent slippage and explain what could be going on here—whether the nonextension of the payroll tax cut had something to do with it, or what actual story we might hold on to for understanding the slippage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only asks for an explanation of the recent slippage in consumer sentiment. It does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 129.
 MR. ENGEN.  Yes.  The biggest part of the deterioration was in the expectations component.  That would be consistent with, in particular, concern about the prospect of taxes and that those would be affecting them more permanently, as compared with, say, just the ugliness of the political wrangling and the uncertainty.  It’s difficult to make a one-for-one connection to what they are responding to when they do give their answers to these questions; but it was in the expectations component.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an explanation or analysis of the deterioration in the expectations component.


Passage number 130.
 MS. RASKIN.  It was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage only states a statement or opinion by Ms. Raskin without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 131.
 MR. ENGEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without further context, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The mere presence of someone expressing their agreement does not necessarily imply the existence of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 132.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay, thank you very much.  We’re going to try to fix the audio buzz, so let’s take a coffee break and come back at 4:10 p.m.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and informing the audience about a break in the session.


Passage number 133.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay, why don’t we recommence.  We are ready now for our economic go-round, and I’ll start with President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the participants are ready to begin the economic discussion and President Williams will be the first to speak.


Passage number 134.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the phrase "President Rosengren" is a statement of fact or identification, and it does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 136.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since the last meeting, the market’s assessment of tail risk appears to have declined here and abroad, as global stock markets have continued to rise and credit default swap rates for many troubled sovereigns and banks have fallen.  While there can still be significant reversals on fiscal discussions here and abroad, the abating of some of the headwinds is welcome news and a cause for somewhat more optimism.  My own forecast is very similar to that of the Tealbook, with economic growth in the first half of 2013 a bit above potential and gradually rising to 3 percent in the second half of this year, though I assume more asset purchases than in the Tealbook.  We may finally get the positive self-reinforcing cycle we have been hoping for, and there may, at long last, be some upside risk to my forecast. I would highlight that some of the improvements are the result of actions taken by central banks.  In Japan, the markets seem to believe that the new government finally possesses the will to do what it takes to break out of the deflationary problems.  In Europe, the announcement by the ECB of a willingness to engage in outright monetary transactions helped to improve financial market conditions to the point that now Spain and Portugal have been able to issue long-term securities, and European peripheral stock markets are up sharply.  In the United States, the positive financial impact around asset-purchase announcements supports the view that these purchases have a meaningful impact on asset prices and the economic recovery.  That the components of GDP growing most quickly are those categories you would expect to be sensitive to our actions supports this interpretation.  While real GDP over the previous four quarters has grown by 2.6 percent, motor vehicle spending has grown by 9.6 percent, and residential investment has grown by 13.6 percent.  These are the two sectors that I would expect to be most affected by lower credit costs and improvements in net worth. Some have argued that pushing down longer term interest rates will not speed up the recovery.  I disagree.  An economist on my staff recently purchased a new car and, when asked why, immediately responded she wanted to take advantage of low rates offered on auto loans.  The rate she received was equal to the current PCE inflation rate, which, as we all know, is well below 2 percent.  Similarly, my wife has noted that with these low financing costs, we could replace my 1997 Ford Escort with roll-down windows with a car that might even have air conditioning.  [Laughter]  While these are only two examples, it seems fair to assume that people respond to lower financing costs like they respond to lower prices:  They buy more of the good.  This seems consistent with the University of Michigan consumer sentiment responses regarding the economic conditions for buying a car, with the number of respondents citing low interest rates increasing through the second half of 2012.  That auto sales are currently above 15 million units is in part due to our pushing down rates, which is also responsible for part of the improvement in employment we are seeing in motor vehicle parts and manufacturing.  Lower auto rates might not be the only reason auto sales have increased.  There is other evidence that our actions are having a positive impact on autos.  Auto ABS issuance has improved significantly.  Not only has prime auto ABS risen, but there has been a substantial improvement in subprime auto ABS issuance, which had been dormant during the financial crisis.  In 2012, 27 percent of the auto ABS issuance was subprime borrowers.  As investors have searched for higher yields, the ABS subprime market has opened up so that both credit costs and credit availability have improved.  For low- and moderate-income families, access to an auto can significantly impact job searches, as we have found in some of the Boston Bank’s work in Springfield.  There, some unskilled jobs went unfilled because firms were not located on mass transit and firms needed night-shift workers during times when mass transit was not available. While access to credit has improved significantly for cars, it still has a long way to go for housing.  There is just the beginning of a private-label RMBS market, though there are starting to be new issues with a focus on jumbo mortgages.  As investors reach for yield, there will be greater demand for RMBS product, and access to credit for homebuyers who do not conform to Freddie and Fannie guidelines will start to improve. Our economy continues to suffer from insufficient aggregate demand likely to be made worse by fiscal austerity.  Our asset purchase programs seem to have the desired beneficial effects of accelerating demand for purchases that are most sensitive to the cost and availability of credit.  We still have a long way to go, but monetary policy is an important reason for my increased, but guarded, optimism for continued improvements this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own views and opinions, and there is no indication of opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 137.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" is simply expressing gratitude and does not involve any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 138.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy continues to expand at a modest pace.  The District unemployment rate continues to run below the national rate.  It was 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides information about the state of the Eighth District economy, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 139.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 140.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 141.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In December, I reported some increase in optimism from my business contacts and directors in the Sixth District.  Though still very cautious, that optimism has carried over into the beginning of the year.  Broadly speaking, the pockets of strength in my District are the same as those in the rest of the country.  Residential construction has continued to improve.  Builders and Realtors indicate the recovery in the housing sector is real and, they believe, sustainable.  Energy exploration and extraction remain very active, and auto manufacturing remains strong.  Reports of contacts in the retail industry depicted generally healthy trends.  This was especially the case with our director who represents a large home-improvement chain, the country’s second-largest retailer.  Despite encouraging performance in some sectors and the positive tone of comments of my business contacts, I still find scant evidence that overall economic activity has broken out of the slow growth track we experienced over the last several years.  Uncertainty about fiscal and regulatory policy remains the dominant theme, especially the practical outcomes related to implementation of the Affordable Care Act.  A posture of caution with respect to business expansion persists.  I detect no evidence yet that many firms are taking concrete steps to increase payroll.  Firms remain very cost-conscious, and several directors noted that companies are adding employees only when they feel it is absolutely necessary to maintain the current level of operations.  With respect to inflation, my contacts describe mostly a very soft pricing environment.  I hear virtually nothing about rising cost pressures, outside of isolated areas. I have not materially changed my outlook since the December meeting.  I continue to expect moderate economic growth in the 2 percent to 2½ percent range, with moderate employment growth and inflation somewhat below 2 percent.  My current growth projections are somewhat lower than the Tealbook baseline.  My staff has been incorporating different measures of uncertainty into our own formal model-based forecasting exercises.  The impact of uncertainty in these exercises is material and, depending on the model, reduced annual economic growth by ⅓ percentage point to 1 percentage point.  I have incorporated the lower end of that range into my baseline view for 2013.  Although it is not in my baseline forecast, I believe the economy could outperform my 2 percent to 2½ percent outlook should greater clarity and visibility materialize.  One consistent theme I hear in conversations with contacts is that many businesses are in a good position to expand should the decisionmaking environment improve. I am shifting my assessment of risks around economic growth in the direction of balance.  I view a better-than-expected improvement in the housing sector as a plausible upside risk.  In the suite of models we use for constructing forecasts, the one that emphasizes housing prices generates results that are very similar to the Tealbook’s better housing scenario.  If I were doing a formal balance-of-risks submission, I would hold to risk to the downside.  I am not yet quite ready to move away from a downside bias, but I am getting closer.  Barring any negative developments between now and the March meeting, I expect I will see the risk circumstances as in balance by the next SEP submission.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a summary of his observations and opinions without conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of President Evans does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 143.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  And I’m sure to be well paid for saying it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeable statements. It is a light-hearted remark indicating that the speaker expects to be rewarded for their statement, likely implying that the statement will be well-received or appreciated.


Passage number 144.
 MR. EVANS.  I didn’t ask.  When I travel overseas, I remind and bore any and all listeners that the American consumer who fueled global growth over the last 15 years has been taken off the playing field after receiving several red cards, after all, from abroad.  [Laughter] Let me now turn to inflation risk.  Identifiable and concrete inflation risks continue to be remarkably low.  I read with interest the Board staff’s memo on forecast errors from January 2010 to December 2012—that was also an excellent analysis.  Apparently, the disinflationary forces we have faced have been somewhat stronger than many would have expected, and, again, Beth Anne made a comment about that related to advanced foreign economies.  Somewhat in contrast to where I thought President Plosser was going when he asked the staff about the implications for appropriate monetary policy, given data back then, I think the bottom line would have been that the staff’s advice wouldn’t have been that different because the slack measures were relatively more robust.  But I’m happy to have people clarify that.  On this, first let me take note of the substantial monetary accommodation that we’ve attempted to provide in the form of—we all know this—QE2, Operation Twist, open-ended QE3, and aggressive forward guidance for the currently zero funds rate.  I wouldn’t put it this way, but I did note with interest the Dallas Fed presentation by Evan Koenig that was circulated to us that characterized our monetary policies as the FOMC having a well-stocked liquor cabinet—very colorful.  And the second point is that the Tealbook has revised downward the level of potential output by several percentage points over this period.  Staff analysis attributes a large portion of the slower-than-expected growth in actual and potential output to a decline in technological growth, perhaps due to restrictive financial conditions.  A wealth of academic and policy research points to strong inflationary consequences of such negative technology shocks unless, of course, monetary policy counteracts the inflationary effects.  But instead of pursuing more restricted policies, we’ve spiked the punch bowl more and stocked the bar further.  So smoothing through transitory influences on headline PCE, core PCE inflation has been well below our long-run inflation objective of 2 percent, and I infer that we’ve been fighting substantial disinflationary forces for some time.  That’s where I end up from that analysis.  And finally, there is the very low growth in wages we’ve seen over the last few years.  This puts an exclamation point on low inflation risks.  The 1970s is the episode that causes us the most concern that our accommodative monetary policies may be misguided, but back then we had a wage-price spiral.  Today I know of no businessperson who expects that wages are going to start growing strongly across their corporate enterprise.  And households don’t seem to expect this either, judging by their expectations for future low income growth in the Michigan survey, which have been almost bleak for quite some time. Putting this all together, I’m hopeful that 2013 will be the year that the U.S. economy finally achieves a degree of economic momentum that becomes self-sustaining and ultimately gives rise to escape velocity by 2014, but this will require that we remain on guard against complacency.  Importantly, my outlook is premised on maintaining our open-ended asset purchases until we’re highly confident that we will have evidence of a substantial improvement in the labor markets and the real economy.  Escape velocity has to be more than just a hope.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing their own analysis and opinions on various economic factors, but there is no direct disagreement or conflict with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of gratitude from someone named President Pianalto.


Passage number 146.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Leaving our last meeting, I was hopeful that we would get a more complete resolution to the fiscal cliff and clearer data on the economy.  On fiscal policy, some uncertainty related to taxes has been resolved, but much uncertainty on the spending side still remains.  Meanwhile, the incoming economic data have been somewhat mixed, but, in general, most signs still point to moderate economic growth over the forecast horizon, an improving labor market, and inflation near target.  While headline GDP growth in the fourth quarter likely dipped due to transitory forces, the underlying pace of growth is a bit more encouraging.  Anecdotal reports and incoming data on consumer and business spending were reasonably solid, despite all the uncertainty that was present. The cloudy domestic and foreign outlook continues to give a number of manufacturers in my District pause, but my contacts in consumer-focused industries like autos and construction products remain optimistic.  In addition, retailers seem satisfied with the holiday shopping season.  So overall, the economy appears to be entering 2013 with improving prospects despite facing many challenges.  A key factor supporting the recovery, as several have already mentioned, is improvement in the housing sector.  Almost across the board, housing activity is well above year-ago levels.  With the inventory of home sales being low, house prices are starting to perk up in my District as well as in the national statistics.  Despite this encouraging pickup in housing, I am hearing that the pace of mortgage origination and refinancing is being restrained by the wide primary–secondary mortgage spread.  Like others, I’ve wondered whether this wide spread will narrow in the future so that today’s very low MBS yields will be passed on more fully to consumers.  My staff spoke with two of the larger mortgage originators in the District about where they thought pricing was headed, as both are expecting to gain market share in mortgage originations.  Interestingly, they suggested that over the course of this quarter, competitive pressures would likely push down the spread between mortgage rates and MBS yields to what they would consider more normal levels.  A decline in the spread should contribute to further progress in refinancing.  However, these contacts are expecting mortgage refinancing to gradually slow throughout 2013, despite these smaller spreads and generally low mortgage rates. With improving conditions in the housing sector and less fiscal uncertainty, I continue to expect that economic growth will pick up over the forecast horizon and that unemployment will gradually decline.  My growth forecast is relatively unchanged from the last meeting, averaging approximately 3 percent over the next few years.  However, I have once again nudged down my outlook for the unemployment rate, reflecting the better-than-expected data.  Since September, I have lowered my unemployment rate projection by about ½ percentage point throughout the forecast horizon, and now I expect unemployment to hit the 6½ percent threshold by the end of 2015. Turning to inflation, the Cleveland Fed measures of underlying inflation suggest that inflation remains close to our longer-term 2 percent objective.  For example, while recent headline and core CPI readings have been subdued, the median CPI has increased at an annual rate of 2.2 percent over the past three months, the same as its year-over-year rate.  Inflation expectations derived from financial markets using the Cleveland Fed’s model are also anchored close to 2 percent going forward.  The risks to my outlook remain to the downside for GDP growth, but with the improving housing market and the gradual healing in the labor market, like President Lockhart, I think that the risks are moving toward being balanced.  On inflation, I see that the risks are broadly balanced, as inflation expectations have remained well anchored despite the growth in our balance sheet.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, provides her analysis of the fiscal cliff resolution, the state of the economy, and her forecasts for economic growth, unemployment, and inflation. She also mentions the opinions of her contacts in various industries. There is no mention of conflicting viewpoints or disagreements.


Passage number 147.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you. President Plosser" does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a phrase of gratitude towards President Plosser.


Passage number 148.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude towards President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 149.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to President George.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 150.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Tenth District economy continues to expand at a moderate pace.  Employment growth has increased in most of our states and industries.  While uncertainty about fiscal and regulatory policy has tempered hiring decisions, these effects have been more than offset by relatively positive expectations about future sales and profitability.  For the District as a whole, growth reflects strong auto sales and a rebound in residential and commercial real estate markets.  Commercial construction activity, in particular, outpaced the nation throughout the fourth quarter of last year.  Vacancy rates have continued to fall, with notable improvements in sales, absorption, and rents.  In the ag sector, despite the severe drought, farm incomes are near historical highs, thanks in part to record crop insurance payments.  The volume of land sales remains exceptionally high, and prices continue to rise.  Looking ahead, livestock operators will likely see rising incomes, while crop producers face declines.  With grain stocks at historical lows, ag commodity markets are likely to be volatile.  A soft spot in the District is manufacturing.  After falling throughout the fourth quarter of last year, manufacturing activity contracted modestly again in January, but production expectations remain relatively optimistic for the months ahead.  Energy and consumer discretionary spending also softened—energy as a result of the relatively low domestic prices, and consumer spending particularly in the areas of leisure and hospitality. For the national economy, I continue to see economic growth at a moderate pace, and my outlook for the medium term is largely unchanged.  I’ve been particularly encouraged by the improvement in the housing market and how it has surprised to the upside.  Looking back at the first quarter of last year, the median estimate from the Survey of Professional Forecasters called for ½ percent decline in house prices for 2012.  The forecast was based on the Case-Shiller 20-City Composite Index that now looks likely to come in about 5 percent above its year-ago level.  So it is encouraging to see that home prices have risen substantially more than anticipated.  Likewise, residential construction activity has exceeded expectations.  In terms of the labor market, I think we’ve been seeing some notable improvements.  The three-month average change in private nonfarm employment is 181,000, which is a pace consistent with a steadily declining unemployment rate.  And although volatile, initial claims for unemployment insurance are also at their lowest level in almost five years.  The unemployment rate, I would note, has also fallen faster than many expected. Despite the improvements in housing and labor markets, the pace of real GDP growth remains slow.  Although much of the weakness in the fourth quarter last year and the first quarter this year appears to be transitory, I am not expecting much above 2 percent growth for this year.  The Board staff’s memo on reasons for the weaker-than-expected recovery supports my own sense of things, as it emphasizes the surprisingly slow pace attributed to lower-than-expected growth in potential output.  So the combination of these factors suggests to me that we should anticipate seeing improving growth ahead but also that we will need to be cautious about attempting to push the economy back to its pre-crisis trend. Inflation is likely to remain below 2 percent over the near term, but with open-ended asset purchases at their current level and a zero funds rate well into 2015, I would expect inflation to rise above 2 percent in the medium term.  And while longer-term inflation expectations are currently anchored, I would note that a tradable measure of the five-year, five-year ahead level of breakeven inflation remains about 30 basis points above its level prior to the September FOMC meeting, and at the upper end of its historical range.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains both positive and negative information about various aspects of the economy. For example, there is positive information about employment growth, auto sales, real estate markets, and farm incomes. However, there is negative information about manufacturing activity, energy and consumer spending, and the pace of GDP growth. Therefore, there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 151.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply an expression of gratitude from the speaker, President Lacker.


Passage number 152.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, a mea culpa.  Evidently I was responsible for the intermittent buzzing sound that plagued the session earlier today.  While shuffling staff briefing material, I lightly brushed up against the microphone chiefly relied on by the First District, and you may have noticed the First District relying on the Second District’s microphone earlier today.  We in the Fifth District are familiar with technology outages, although things have improved in recent years. [Laughter]  I’m confident that a thorough after-action review will result in a stronger and more resilient technology infrastructure.  I’ll proceed with my statement now. We continue to receive mixed signals on economic activity in the Fifth District, and that probably means economic growth remains somewhat sluggish.  For example, our diffusion index for service sector revenues rose sharply from minus 2 to plus 13 in January, but our manufacturing index fell sharply from plus 5 to minus 12.  Commercial real estate is another sector in which signals are mixed.  Our office vacancy rates declined last year in Charlotte and Norfolk, and asking rents there have increased.  But office vacancy rates have risen recently in Washington, and asking rents there have declined.  Net absorption was a whopping negative 4 million square feet in the D.C. metro area last year.  Outside of Washington, though, our commercial real estate contacts are generally optimistic about the coming year.  Labor market conditions also have been mixed across the District.  We’ve seen accelerating job growth in the Carolinas, middling performance in Virginia and Maryland, and outright employment declines in West Virginia and the District of Columbia.  Some firms say that they’re reluctant to hire due to economic uncertainty, while others continue to report difficulty finding workers with the needed skills.  One manufacturer of advanced engines, for example, noted that community college training of potential workers is inadequate because the equipment they train on is out of date.  Housing has been a bright spot across our District, outside of West Virginia, but our home furnishings contacts have yet to see sales gains to match the pickup in homebuilding we’ve seen.  Our most recent surveys opened up on December 27, and, as you would expect, the early submitters were generous with their expressions of wrath about uncertain tax and spending plans.  These complaints have continued since January 1, but attention is now also focused on the impact of the costs of health-care reform on hiring plans. In short, the regional picture hasn’t changed much since our last meeting, and my national outlook hasn’t changed much either.  Granted, the data flow has been mildly better of tone lately, and in response I could be persuaded to bump up my GDP forecast a tenth or so, but it would still leave it well below the Tealbook for this year.  The most important difference I see between our outlook and the Tealbook is that I’m less optimistic about personal consumption spending.  We talked about that a little bit earlier.  I think the pall being cast on sentiment by the spectacle that passes for fiscal policy deliberations these days, along with a raft of other good reasons to be cautious, is likely to continue to dampen household spending for much of the year.  So I expect consumer spending growth to come in near 2 percent, and I project GDP growth to come in only a shade above 2 percent. My inflation outlook hasn’t changed much, either, since the last meeting.  I continue to expect to see headline inflation near 2 percent next year and beyond, though we may fall below 2 percent this year.  Given the trajectory of monetary policy, though, I see upside risks for inflation in 2014 and beyond.  I agree with President Evans.  Our business contacts don’t see a wage-price spiral at this point, but I doubt they would have said that in 1966 or 1967 either.  I don’t view the lack of current wage and price pressures as “dispostive”—I learned that word from Governor Tarullo yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and describing their outlook on various economic indicators.


Passage number 153.
 MR. TARULLO.  “Dispositive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contradictory statements or opposing viewpoints. It is a statement made by Mr. Tarullo without any contention.


Passage number 154.
”  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  A slow student.  But concerning inflation, I share the sense President Evans had about his forecast:  I worry about too much complacency. For the Tealbook’s inflation projections, the concept of potential output, which we’ve touched on a couple of times today, and the implied gap between actual and potential has been important.  We’ve had a lot of discussions about these today and at other meetings.  Differences have been important to our different perspectives on policy.  In this context, I, too, admired and I applaud the staff’s memo on identifying the sources of the unexpectedly weak economic recovery.  We don’t often conduct after-action reviews of our monetary policy deliberations.  So a comparison of what we were projecting at the beginning of the recovery with how things turned out is, I think, quite instructive.  I should say up front that forecasting errors are inevitable, and that such a look back should be focused on what we can learn that can strengthen our understanding and analysis in the future rather than finding fault with the staff’s past analysis.  I don’t think that’s appropriate, and this is very much the spirit in which I read this memo. So what did we learn.  Well, for one, we learned that our estimate of potential output can change quite a bit depending on how we see the economy perform.  The staff compared the time path for real GDP with their January 2010 forecast and found that the estimated level of actual real GDP last quarter was 8.3 percent below the level in their January 2010 forecast.  The staff’s estimate of potential GDP changed by a comparable magnitude:  It was down 7.7 percent below the January 2010 estimate of what it would have been.  So the staff, if you put that into a decomposition, essentially attributes four-fifths of the shortfall in this recovery, relative to the rapid recovery that they and many others were initially expecting, to the shortfall in potential output.  Let me just note a couple of striking features of the analysis.  One is that estimates of potential respond so much to the incoming data, and I think that’s entirely consistent with what the staff have told us over the years:  that we should regard contemporaneous estimates of potential as subject to considerable uncertainty.  The second notable feature is that in the plot of the path of potential, there appears to be a kink around the end of 2008 and 2009.  So it appears as if something in the most recent downturn left its imprint on the staff’s estimate of potential.  The third striking feature is that potential is very, very smooth, except for this little downward kink.  As you all know, an alternative interpretation of the data that has been advanced by some economists, including President Bullard, is that there was a one-time downward shift in the level of potential output during the recession.  And that would line up roughly with the view of some of us and many academic economists that the notion of potential output that’s relevant to policy is affected by many different contemporaneous shocks to the economy and can vary significantly over time.  So I’m just going to leave these observations at that and just note that I think the Committee would benefit if we could learn more in the future about the staff’s thinking about potential and, in particular, how they think about these alternative approaches to thinking about potential.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing their agreement with President Evans' forecast and their admiration for the staff's memo on the weak economic recovery. They also mention that they have had differences in perspective on policy but emphasize that the focus should be on learning and improving understanding in the future rather than finding fault with past analysis.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker, your comments and President Plosser’s certainly illustrate that measuring potential output and the output gap is very difficult in real time.  But if we went back and looked at the policy recommendations that were made by the staff based on those measurements, clearly, they’ve been too tight throughout.  If you look at inflation, we’ve been repeatedly easing, again and again, in order to maintain inflation at 2 percent.  So a priori, if you went back and looked at their initial estimates, I think that the policy recommendations are going in the other direction.  Your basic point about it being difficult to measure output gaps is certainly true, but there’s no presumption from that that policy should be tighter or easier.  You have to make your best decision that you can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. It primarily discusses the difficulty of measuring potential output and the output gap, as well as the policy recommendations based on those measurements. There is a mention of inflation and the need for easing, but it does not directly contradict any previous statements or arguments.


Passage number 156.
 MR. LACKER.  I totally agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "I totally agree with that" indicates that there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 157.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply mentions the title of "Vice Chairman" without providing any additional information or indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 158.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  First off, let me endorse President Kocherlakota’s remarks.  If you remember in the past, I’ve said that the Taylor rule gives me a headache.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with President Kocherlakota's remarks and also stating a personal opinion about the Taylor rule.


Passage number 159.
 MR. TARULLO.  You’re not getting another dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement by Mr. Tarullo does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement without any conflicting views or argument.


Passage number 160.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage only consists of a polite expression of gratitude and an address to someone without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 161.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Thank you. Governor Duke" does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a thank you message to Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 163.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given statement is a simple expression of thanks and a mention of Governor Raskin. There is no sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 164.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Over the past couple of months, the economy seems to have evolved pretty much as I expected.  We have not yet seen much indication that we’re moving into the self-sustaining stage of the recovery, but there are signs that flickers of improvement are under way and that accommodative monetary policy is helping to keep that improvement from stalling out.  As noted by many around the table here, one area in which we’re likely seeing the positive effects of our policies is in the housing market.  After we initiated new MBS purchases in September, MBS yields fell and mortgage rates declined; rates on fixed-rate mortgages currently remain close to all-time lows.  Of course, over such a short time period, it’s hard to definitively link these lower rates on fixed-rate mortgages to improved activity, but there are some encouraging signs.  For starters, households themselves report that low interest rates make this an excellent time to buy a house.  In January, the share of respondents in the Michigan survey who reported that this is a good time to buy a house, because interest rates are low, rose to the highest level in nearly a decade.  Moreover, the share of households reporting that it’s a bad time to buy a house, because rates are high or credit is hard to get, dropped sharply in the second half of last year.  Another encouraging sign is vacancy rates.  For some time, we’ve been saying that residential construction hasn’t been responding fully to low rates, in part because of high vacancy rates that divert demand to existing units.  In fact, during 2012, the single-family vacancy rate came down considerably, and it now stands near pre-recession levels, suggesting that the drag on construction from this factor has probably abated.  Indeed, single-family housing starts increased at an annual rate of more than 34 percent over the second half of last year, up from about 4 percent in the first half. Once we begin to see these signs of life in the housing market, various secondary effects usually kick in, and we’re beginning to see those, too.  For instance, house prices moved up 8 percent last year, which boosts the wealth of households and improves confidence, all else being equal.  And we’ve now seen households reporting expected increases in home prices on net.  Compared with the first half of last year, survey respondents in the second half were much more optimistic about house prices rising over the next year and over the next five years.  This improvement in optimism regarding home prices provides an additional impetus for economic activity.  In addition, after years of decline, there are some tentative signs that home equity lending is reemerging.  Large banks, regional banks, community banks, and credit unions are reporting upticks in home equity lending.  This increase in home equity lending could provide additional liquidity for homeowners who may be seeking to refinance a major purchase, consolidate debt, or refinance a mortgage with a small balance.  This ability to tap into liquidity could provide households with the ability to increase consumer spending. Another channel through which our policies are likely working is the dollar.  It appears that the decline in the dollar over September and October of last year was driven, at least in part, by the new monetary policy accommodation we put in place.  It’s surely too early to be able to identify the impact of those changes on our net exports and on the manufacturing sector, as those channels usually work with a considerable lag.  But unlike the housing sector, we don’t have strong reasons to believe those channels are attenuated.  So I expect the impact of our mix of monetary accommodation measures to boost net exports—either through a lower dollar or through increased foreign demand, depending on how other central banks respond to our actions—which could, ultimately, spur domestic production in the quarters ahead. I’m encouraged that our policies are supporting economic activity, but discouraged by how long it’s taking for this support to remain necessary.  While it’s good news that the unemployment rate has moved down to 7.8 percent, the labor market doesn’t yet seem sufficiently robust to signal an economy that can grow without extraordinary monetary accommodation.  The declines in the unemployment rate in the second half of last year may have been statistical noise or perhaps were due to discouraged workers leaving the workforce.  Moreover, the unemployment rate misses the huge problem of underemployment.  It appears that many of the workers who have been added to the rolls during the recovery are working in jobs that are paying less than what they earned before the recession, don’t offer benefits, or offer fewer than full-time hours.  And consumer confidence fell for the third straight month in January, slipping to its lowest level in more than a year.  Perceptions of job availability weakened moderately this month.  The percentage point differential between respondents saying jobs are hard to get and those saying they are plentiful now stands at 29, up from 25 in December.  So the increased pessimism is not fully explained by the recent increase in payroll taxes. In sum, I’m encouraged by the signs that our policies are having beneficially supportive effects.  At the same time, I think the ability of the economy to grow in a way that is definitively and assuredly self-sustaining has yet to emerge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the effects of certain policies on the economy and the author's opinion on those effects.


Passage number 165.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Stein.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Thank you" and "Governor Powell" are expressions of gratitude and acknowledgement.


Passage number 167.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since the last meeting, the data suggest to me a modest improvement in the outlook, if only because the economy has weathered the year-end fiscal cliffhanger with no loss of momentum.  My industrial contacts report no real improvement, and my own experience in that space is that when the inflection point comes, it can be pretty dramatic; you don’t have to squint to see it.  So I don’t think we’re missing it.  But still, there’s a feeling, which many around the table have sensed, of coming improvement, particularly in the financial markets, if not yet in the data. For some time, the narrative has been about persistent headwinds restraining an economy that periodically has shown real underlying strength.  Those headwinds are suddenly much weaker, as the worst outcomes for Europe, the fiscal cliff, and China appear to have become much less likely.  If that state of affairs persists and if the underlying narrative has been correct, we should finally see, perhaps as the year moves along, the arrival of the long-awaited pickup in economic growth to a level that’s worthy of a recovery, and that is the narrative that the financial markets appear to be embracing.  Of course, those headwinds may return, and others remain, particularly credit availability for less-creditworthy households.  And it’s quite possible that the conflict over fiscal matters may intensify in a disruptive way as the year goes on.  At the last meeting, I expressed the hope that this fiscal battle, if we have to have it, would be a useful one, a debate worth having.  There seems to be little chance of that now.  But there’s always hope.  Nonetheless, for now, the headwinds are perceived to be much weaker—the 10-year flirts with 2 percent, and U.S. and global equity markets have rallied sharply, led by economically sensitive stocks.  Although it doesn’t show up yet in the dealer survey, some investors are saying that they sense the end of quantitative easing over the horizon, and as a result, there’s a sense of a rotation into equities and away from the safety of Treasuries, which accounts for some of the very large increase in the yield on the 10-year.  And we should welcome all of that and consider whether our statements and actions reinforce or restrain the positive feelings that are out there.  So I am joining Governor Tarullo in dipping one toe into the slightly more optimistic pool.  I do feel for the first time that there’s a shot to break out of the 2 percent growth trajectory, and the markets clearly agree.  I also agree with at least a couple of others around the table that I no longer see the risks as skewed to the downside.  And I wonder—it’s a discussion for tomorrow—whether that’s broadly agreed on, in which case we ought to reflect it in the statement. While financial conditions are a net positive, there’s also reason to be concerned about the growing market distortions created by our continuing asset purchases.  And because we’re going to go into a deep dive on financial stability in March, I’m going to be brief today.  I want to say that I think President George captured these concerns very well in her speech of a couple of weeks ago.  Many fixed-income securities are now trading well above fundamental value, and the eventual correction could be large and dynamic.  You hear that all the time now in the fixed-income markets—and in the media, for that matter, which actually may suggest that it won’t happen, of course.  But you hear it all the time; we all do.  The leveraged finance markets are a particular concern.  Rates are low; spreads are not that low yet, but they’re definitely tightening; and terms are deteriorating rapidly.  There are many examples of bubble-like terms, which we can talk about at the next meeting.  The Dell leveraged buyout, if it does happen, may be very prolific in that theater.  I don’t think there’s an imminent crash coming.  I do think that the incentives will rule in the end, and the incentive structure that we put in place with the asset purchases, is driving securities above fundamental values.  So there is every reason to expect a sharp and painful correction. We also—I want to touch on this point—generally have the view, and I agree, that the growing risk buildup is a job for regulatory policy, as opposed to monetary policy.  And as I said, I’m sympathetic to that argument.  Monetary policy is not well suited, in some ways, to address asset bubbles.  I find it much less satisfying that the risk buildup is a clear, and perhaps intended, consequence of monetary policy.  If the argument is that monetary policy should stick to the dual mandate, as President George pointed out, it’s worth remembering the power of another financial shock to damage the economy and drive us away from the mandate.  In any case, we ought to have a low level of confidence that we can regulate or manage our way around the kind of large, dynamic market event that becomes increasingly likely, thanks to our policy.  This crosses the line into tomorrow’s discussion.  I think the likelihood that we will see a substantial improvement in the labor market is rising, and so are the financial stability risks that are a consequence of our asset purchases.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  While there are some concerns raised about asset bubbles and market distortions, there does not appear to be any direct disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 168.
 MR. LACKER.  Well done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "well done" suggests approval or praise, indicating agreement or satisfaction rather than disagreement.


Passage number 169.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A question.  Yes, President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 170.
 MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman, as I understood it, some people are only considering buying cars with air conditioning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is simply stating a fact or sharing information about some people's preferences when it comes to purchasing cars.


Passage number 171.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Which argues that policy maybe needs to be more accommodative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement. It simply mentions a suggestion or perspective that policy possibly needs to be more accommodative.


Passage number 172.
 [Meeting recessed] January 30 Session   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning.  Let me start by calling on David Wilcox to update us on some data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the meeting has recessed and then introduces the next speaker.


Passage number 173.
 MR. WILCOX.3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Top-line GDP growth was estimated this morning by the BEA at minus one-tenth of 1 percent, which was very close to our forecast of plus one-tenth of 1 percent.  That’s as close as we get to a bull’s-eye.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the estimated GDP growth is close to their forecast.


Passage number 174.
  MR. FISHER.  Just a sign error.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply mentions a sign error without expressing any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 175.
  [Laughter] MR. WILCOX.  Yes, well—I’ll take a sign error for which the digit is only a digit after the decimal place.  It’s the sign errors that involve whole percentage points that are more of an issue.  The composition of demand was also very close to what we’ve been expecting.  The main contributor to the downside surprise, such as it was, was a bigger decline in federal purchases, as you can see in the table that you have in front of you; the BEA’s defense spending was even weaker than we had penciled in.  On the whole, and while we obviously haven’t had a chance yet to look through the information in any detail, I doubt very much that this release will have any material implications for our projection of real activity.  On the inflation side, as you can see at the bottom of the page, all three of the high-level PCE indexes that we track came in very close to our expectations as well.  On the income side, the BEA built in a considerably bigger bump in fourth-quarter income than we’ve been expecting.  It attributed that to a tax-related time shifting, so, to that extent, that won’t affect our assessment of the fundamental wherewithal of households or businesses.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply providing information and sharing their analysis of the data. There is no indication of conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any questions.  [No response]  All right.  We’re now at the point for our policy discussion.  We start with Bill English.  3 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 177.
 MR. ENGLISH.4  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be referring to the handout labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.”  The top-left panel of page 1 shows results from the three most recent surveys of the primary dealers:  the one taken before the December meeting (the dotted red line), the “flash” survey taken after the December policy announcement (the dashed blue line), and the regular pre-meeting survey received last week (the solid black line).  As you can see, the median projection for the peak level of SOMA securities holdings didn’t vary a great deal across the three surveys; it rose modestly after the December meeting, but, due in part to that meeting’s minutes, which pointed to increased concerns about the costs and risks of further balance sheet expansion, the peak dropped back to about its earlier level. The two smaller panels to the right summarize the dealers’ responses to questions about the potential efficacy and costs of additional asset purchases.  With regard to efficacy (the red bars), dealers generally reported that purchases were moderately effective in putting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, supporting the mortgage market, and easing overall financial conditions.  With regard to costs (the blue bars), the dealers saw possible impairment of market functioning as the most important cost in determining the future size, pace, and composition of SOMA purchases; effects on financial stability, future policy implementation, and inflation expectations were close behind.  Reduced Federal Reserve income was viewed as least important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting information from surveys and summarizing the responses of dealers. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Bill, could I interject.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Bill is simply asking if he can interject, which does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 179.
  MR. ENGLISH.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage does not provide any specific information or context, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is this their own assessment of the costs or their assessment of what we think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is merely questioning whether the assessment mentioned is based on their own evaluation of costs or on our perception of their evaluation.


Passage number 181.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Their assessment of how those costs might affect your decisions to adjust the pace of purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by Mr. English is a statement of fact or question, without any clear indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 183.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any questions for Bill.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 184.
 MR. FISHER.  Bill, I’m just curious.  Looking at the first sentence in alternative C, paragraph 3, if and when we decide to start tapering back—I’m assuming you’re looking way down the road—is that the kind of language you would envision our using to tee up tapering.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asked out of curiosity by Mr. Fisher regarding the language that would be used to discuss tapering.


Passage number 185.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Clearly, it would depend on why the Committee decided to throttle back.  But this was intended to be a sentence that points both to the labor market and to the efficacy and costs, and so covered a range of possible reasons why the Committee might take such a step.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply describing the intentions and reasoning behind the committee's decision to throttle back.


Passage number 186.
 MR. FISHER.  This is roughly the kind of language we would use if, in April or June or God knows when, we decide to cut back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a hypothetical situation and does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 187.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the full passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement based solely on the given information.


Passage number 188.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing none, we’re ready for our policy go-round.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 189.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, and I can support the language in the statement as is.  I accept the wisdom of keeping the language as little changed as possible in the absence of a new policy action.  That said, I do have a couple of minor comments about the language of the statement.  In paragraph 2, I think the word “significant” before “downside risks” could be removed.  The better picture in Europe, along with the fact that the Congress navigated around at least the immediate risks related to fiscal policy, might justify this.  This would be a small recognition that the risk environment has lightened up a bit.  I don’t feel terribly strongly about this.  In paragraph 4, I propose removing the words “as always” in the sentence referencing efficacy and cost considerations.  To me, the insertion of “as always” gives the sentence a boilerplate quality and makes the consideration of efficacy and costs sound like an afterthought.  I think it would be wise to nudge the language, over the next two or three meetings, in the direction of explicit balance between economic conditions and efficacy and costs.  Finally, I support adding the bracketed language referencing unresolved fiscal issues as a key risk. I’m looking forward to the full discussion of the success of the LSAP planned for the March meeting.  At this meeting, it is premature, in my view, to contemplate anything like the policy in alternative C, but I don’t think it’s premature to think about and discuss when and how we might begin to alter the course of our open-ended purchase programs.  Let me express a concern.  I can envision a situation developing in which there is significant sentiment on the Committee favoring tapering down or even ending the LSAP, even under circumstances in which economic and labor market conditions have not really progressed enough to justify such an action on the basis of observed labor market improvement.  The Tealbook assumption is that asset purchases end in midyear.  At that time, the projected pace of job creation is scarcely better than it’s been over the last two years, and the unemployment rate is forecast at 7.7 percent.  If a year-end date is considered, the Tealbook forecast in the fourth quarter has no pickup in the pace of job creation, and the unemployment rate is still 7.6 percent.  I have a hard time seeing how we’ll explain a wind-down or stopping of purchases on the basis of labor market conditions and not on the basis of some interpretation of efficacy and costs.  As I said, I think it would be wise to begin to move toward a repositioning of the balance of considerations by incorporating stronger mention of efficacy and costs into future statements and other communications, even well ahead of taking any action.  We began that process, I believe, with the December minutes.  I think that we may have to reframe the LSAPs as open ended for the time being but still as purposely temporary programs with limits.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lockhart states his support for alternative B and the language of the statement as is, but offers some minor comments and suggestions for improvement. He expresses his concern about ending the LSAP without sufficient improvement in labor market conditions and suggests incorporating stronger mention of efficacy and costs in future statements.


Passage number 190.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards someone, President Rosengren.


Passage number 191.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as written.  This is an appropriate time to watch further developments in the economy and to take some time to determine the impact of our recent and continuing actions.  As a result, I would make no change to the December statement other than to update the statement to reflect incoming data.  The improvement in housing and stock prices, auto and residential interest rates remaining near cyclical lows, and the broadening of credit availability are all positive developments generated by our actions, as many of us discussed yesterday. In Part B of the Tealbook, much of the discussion of the choice between alternatives A and B was couched in terms of whether accommodation was sufficient to produce sustained improvement in the labor market.  The preferred policy doesn’t just get the economy back to full employment, but it also gets us there as soon as possible without increasing inflation expectations.  That seems to be the intent of the comparisons of alternative policy rules.  But there is also another cost that all of these simulations ignore—possible permanent effects of this slow recovery on potential output.  As we consider the benefits and costs of our actions for the next meeting, I would encourage a broader discussion of the costs of inaction as well as action.  Most of the models we use assume no permanent societal cost to a much slower return to full employment.  However, labor market scarring; permanent exits from the labor market, as discussed in several alternative scenarios over the past few Tealbooks; poor market experiences for newly educated workers; and growing problems associated with income inequality, exacerbated by periods of long-term unemployment, can affect the path of the economy in important ways not captured in many of the models we typically use in our calculations.  What is the evidence that long-term potential for the economy is affected by the speed of the recovery.  The Tealbook, Part B, has unemployment at the end of 2015 at 5.9 percent if we follow the constrained optimal control policy but at 7.3 percent if we follow Taylor (1993).  Clearly, the optimal control approach is preferred; they both have inflation below 2 percent in 2015, while Taylor (1993) has a much higher unemployment rate for much longer. Prolonged unemployment is of course undesirable, but it seems to me that there are likely other reasons to be concerned with this very slow return to full employment, perhaps not well captured in the modeling exercise.  Are there long-run costs to speed of adjustment that effect the fiscal deficit, potential growth in the economy, or our global competitiveness.  How much of Japan’s stagnation can be attributed to its acceptance of a slow recovery and obsession with the potential for inflation while continually being surprised by deflation.  While we need to consider the possibility of future inflation or asset bubbles, there is little evidence of either in the current data.  The possibility of these costs seems small relative to the costs of very high unemployment that will be exacerbated if we choose to remove accommodation quickly.  It is important to understand those costs and benefits we think we measure reasonably well.  Some of the costs of a larger balance sheet are difficult to quantify but get plenty of discussion.  I would encourage us to also spend time discussing the costs of inaction that are difficult to quantify but, nonetheless, can be quite real as well.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement of support for alternative B and a discussion of the potential costs and benefits of taking action or inaction.


Passage number 192.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a brief statement expressing gratitude from an unknown person to President Plosser. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a straightforward expression of gratitude from President Lacker.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 194.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The major challenge I see ahead for us is how to stop buying assets when the time comes, and by that I mean, how to communicate about it and how to rationalize it to ourselves and the public.  Unlike our other asset purchase programs, this one is open ended, so it won’t end itself and we don’t have any precedents to fall back on.  So I think it is worthwhile giving this some thought and discussion as we go forward, even if we don’t know when we’re going to face this issue.  In our statement, paragraph 4 spells out three considerations that could justify ending our asset purchases.  First, obviously, is a substantial improvement in labor market conditions, and I anticipate robust discussion in future meetings about whether observed improvement in labor market conditions has been substantial enough to warrant the end of purchases.  One problem we could face, as has been pointed out before yesterday and today, is that we get conflicting signals from unemployment and employment growth.  In that connection, I’m struck by the charts in Part A of the Tealbook that suggest to me that the staff’s unemployment rate forecast has improved in the last three meetings almost entirely because of reductions in their forecast of labor force participation.  And I agree with President Lockhart that if the unemployment rate were to fall, but without a substantial increase in employment growth, we’d be harder pressed to justify citing labor market conditions.  In that regard, I think our understanding of trend versus cycle in labor force participation is a bit murky at this point.  So I believe future research on labor force participation in the months ahead would be useful.  Apart from labor market conditions, we can invoke the efficacy and costs clause of paragraph 4.  I think that it makes abundant sense—as you have directed, Mr. Chairman—for us to spend more time discussing these in upcoming meetings.  An expanded record of those discussions in the minutes can help prepare the public for ending the purchases when the time comes. I recognize that the staff will be preparing memos for the next meeting.  I’m looking forward to some more full discussion there.  But in the meantime, I’ll make a couple of observations.  First, I’ll just say that, to me, the most obvious class of costs associated with our asset purchase program involves the implications for the exit process.  And on this, I’d note that our official pronouncements in the past have been resolutely confident about our capacity to withdraw monetary stimulus when the time comes in a way that prevents an increase in inflation.  But if we keep going, at some point, our balance sheet is going to become so large that the consequences of small errors in the pace and timing of tightening become quite significant.  So I think it would be useful for us to acknowledge publicly—and for you to acknowledge in your press conference, Mr. Chairman—that one of the potential costs of future asset purchases is that further expansions of our balance sheet raise the risk of compromising our capacity to withdraw stimulus in a timely way.  Concerning efficacy, I think it would also be helpful to acknowledge publicly—as you did in your last press conference, Mr. Chairman—the relatively humble state of our understanding of the effects of our asset purchases.  The theoretical accounts we have of how our asset purchases affect real activity have always faced some serious challenges.  For example, the limited arbitrage assumptions underlying some accounts are hard to reconcile with the empirical observation that apparently a huge range of investors appear to be capable of operating in virtually any segment of the U.S. Treasury market.  I’ll also mention that Governor Stein has made the useful point—it was enlightening to me—that even if our purchases drive long-term yields below the expected sequence of short-term yields, it may not have much of an effect on business investment.  And what I’ll call the strong form of the Stein critique says that the sequence of expected short-term yields will be the relevant hurdle rate for a firm’s physical investment opportunities, even if the firm is capable of borrowing at a lower long-term yield, because the sequence of short rates represents an investment option always available to them, even if their longer-term cost of funding is lower.  I think this is worth taking seriously, because it would imply that our asset purchases may be having little effect on firms’ investment, even if we can lower long-term yields.  And more broadly, I believe it would be useful to back away from resolute certainty about our purchases having a discernible effect on economic growth right now. Concerning the statement language, I support “suggests” and “paused,” I’m against “fiscal issues,” and I support President Lockhart’s suggestions about deleting “significant” and “as always.”  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains a potential disagreement or contention. In this case, Mr. Lacker expresses concerns about the potential risks and costs associated with the continuation of the asset purchase program and suggests that public acknowledgement of these risks may be necessary. This differs from the perspectives expressed by other participants in the passage, suggesting a difference in opinion or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 195.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker, did I understand you to say that the unemployment improvements were mostly on the participation side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is contention or disagreement. The speaker is seeking clarification while questioning President Lacker's statement about the improvements in unemployment being primarily on the participation side.


Passage number 196.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, that’s an ocular decomposition I did, and I may be wrong about that.  But labor force participation has been revised down substantially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about their previous analysis.


Passage number 197.
 MR. WILCOX.  At the end of 2013, our projection for the labor force participation rate is down about one-tenth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact or projection without any contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 198.
 MR. LACKER.  Through what.  From when.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. It consists of a simple question and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. Therefore, the answer is no.


Passage number 199.
 MR. WILCOX.  From September.  The scale was dramatically different.  So, measured in terms of inches on the page, it’s the same, but the scale spans only 1½ percentage points in the labor force participation rate chart, whereas it spans 3 percentage points in the unemployment rate chart.  We’ve revised down the unemployment rate about four-tenths at the end of this year, for example, and the labor force participation rate about one-tenth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 200.
 MR. LACKER.  I stand corrected, but the possibility remains that the trend in labor force participation eludes our grasp.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges that the possibility exists that the trend in labor force participation may be difficult to understand or predict.


Passage number 201.
 MR. WILCOX.  Past results are no guarantee of the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a commonly accepted principle in finance and investment advising. It suggests that just because something has happened in the past, it does not guarantee that it will happen again in the future. It does not introduce any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 202.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage only includes a brief statement by President Bullard and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 203.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B for today.  I want to make some remarks on the management of the asset purchase program in the coming quarters.  As I mentioned yesterday, I do not think that the asset purchase program should be ended on the basis of risks emanating from the size of the balance sheet, if at all possible.  If we end the asset purchase program for reasons in this sphere, the Committee would essentially be saying that, in its collective judgment, the balance sheet cannot be expanded any further.  This would take an important policy tool off the table in an era in which the Committee does not have a lot of credible policy tools.  Instead, I think the program should be ended according to the Committee’s judgment on economic conditions.  This would be a far better signal to the financial markets:  In effect, the program is ending because the economy is improving and because there’s a lot of other monetary accommodation in train.  The Chairman outlined yesterday some of the case for labor market improvement, and, according to most forecasts, we will see further improvement along this dimension as the year progresses.  I’m fairly confident that we will be able to make a reasonable case—although, as always, uncertainties abound. I also urge the Committee to consider minor adjustments to the asset purchase program as the macroeconomic situation evolves during the year.  Some of the language in alternatives A and C hints at this sort of adjustment.  I have long advocated that the asset purchase program be thought of and operated as if we were in a more normal interest rate targeting regime.  In that regime, the Committee often makes relatively minor adjustments to policy in reaction to changes in macroeconomic conditions.  The same could be done in the current regime by adjusting the pace of purchases up or down as macroeconomic fortunes wax and wane.  One idea along this line would be to consider tapering the asset purchase program during the year should we be fortunate enough to see continuing improvement in the economy.  A tapering program would avoid an abrupt end to the asset purchases, with its attendant high hurdle to starting up the program once again.  Tapering could take the form of reducing the pace of purchases as we continue to receive data indicating some improvement in labor markets.  One particularly concrete version of this might be to reduce the pace of purchases by $15 billion for each one-tenth point reduction in the unemployment rate, provided that inflation does not exceed 2½ percent in this period.  But the Committee could simply make more judgmental adjustments at each meeting as macroeconomic conditions evolve.  Making minor adjustments to the program as the data arrive would make the asset purchase program more state-contingent than it is today and, in my view, would help make the program more effective.  It would also provide the Committee with a tangible way to manage the program going forward. I want to comment briefly on two additional issues.  I think that possibly the Committee should revisit its planned exit strategy in the context of a larger balance sheet than was anticipated at the time that the current exit strategy was adopted.  As it stands today, we are planning to pay substantial sums in interest on reserves for the largest banks in the nation and to foreign banks.  These amounts may be larger than the total profits reported by these firms in a given year.  Relatedly, the large balance sheet may mean that remittances to the Treasury would be zero for an extended period.  I would prefer that we think about ways to smooth our remittances to the Treasury in order to avoid what may be difficult appearance issues for the Fed going forward.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is expressing his support for alternative B and offering his thoughts on the management of the asset purchase program. He is suggesting some adjustments to the program and discussing potential issues related to the size of the balance sheet and remittances to the Treasury. However, there is no disagreement or conflict present in his remarks.


Passage number 204.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 205.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply addressing the chairman.


Passage number 206.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This question cannot be answered as there is no passage provided.


Passage number 207.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m sorry.  Can I attempt a revival of my reputation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply expressing his desire to improve or restore his reputation.


Passage number 208.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  If you think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The question cannot be answered without any passage.


Passage number 209.
   MR. FISHER.  So little time, Jeff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 210.
  [Laughter]   MR. LACKER.  I said “attempt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage consists of a speaker making a statement followed by laughter.


Passage number 211.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but there is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 212.
 MR. LACKER.  At the end of 2014, the labor force participation rate projection is 63.5; in the last Tealbook, it was 63.7.  So the difference is two-tenths.  You divide by the labor force participation rate to get the implication for the difference in the unemployment rate.  So that would be three-tenths.  And the difference in the civilian unemployment rate projection from the last Tealbook to the end of 2014 is indeed three-tenths.  There may be some rounding in there that I’m not aware of, but that was the basis of my assertion.  I apologize for the confusion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging a mistake and apologizing for any confusion caused.


Passage number 213.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only contains expressions of gratitude and a mention of President Pianalto, without any indication of disagreement or controversy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 214.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B today.  As I indicated in yesterday’s go-round, I continue to see gradual improvement in the economy and labor markets, and I see inflation remaining close to our longer-term objective of 2 percent.  Our previous asset purchase programs have almost surely contributed to the improved outlook for economic activity, and up to this point, at least, the associated risks appear manageable.  Moreover, as was discussed yesterday, the unemployment rate has declined somewhat faster than most of us had anticipated last fall, and the staff’s estimate of the GDP gap has narrowed.  The cumulative effect of these developments heightens my interest in evaluating the benefits and costs of additional asset purchases.  I have growing concerns that additional asset purchases will not have an appreciable effect on real economic activity and that the costs and risks associated with a sizable further expansion of our balance sheet are likely to outweigh the benefits.  I’ve been concerned for some time now that our asset purchases could be creating undue risks for private investors, for financial firms, and for us.  These risks are greater, it seems to me, in the low interest rate environment, which we expect to last for quite a while longer, and these risks could compromise financial stability, market functioning, and our ability to exit in a safe and timely manner. The Tealbook discussion of the case for alternative C provides an excellent characterization of my views about the risks.  Because we’re planning to have a thorough discussion of the risks and benefits at our March meeting, I’d like to suggest a few risks that I think are worth considering.  First, some of my contacts tell me that financial institutions and investors are prepared to sell assets very quickly and get the first-mover advantage in a rising interest rate environment.  So I’d like us to explore how well prepared banks and other financial companies are for a rise in interest rates and how robust the financial system is likely to be.  Second, I’d like to know whether we see evidence that financial institutions are taking on undue leverage and credit risk to compensate for lower-than-expected returns on fixed-income assets.  And, finally, I’d like us to have a more complete picture of how our enormous presence in the agency MBS market might affect the housing market when the time comes to implement our exit strategy and we begin to unwind our MBS position.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: In the passage, Ms. Pianalto expresses support for alternative B, which suggests some level of agreement. However, she then goes on to express her concerns about the risks and costs associated with additional asset purchases, which indicates disagreement or contention with the idea of expanding the balance sheet. She specifically mentions risks to financial stability, market functioning, and the ability to exit in a safe and timely manner. Furthermore, she suggests exploring the preparedness of financial institutions for rising interest rates and the impact of the Fed's presence in the agency MBS market on the housing market. These concerns suggest a disagreement or contention with the potential negative consequences of further asset purchases.


Passage number 215.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  It’s probably worth mentioning at this point, given your comments and President Bullard’s comments, the two areas of focus for the staff for the next meeting.  The first, obviously, is financial stability and the interest rate factors—the effects on financial firms, their holdings, who’s holding these assets, and what is the risk of a jump in long-term rates.  These are the issues that Governor Stein raised yesterday, and I want to note that they are very much on the agenda.  President Bullard talked about smoothing, and we are doing some substantial work on strategies for smoothing remittances.  That’s, I think, a useful suggestion as well.  So these things are under way.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the areas of focus for the staff for the next meeting and acknowledging some suggestions and work being done by Governor Stein and President Bullard.


Passage number 216.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 217.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B.  Unlike the Tealbook assumption, I expect that we will need to continue our Treasury and MBS purchases at the current pace for some time to come, certainly past the middle of this year.  In thinking about this, I’d like to refer to alternative A in the chart on page 2 of Bill’s handout.  If you look at alternative A, which is assumed to have the purchases going out further, and if you look just at inflation and ignore for the moment unemployment, alternative A actually does a better job over the next decade of hitting the 2 percent inflation target, on average, than alternative B or C.  So I feel that from a point of view of trying to achieve even just our inflation objective, continuing these purchases longer is right to do.  Importantly, our policies have contributed vitally to the current historically low levels of long-term mortgage, auto loan, and other interest rates, which are helping the economy gain traction.  And I’d like to say that I agree with everything President Rosengren said earlier in this go-round. As I mentioned yesterday, low rates are energizing a positive feedback loop in residential and commercial real estate, which is providing critical impetus for a faster recovery.  If we were to end our asset purchases prematurely, we could disrupt this progress.  Not only would that impede economic revival, but it would also put further downward pressure on inflation, which has been running persistently below our 2 percent objective.  The Tealbook box on Japan provides a sobering reminder of the potential long-term costs of timid and self-doubting monetary policy.  In response to persistent deflation and economic stagnation, the Bank of Japan announced a series of measures in the past that proved inadequate to deliver their inflation objective or faster growth.  Like Sisyphus trying to roll a bolder up a hill, the Bank of Japan’s halfhearted efforts—too little, too late—failed to make lasting progress.  The lesson for us is clear:  Despite the uncertain costs and benefits of LSAPs, doing too little poses as great a risk as doing too much. With regard to the statement language in paragraph 2, I would omit the bracketed phrase regarding fiscal issues.  I would also omit the word “significant” as a modifier of “downside risks.”  The risks are still to the downside, but global and domestic strains have unquestionably eased notably since December.  I would not make the change recommended by President Lockhart regarding paragraph 4; I would leave it as is.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Williams supports continuing the Treasury and MBS purchases at the current pace for some time, while also emphasizing the importance of low interest rates for the economy. However, he disagrees with the bracketed phrase regarding fiscal issues in paragraph 2 and with the recommended change by President Lockhart regarding paragraph 4.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude from President Evans.


Passage number 219.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude directed towards President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Just a word on the “fiscal” to tell you what the thinking is.  There were a couple of stories in the last couple of days about how the sequester now seems, according to the politicians, very likely to be enacted in full, which would presumably have a major impact on the near term.  I have said in press conferences that monetary policy can’t offset highly contractionary fiscal policy.  If we want to separate, in some sense, this as the part we can’t really control, this would be one way to do it; that was the rationale.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation or clarification of the current thinking on the fiscal situation.


Passage number 221.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is expressing gratitude for something without any opposing viewpoints or contradictions being presented.


Passage number 222.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of "Mr. Lacker" and "Mr. Chairman" suggests a formal conversation or exchange of words between two individuals, but there is no indication of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without providing the specific passage for analysis. Please provide the passage for a more accurate answer.


Passage number 224.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m interested in having President Kocherlakota clarify what he thinks “current policy accommodation” means.  I think of it as how much we own, not how much we plan to buy.  So I’m just curious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing curiosity and a desire for clarification.


Passage number 225.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think this is a challenging problem.  I’m not sure I’ve solved it in the appropriate way.  “Current monetary policy stance” might be appropriate instead.  I understand the point you’re raising, President Lacker.  But I think I feel very uncomfortable with the use of “sufficient.”  That’s what I was trying to describe.  I think what the statement is trying to connote is, given what we have in place as of our December meeting, this is what we expect to happen.  And I don’t think the word “sufficient” really is the right word for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no evident contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is expressing his own uncertainty and discomfort with certain language choices, but he acknowledges President Lacker's point and offers his own perspective on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 226.
 MR. LACKER.  I’d raise one other thing: the second sentence does not say anything about inflation.  It says that “economic growth will proceed at a moderate pace” and that the unemployment rate will get to levels we think is consistent with our dual mandate.  By not saying anything about inflation, the implication is that this may come at the cost of inflation being not consistent with our dual mandate.  I doubt markets have picked up on that, but, as a matter of grammar—and we haven’t been scrupulous about this in other places—I would just point out that it’s not crystal clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Lacker disagrees with the statement in the second sentence and argues that by not mentioning inflation, it implies that achieving economic growth and low unemployment may come at the expense of inflation not being consistent with their dual mandate.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The last sentence is pretty clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 228.
 MR. LACKER.  I know the last sentence is.  I’m just dealing with the second sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only includes one sentence and does not present any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 229.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I’ll go to President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 230.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like others, it seems clear to me that policy will need to remain accommodative for some time to encourage and support the projected pace of economic growth and employment as various sectors complete the deleveraging process and demand returns to more normal levels.  Our current policy, of course, goes well beyond accommodative and continues to provide an unprecedented level of easing, with open-ended asset purchases and zero interest rates well into the future.  After effectively deploying asset purchases during the crisis to arrest deflationary pressures and stabilize markets, we are now continuing asset purchases to accelerate the recovery and bring down unemployment faster to achieve our objectives.  My concerns with this policy are certainly not with its intentions and desired outcomes, but with the efficacy with which asset purchases can in fact accelerate the decline in the unemployment rate.  My concerns remain focused on the unintended consequences or possible side effects associated with this extraordinary level of accommodation in a growing economy.  Certainly, our asset purchases have contributed to some degree to the housing market recovery, although they occurred relatively late in the year, and it’s not clear that it’s a primary factor behind the better-than-expected improvement.  We’ve seen lower secondary mortgage rates, although those rates have backed up substantially over the past month.  Primary mortgage rates also fell a bit after the September meeting but have risen recently.  I continue to be concerned about the number of potential costs of our current purchase program, such as market functioning, complicated exit, balance sheet normalization, financial imbalances, and the potential for higher longer-term inflation expectations.  I, too, look forward to discussing these issues in March and hope we can clarify the efficacy and costs of this policy, including the points that President Rosengren made about the cost of prolonged high unemployment. I appreciate that these risks are particularly difficult to quantify today and, in some cases, to describe with any precision.  They are not staring us in the face today, and it may be well into the future before we realize them.  And the ability to distinguish between healthy and unhealthy search for yield is most challenging.  One issue that does concern me, though, is the emerging shift in strategy by individual and institutional savers, banks, insurance companies, and pension funds to recast their portfolios and products as the near-zero-rate environment becomes untenable for safe returns.  Examiner findings in my own region suggest that banks are beginning to extend the duration of their portfolios, which will make it more challenging for them to adjust when rates begin to normalize.  Other institutions and investors are also placing more emphasis on strategies that entail greater risk, moving away from traditional, investment-grade products and toward riskier lending or equities.  Whether this increased risk proves healthy and supportive of economic activity, only time will judge.  However, having spent a fair part of my Fed career examining banks, I know how difficult it is to identify the tipping point in real time when a healthy shift toward risk becomes excessive and potentially damaging.  Our actions today contemplate continuing a policy that I believe is too accommodative and poses more risks than benefit in achieving our objectives for sustainable economic growth.  The recovery is continuing, and we are making slow progress toward our objectives.  As we see the recovery take hold, I am concerned that the continued high level of monetary accommodation proposed in alternative B increases the risk of future economic and financial imbalances and, over time, could cause an increase in long-term inflation expectations. I, too, would suggest keeping the language as is in alternative B, and I would support President Lockhart’s suggestion on the word “significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses concerns about the efficacy and unintended consequences of the current policy, indicating a disagreement or contention with the policy.


Passage number 231.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 232.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you for calling attention to the Wall Street Journal article, which I commend to people around the table.  It’s a good exposition of the staff work, which makes very clear that it’s a possibility that there will be a period of low or zero remittances.  And I think getting that out there and having that part of the discussion is, obviously, constructive.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude for bringing attention to an article and acknowledges the possibility of low or zero remittances.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 233.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, and I consider it appropriate at this meeting to make only modest changes to the statement.  In paragraph 2, I do very much like the shift from the negative rationale for our purchases—namely, that without them, economic growth might not be strong enough to see improvement in the labor market—to the more positive rationale that with the program we do expect to see gradual improvement.  My preference would be not to add the bracketed clause in this paragraph.  Although there certainly remain large unresolved fiscal issues, it seems problematic to me to insert this clause now, just four weeks after agreement was reached on tax issues and concerns about the debt ceiling are receding.  I could support the suggestion of removing the word “significant” as well in this sentence. We’ve linked the pace and duration of asset purchases to the goal of a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market.  I certainly don’t think that criterion has been met.  The unemployment rate has declined a bit, but with the moderate economic growth the Tealbook forecasts, there is not yet an expectation of significant improvement over the coming year.  My own outlook is similar to the Tealbook’s, so I do not now anticipate sufficient progress in the labor market to terminate this program for this reason before the end of 2013, and I, too, envision total purchases that will come closer to alternative A than alternative B.  Of course, I intend to keep reevaluating the outlook. With respect to the efficacy of our asset purchases, I see them as definitely having lowered primary mortgage rates, which is contributing to a surge in refinancing and is aiding recovery of the housing market.  And I agree with the comments of Presidents Williams and Rosengren and others about the broader beneficial effects.  Because the minutes surprised markets, the reaction also provides something of a read on the program’s efficacy, at least in terms of its impact on asset prices.  The most recent Desk survey suggests that there was only a modest shift in market expectations concerning the ultimate size of the program.  We would not have expected a major market response, but key financial variables did move in a manner consistent with a small tightening of policy.  During the two hours subsequent to the minutes’ publication, yields on 10-year Treasuries moved up about 5 basis points, the S&P 500 declined about ½ percent, and the dollar appreciated three-tenths of 1 percent versus the yen and four-tenths versus the euro.  Because the benefits of our asset purchases come about largely through the transmission to asset prices, and from there to the real economy, for what it’s worth, this bit of event-study evidence is consistent with past assessments of their likely benefits. With respect to the costs of our asset purchases, they do not seem to be impeding the functioning of financial markets.  With respect to risks, we are seeing some increased risk-taking in financial markets, although I also remind myself that within limits, a greater willingness to bear risk is something we want in order to promote the recovery.  As Governor Stein noted yesterday, interest rate volatility has declined, and there are reports of a rise in the use of leverage.  I, too, worry that investors may resort to strategies to enhance returns that could subject them to significant losses if interest rates were to rise sharply.  As Governor Stein discussed, if these investors are highly leveraged, this could create systemic risk.  A prolonged period of low interest rates may be spurring such behavior, along with a diminution of perceived tail risk, but I doubt that this is importantly attributable to our asset purchases per se.  We do need to watch these developments carefully; use our supervisory tools, such as stress tests; and consider what other tools we could deploy should we conclude that they pose a significant threat to financial stability.  But at the same time, we need to keep firmly in mind that there are large social costs and serious downside risks that would be associated with the failure of the economy to return toward maximum employment over the next few years or with a prolonged decline in inflation below our 2 percent objective.  And I certainly agree with Presidents Rosengren and Kocherlakota and others—and with the remarks that you made yesterday, Mr. Chairman—about the potential impact of such a prolonged period of slow recovery on the long-run potential of the economy. With respect to the potential for losses on our balance sheet and a possible suspension of remittances to the Treasury, I agree with the comment you just made—we certainly need to communicate the possibility of such outcomes to the public soon and clearly.  At the same time, I would certainly emphasize the rationale for this program and its expected benefits.  I think the publication of the Carpenter et al. FEDS working paper is certainly a good step in this direction. Considering the federal budget situation overall, I believe and would forcefully argue that the program is strengthening, not weakening, federal finances by lowering the interest cost to the Treasury of new issues; by diminishing the potential for inflation to undershoot our target, which would result in an unanticipated redistribution from government to domestic and foreign holders of Treasury debt; and, of course, by strengthening the economy and thereby boosting tax revenue.  We would hardly be the first country to experience such losses in the conduct of monetary policy, and we can learn from other countries’ experience.  The central banks of Switzerland, Chile, and Israel, for example, all have maintained their independence and the support of their governments and the public in spite of incurring losses in their conduct of monetary policy.  Importantly, these central banks were understood to be pursuing objectives in the national interest.  Even with negative capital, a central bank can continue to conduct policy successfully, except in very extreme cases. Overall, then, my assessment of the efficacy and costs of our asset purchases has not materially changed since we started the program in September.  I therefore think it’s appropriate to leave the expression of our commitment in paragraph B(4) unchanged.  I consider it important for us to communicate more clearly to the public our assessments of the efficacy and costs of our asset purchases.  Should we at some point decide that we need to scale back these purchases, even though a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market has not yet materialized, I definitely think we will have to explain to the public why and how our assessment of efficacy and costs has changed, and a failure to do so would severely damage our credibility. Turning to forward guidance, I believe the market has responded well to the adoption of thresholds, although there is some confusion out there about whether 6½ and 2½ are thresholds or triggers.  I agree that it’s appropriate to drop the calendar date today and allow the market to take over the job of judging when the thresholds may be reached.  I anticipate that we will be able to leave the forward guidance as is for quite some time.  Certainly, today, with the unemployment rate far above 6½ percent, inflation expectations well anchored, and my forecast for inflation one to two years ahead running well below 2½ percent, I consider the status quo appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Yellen disagrees with the idea of adding a bracketed clause and removing the word "significant" in paragraph 2. She also disagrees with terminating the program before the end of 2013. She agrees with Presidents William and Rosengren about the broader beneficial effects of the asset purchases. She also expresses concerns about increased risk-taking in financial markets and the potential impact of a prolonged period of slow recovery on the long-run potential of the economy. However, she agrees with the idea of communicating the potential for losses on the balance sheet and the expected benefits of the program.


Passage number 234.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 236.
   MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, I have to return to our adoption of the consensus statement on policy yesterday.  I was happy to abstain without comment, but I was told after the meeting that that’s an unacceptable way to proceed and I need to make a comment for the record.  So I’m going to do that now.  First I would say that I admire the way that Narayana formulated his understanding of the statement yesterday in his comments, and I’d be happy to embrace that or, for that matter, the speech of then Governor Bernanke to which Narayana alluded.  But nothing that has happened in the last year has changed my view that the document itself made vagueness a virtue to an excessive degree, and, ultimately, I don’t think it has advanced the cause of achieving or communicating greater consensus in the policy views of the Committee as a whole.  But it certainly hasn’t made things worse than they were before, so I’m content to continue to abstain. Turning to monetary policy issues, I first want to make one point, which is not about the statement itself but refers to some earlier comments.  There were a few people who said earlier that we shouldn’t identify potential costs to the balance sheet position of the Fed that mean we would not be paying any remittances to Treasury, because that would suggest that we wouldn’t any longer have the LSAP as a policy measure.  To be fair to our colleagues—including Betsy, who just did this—I don’t think what they’ve done is to say there’s some absolute level beyond which, under any circumstances, they wouldn’t be willing to go.  They have identified the political costs, as Betsy articulated them, as a cost to be taken into account.  But she did say that if there were more dire economic circumstances, she might be willing to do more, and I presume the reason for that is, at that point, her judgment of the balance of benefits and costs would have changed.  So, Jeff, I don’t think anybody is suggesting that that issue is, in and of itself, dispositive.  I think it’s just a matter of people differently valuing costs and benefits. Turning now to the monetary policy action itself, I was struck by what Narayana said in his intervention, because it returned to a theme that I at times have addressed and that Bill Dudley has at times addressed, which is the desirability of thinking forward several meetings, or part of the year, and trying to, in a strategic fashion, think through how we’re going to act and communicate our actions.  Some of you may recall that even though I was obviously in favor of greater accommodation in the 2009–10 period, I was cautioning against what I then characterized as the impulse to have to throw a maiden over the cliff to a dragon in every meeting, just to be perceived as having done something.  And I thought what Narayana did a little while ago was to present a possible strategic approach that couples a shift in LSAP policy with a complementary change in the thresholds.  Now, Narayana may well favor the change in the thresholds even without the LSAP policy, but the point is that he was trying to think of them together and think of how we’re going to move over the course of the next several meetings.  And I think that strategic perspective is really important for us to maintain when we’ve got a bunch of novel types of actions, including now both the thresholds and the open-ended LSAPs, on the table.  That strategic perspective is very much worth discussing in March and June—and thereafter, if necessary.  For today, I think it counsels minimal changes in the statement, certainly in the policy portions of the statement.  Now is not the time, in my view, to move even incrementally on policy, largely because of the overinterpretive propensities of the folks out there who’ll be on CNBC as soon as the statement is released this afternoon and who will follow on for the next couple of days.  As I think I’ve said before, these guys make Kremlin watchers look as though they just weren’t paying attention.  And they just do overinterpret any little shifts in language to reflect more of a policy change than we certainly intend. Paragraph 4 could certainly have been drafted differently.  I, frankly, was a bit surprised back in September that some people didn’t ask for changes in the drafting of it, but it became what it is.  And I believe it would be ill advised at this juncture to change it, because people will read into it a shift in policy that I don’t think reflects the view of this Committee today.  So I wouldn’t make any changes in paragraph 4, even though I fully anticipate a discussion of these kinds of changes and issues in March and June.  Of course, paragraphs 1 and 2, almost by necessity, change every meeting because they’re supposed to be retrospective and prospective.  Mr. Chairman, to my memory, nobody has commented on the blue language in paragraph 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo expresses disagreement with the consensus statement on policy, stating that it made vagueness a virtue to an excessive degree and did not advance the cause of achieving greater consensus.


Passage number 237.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You would be the first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement or observation without any contention or disagreement involved.


Passage number 238.
 MR. TARULLO.  Well, I’ll do it then.  I’m going to take the patriotic approach and suggest that we have some of the red and some of the blue against the backdrop of the white paper.  I would suggest that we say that the “information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December indicates that growth in economic activity paused in recent months.”  The GDP results that David communicated to us as the meeting began make it reasonable to use the verb “indicates.”  It’s not just a suggestion anymore, and everybody’s expectations about growth in Q1 and Q2 would suggest that Q4 was a pause rather than a slowing.  In paragraph 2, as the Board knows, I had some of the same reaction to the paragraph 2 language as Narayana did.  And I believe that maybe Richard has come up with the best adjective, which would have been “appropriate,” because “sufficient” is a little value laden—you’re not sure which side of that you’re on.  I think it is fine to omit “significant” before “downside risks”; that certainly comports with the discussion that we had yesterday.  Like Janet, I think it would be a bit odd to insert “in part reflecting unresolved fiscal issues” at this point.  It would have certainly been fine to do it in December.  But even though the prospect of full sequester would be disruptive and a significant fiscal issue, what we faced in December was that possibility plus uncertainty about taxes plus the fiscal cliff, and at least some of those—the debt ceiling, tax issues—have been taken off the table.  So I believe that inserting it now would once again elicit that kind of overinterpretation that’s probably not particularly helpful.  I do think, Mr. Chairman, that if things continue along a path in which full sequester seems increasingly likely, we’ll have the opportunity to return to it again in March or, for that matter, June, depending on how things work out.  And again, you would have ample opportunity to comment on it either in your monetary policy testimony or at the March press conference.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and suggestions but does not explicitly disagree with anyone else's viewpoints.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Thank you, Governor Raskin" expresses gratitude and respect towards Governor Raskin.


Passage number 240.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I guess we are doing some cleanup from yesterday.  In the spirit of starting with some cleanup of the issues, I did want to follow up on President Fisher’s question regarding the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations in extraordinary circumstances, only to note what I perceive to be the rationale of his question, which maybe wasn’t fully fleshed out and which is really one of governance.  You will recall that he asked the question:  If the Chairman becomes indisposed, will it be the Vice Chair of this Committee or the Vice Chair of the Board or some other person who will be the person who will authorize the Desk to take actions.  The answer was that it will be the Vice Chair of the Committee.  From a governance perspective, that’s probably less than ideal, but I wanted to just complete the perceived rationale, I think, for the question and leave it at that. As I described in the economic outlook go-round, I believe the economy is showing some signs of improvement, but we haven’t yet moved into what might be a self-sustaining recovery.  At this point, I don’t see convincing evidence yet that the outlook for the labor market has substantially improved, and I believe the benefits of our policies still outweigh the costs.  Having now seen fourth-quarter GDP growth at negative one-tenth, I also think any near-term shocks to economic activity could be particular debilitating.  I believe there’s still considerable downside risk that economic growth is not sustainable.  At the same time, because I also see signs of improvement, I wouldn’t advocate for the more aggressive form of accommodation contained in alternative A.  At this juncture, I support the continued accommodation described in alternative B. Although the wording of alternative B is largely similar to the language we adopted in the December statement, there is this one subtle aspect to it, which many have described.  Instead of saying that the Committee remains concerned that if we don’t provide sufficient accommodation, the recovery will sputter out—or worse—the new language really does give it a more positive spin away from the prospects of poor prognosis, which can cast policy action into a self-defeating mode that hinders rather than supports growth.  In the shift from the old sentence, the new sentence says that the Committee expects that, with “sufficient”—or is it “current” or “appropriate”.—accommodation, the unemployment will decline toward a mandate-consistent level.  One of the benefits to the policy that we’ve put in place throughout the statement both in the forward-guidance language in the statement of lower for longer—saying that we’ll keep rates lower well beyond the point when the economy begins to strengthen—and now in the asset purchases statement is that we’re sending a signal that policy actions are intended to support economic growth.  If one of the downside risks that we have identified, or another one that we haven’t foreseen, should materialize, our policies will have created a floor of support that will keep the economy from completely tanking.  This qualitative language can cut off some of the tail risk that people fear, and less fear of tail risk enhances optimism, spending, and rational risk-taking today, even without any other change in monetary policy.  So I support the change in this wording in alternative B. I’d also like to commend President George for reminding us that it is exceedingly difficult for supervisors to definitively find the tipping point in which healthy reach for yield becomes unhealthy, systemic, destabilizing, and dangerous to the macroeconomy and to our ultimate attainment of the mandate.  Even if examiners could locate this point definitively for us, it is not clear that this body is equipped to consider the regulatory, supervisory, enforcement, and examination tools that would keep these instabilities from spreading and propagating.  In short, an ounce of supervision is worth a pound of emergency liquidity support.  So we need continued supervisory diligence of the sort that President George reminds us of, and I thank her for her comments. I’d also like to express my support for a future refresh of the sequencing that we set forth in the exit strategy.  For example, because of the impact of keeping MBS holdings on our balance sheet, which I believe has already begun to show through into housing markets, I think that this is likely proving to be a very effective channel.  Our MBS holdings are assisting us in supporting the relatively more robust growth in the housing sector.  They obviously have moved us out of a Treasury-only balance sheet, but when it’s time to exit, we may want to determine whether we have the sequencing right in the selling order of the MBS.  The beneficial impact of MBS holdings, combined with the possibility of capital losses incurred in their sale, may suggest that they not be sold as early in the exit plan as we originally designed it to be.  So I look forward to the staff’s continuing work in assessing our ability to execute an effective exit if MBS is held on the balance sheet rather than sold at the time it was originally anticipated. Finally, while I don’t feel strongly, I do want to make one observation regarding the reference to unresolved fiscal issues:  Having not mentioned the fiscal cliff when we were staring into the abyss, the timing of mentioning fiscal issues now seems off—late, if anything.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 241.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only expresses gratitude towards Governor Stein.


Passage number 242.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, but looking to the next meeting in March and assuming that the outlook is roughly where it is now, I would favor something where we begin to step down the purchases.  In part, this is simply because I think I’m roughly in the Tealbook ballpark; I believe a cumulative program on the order of $500 billion makes sense for reasons I’ve discussed before—my own weighting of efficacy, fiscal costs and risks, financial stability issues, and all of that.  Of course, I recognize that not everybody shares those concerns and certainly not to the same degree, and as a result, not everybody is in this Tealbook ballpark of $500 billion.  So let me try to make a set of arguments that maybe will be a little bit more broadly resonant, and I’m going to try to take the tack that Governor Tarullo just suggested, which is to think about this as a strategic set of issues in terms of the dynamics of expectations management and preserving flexibility.  A first observation is that market expectations continue to be out of line with what I take to be not my preferences, but the approximate center of gravity of the Committee.  The most recent dealer surveys show expectations to be for a total program size of approximately $1.2 trillion.  As a group—Vice Chairman Dudley, you mentioned yesterday that your estimate was that you thought the median of the group was in the $750 billion, $800 billion neighborhood.  That sounds completely right to me as well.  So, as Governor Duke mentioned last time, that still leaves us with a few hundred billion dollars’ worth of bad news to deliver to the market.  Based on the dealer surveys, the minutes moved the market prices a little bit, but if you consider expectations, it was really quite a minimal impact.  And I do differ; I do think it is important.  Of course, it’s very hard to do, and there’s going to be a lot of error, but I think it’s important to do the best we can to align expectations, if for no other reason than it gives us operating room.  We’ve heard a number of times how people would be uncomfortable at any given point in time of doing something that was surprising to the market.  So the better we can do on aligning expectations, the better off we’ll be. With that in mind, I was just trying to think through what the inferences will be if we hold steady in March.  Let’s think about it.  We’ll be about six months into the program.  It will be known that we’re doing a serious rethink of cost and efficacy.  Moreover, if we assume that the economy in March is roughly where it is today, I would not want to argue that we’ve made substantial improvement to the labor market, but it wouldn’t be unreasonable to say that there has been some forward progress since September.  As the Tealbook points out, the forecast for the year-end 2013 unemployment rate would be roughly four-tenths lower.  Fiscal cliff issues have been at least partially resolved.  The Dow is now flirting with 14,000.  So, on a continuous scale, there’s been some improvement.  If we don’t turn the dial at all, I guess the inference, as a logical matter, is that either (a) we’re growing increasingly comfortable on cost and efficacy; (b) we’re setting a pretty high bar for labor market improvement, so four-tenths is really not much; or (c) the dial is really not so much a dial that we would adjust in a continuous fashion but has more the nature of a discrete on/off switch.  It seems as though the first two inferences would, if anything, have to push market expectations for program size out further—again, increasing the gap between where the market is and what I take to be the center of mass of the Committee.  And with respect to the third, I’m not very comfortable, as a number of people alluded, with the idea of holding this up as a discrete on/off switch.  I think the idea that we respond more gradually to information is probably useful.  Another way to say this is that if you have a discrete on/off switch, it’s a coarsening of the information available to the market because, as we learn and as we adjust, that’s not feeding through, and I don’t think the minutes are a substitute for action.  If it’s not feeding through, and the market just doesn’t learn, that just pushes that learning further down the road and creates more volatility at a further point. Another argument that I would make as a strategic argument for stepping down—it doesn’t have to be a huge step-down—is that it gives us more headroom and more flexibility to respond to changing circumstances down the road.  Although I was attracted to parts of alternative C, one thing that I didn’t like, because I thought it went counter to this, is that there was a passage that said, “If the economy develops as anticipated, the Committee expects to further reduce the pace of its asset purchases . . . and to bring them to an end by midyear.”  In other words, the whole idea is, if you think there’s an upper limit on balance sheet size, an advantage of slowing the pace is that we don’t have to say things like that.  It gives you more room to extend if the economy then slows down again.  I think if you want to be open ended in spirit and, at the same time, recognize that there’s some tension, an upper limit on balance sheet size, slowing down the scale obviously gives you more room to be flexible going forward.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their own opinion and offering strategic arguments for stepping down the purchases, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 243.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It appears to be a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 244.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B at this meeting.  However, I also believe that it will soon be time to move to something like alternative C, probably well before the end of this year.  I look forward to the assessment of costs and benefits at the next meeting, and I’m going defer my policy comments until then, except to say a couple of things.  First, my principal concerns remain financial stability and fiscal losses.  And if the economy continues on its current path, and subject to further dialogue on the nature of the risks that we face, I believe we should adjust our purchases downward, with a view to ending them before year-end, whether or not we see a substantial improvement in the labor market.  And again, I would say that it is key that we take an opportunity, if we get one to remove the thought that this is an on/off kind of thing.  I also accept that there’s a downside case.  For example, if the risk clouds come rolling back in or if the fiscal negotiations become disruptive once again, it may be necessary to continue the purchases—or even increase them, for that matter. On a separate matter, I want to talk for a minute about the stopping rule.  As many of you know, I did propose an amendment earlier in this process before the meeting, which would have done something like what President Lockhart suggested.  And interestingly, I was advised, I think correctly in both cases, that I had offered the amendment both too soon and too late.  That may say something about my socialization to the way we do things here.  Too soon, because it’s really something that ought to be done, if it’s going to be done, in connection with a press conference.  But I think the broader point is this:  The efficacy-and-cost rule is a real thing, and if you think about it, it can’t be the case that we simply intend to keep purchasing whether or not efficacy is proven and whether costs are perceived to be greater.  Of course, with costs, the issue is that they’re down the road, they’re hard to see, and we’re not going to see them in real time.  So it’s a heavy burden, and I actually think that cautions a little bit of humility and caution.  It cautions caution.  Having said that, the language of paragraph 4 does seem to me to suggest boilerplate; many of us see it that way.  It’s not something we should perhaps address at this meeting, but in a way, it embeds an independent barrier to changing our purchases, and that should never be the case.  When the market expectations are different from the intentions of the Committee, the Committee should adjust the market’s expectations, rather than the reverse.  It can be fixed with a simple drafting change, perhaps at the next meeting, and I will defer the rest of that until then.  There are also other ways to add to clarity.  Those of us who feel more strongly about this can speak publicly about it.  I would echo those who noted positively the paper on fiscal matters by Seth Carpenter and others, and I’d say that I think that is a very positive and significant step toward improving transparency and opens the door for more.  To foreshadow our next discussion, I also think that including balance sheet projections helps clarify matters regarding our asset purchases.  It doesn’t really, of course, address our individual reaction functions, but it does provide some clarity in that respect. In conclusion, let me say that, assuming that the economy keeps on its current path of modest improvement or does better, I think the time is coming when we should dial back our purchases and then stop them well before the end of the year.  I would finally conclude that I could actually live with the risk language in alternative B, but I would certainly support removal of the word “significantly” and then look forward, if this peace scare continues, if this recovery scare continues, to maybe moving to the language in C.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their support for alternative B and their belief that it will soon be time to move to something like alternative C. They also discuss their concerns about financial stability and fiscal losses and suggest adjusting purchases downward with the goal of ending them before year-end. The speaker acknowledges that there is a downside case where purchases may need to continue or even increase. They also mention a separate matter regarding the stopping rule and propose potential changes for clarity and transparency. Overall, the speaker presents their opinions and suggestions without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 245.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply consists of a polite expression of gratitude from the speaker, the Vice Chairman. There is no contention or disagreement apparent in this statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 246.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I support alternative B.  I feel strongly that we should make very few changes to the statement at this meeting.  We don’t want to inadvertently imply any change in our policy stance or thinking.  The fact is, we don’t really know much more than we knew at the December meeting in terms of the likely near-term trajectory of the economy.  I think making changes now might signal lack of resolve and could undo some of the improvement in financial conditions that we’ve seen and that we are, in fact, seeking.  So I would not take out the “as always” in paragraph 4.  Also, I would not add the reference to “fiscal issues” in paragraph 2; adding the “fiscal issues” is odd timing because we didn’t add it when we were staring at the fiscal cliff.  To add it now seems inappropriate to me.  On paragraph 1, I generally agree with Governor Tarullo, but I come out in a very different place in terms of those two words.  I actually favor “suggests” and “slows.” The reason is that while I understand the reasons for wanting to do “indicates” and “paused,” to me, that puts way too much weight on a single indicator:  the fourth-quarter preliminary GDP number, which was minus 0.1 percent.  It’s going to be revised, and GDP is the average of a quarter over the average of the previous quarter.  The reality is, Hurricane Sandy came along and disrupted activity in late October and early November.  I think most of the data show that the economy probably was growing in the rest of November and December.  So I don’t want to put too much weight on the fourth-quarter GDP numbers.  I would prefer “suggests” and “slows”—“suggests,” because all of these data are revised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker disagrees with certain changes to the statement and argues against adding certain references or changing wording. They express their opinion and provide reasons for their stance.


Passage number 247.
 MR. TARULLO.  But I don’t get the “slowed” part of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Tarullo is expressing his confusion or lack of understanding about something, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 248.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Because I think things have slowed a bit because of temporary factors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 249.
 MR. TARULLO.  But what you just said would have suggested a pause early in the quarter and the beginning of an acceleration.  “Slowed” seems to indicate a deceleration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. While the speaker mentions a possible pause and acceleration, they also highlight that the term "slowed" implies a deceleration. This presents a contradiction or disagreement in how the situation is being described.


Passage number 250.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, but it slowed relative to six months ago.  So, we can see where people come out.  I don’t think this is a big deal in the scheme of things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses an observation about the pace of something slowing down, followed by the speaker's opinion that it is not significant in the overall context. There is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement being presented.


Passage number 251.
 MR. TARULLO.  I don’t either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 252.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But for completeness, I just wanted to give an alternative perspective. Now I want to say something more significant.  In our evaluation of our asset purchase program, I think that we really do need to reevaluate our June 2011 exit principles.  I would agree with Governor Raskin on this.  I believe we could alter the principles in a way that would potentially enable us to have more monetary policy accommodation at a given balance sheet size, that we could alter them in a way that could lower the risk of a future interest rate spike that could threaten financial stability, and that we could alter them in a way that reduced the risk of future balance sheet losses.  The way I started to think about this conceptually is that we wrote down those exit principles a long time ago in a very different set of circumstances.  We need to see now if those exit principles still put us at the efficient frontier in terms of these tradeoffs that we’re making across all of these different variables.  Let me give you some examples of what I have in mind.  For example, we might decide not to sell the agency MBS.  If we announced that change, it would have a number of potential benefits.  One, it would make policy more stimulative because our balance sheet would be bigger for longer.  It would reduce the risk of financial stability disruption of a sharp rise in mortgage rates or a negative effect to market functioning in the agency MBS market.  It would also reduce the risk of negative net income and the need to put a deferred asset on our balance sheet.  So, eliminating the agency MBS sales could actually be an improvement in a whole bunch of different dimensions, and I think we need to consider it. That’s a very simple one, but you could argue that our considerations could take us even further in this direction.  You might want to commit to keep our balance sheet fixed in size for some period of time, or you might want to peg the balance sheet to a given fixed duration.  If we really are saying that there are limits to how far we want to go in terms of the size of our Treasury asset purchases, then maybe we have to think about other ways to make policy more stimulative.  I think we’re on a road that has two tracks.  On one track the economy starts to show improvement in the first half of the year, and then on that track, it’s pretty simple to know what to do.  We start to taper purchases, and the tapering actually sends a very positive message that we’re becoming more confident about the economic outlook, so therefore we can purchase less Treasuries.  That’s a very easy road.  The road I think we need to prepare for, though, is the one on which the economy doesn’t show improvement, and we become increasingly uncomfortable with continuing to expand the balance sheet without limits.  If that were the case, we need to think about what we would do to both dial back the purchases at some point in time and replace them with something else that would make it clear that we weren’t backing away from our commitment to achieve our dual mandate objectives.  I hope that in March we could talk about the exit principles as part of this discussion, because I really don’t think those exit principles are anywhere close to the efficient frontier in terms of where we are today regarding what we’re trying to accomplish with all of these different constraints that we face.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that the current exit principles need to be reevaluated and potentially altered in order to achieve their objectives more effectively. This implies that there may be disagreement or differing opinions about the current exit principles among the members of the discussion.


Passage number 253.
 MS. DUKE.  I don’t feel strongly between “suggests” and “indicates,” but I do think “paused” is a better description than “slowed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a preference for one word ("paused") over another ("slowed"), but there is no opposition or conflict regarding this preference.


Passage number 254.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Do people agree with that.  I’m seeing nodding about that.  Okay.  So did you say you preferred “indicates” or you don’t care.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and agreement from the audience, but there is no disagreement expressed.


Passage number 255.
 MS. DUKE.  I don’t care much between “suggests” and “indicates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a statement expressing indifference towards the choice between the words "suggests" and "indicates."


Passage number 256.
” MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s your position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide any evidence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 257.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m sticking to it.  [Laughter]  Let’s see.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement followed by laughter and then an expression of agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 258.
 MS. YELLEN.  I think “suggests.”  “Indicates” is, in a way, taking just one preliminary number very seriously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Ms. Yellen simply expresses her opinion about the use of the word "suggests" versus "indicates."


Passage number 259.
 MR. ENGLISH.  And I think that was our view in putting in “suggests.”  It’s one observation, and it will probably revise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their own view and suggesting that it may be revised in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 260.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It does say “information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December,” and so there’s a lot of other input besides just the GDP numbers.  All right.  I think we have made an important decision.  “Suggests” and—so we’re going blue, is that what we’re doing.  All blue.  Excellent.  All right. That being resolved, the more substantive question—and I’ll address everything that was raised—was on the risk statement.  I explained the reason for possibly including “unresolved fiscal issues” at this point, but most people felt this was the wrong time to do it or that we missed our chance, if we were going to do it.  So I accept that.  And a lot of people suggested removing “significant” before “downside risks.”  I think the thrust of the meeting was consistent with that.  So, notwithstanding an aversion to change, I guess I would agree with that.  Let’s eliminate “significant” and eliminate the bracketed language about fiscal issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions that some people felt it was the wrong time to include "unresolved fiscal issues" and that some suggested removing "significant" before "downside risks." The speaker ultimately agrees with removing "significant" and eliminating the bracketed language, but acknowledges the opposition to these changes.


Passage number 261.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Can I just say a word on “significant”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if they can add a input or make a comment.


Passage number 262.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  By all means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 263.
 MR. ENGLISH.  If you remove “significant,” you may want to then put it back again if things get worse.  And will that be uncomfortable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. English is suggesting a practical approach by recommending that the word "significant" be added back if the situation worsens. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 264.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, as I said, there’s an aversion to change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there is an aversion to change.


Passage number 265.
 MR. FISHER.  You could say “intensified” if it got worse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Fisher regarding the possibility of using the word "intensified" to describe a worsening situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 266.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  I think there was a clear sense of the Committee that the risks were less skewed to the downside—a number of people said they were closer to balanced at this point.  Is that okay.  Is there any objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that there was a clear sense among the Committee that the risks were less skewed to the downside, but it also implies that there were differing opinions on whether the risks were more balanced at that point. Therefore, there is disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 267.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You might want to wait to do that until the March meeting, when you have the SEP exhibits that show that the risks have actually shifted toward less downside risk, but I don’t feel strongly about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is providing a suggestion but also stating that they do not have a strong opinion on the matter. There is no disagreement or contention present in this passage.


Passage number 268.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I really feel the sense of the meeting was to eliminate it—if that’s okay.  So that was substantive.  Narayana’s suggestion about “sufficient policy accommodation”—again, I don’t feel strongly.  I think an alternative word would be “appropriate.”  Do people prefer “appropriate”.  President Fisher suggested that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and suggesting an alternative word option.


Passage number 269.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But again, why are we changing that word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is posed to inquire about the reason behind changing a word, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 270.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why are we changing.  Are we changing.  What was it last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a series of questions, but there is no contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 271.
 MR. ENGLISH.  It was “sufficient.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement that implies disagreement or contention. It only includes a quote from Mr. English without any contrasting opinions or conflicting statements.


Passage number 272.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It was “sufficient”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The word "sufficient" does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states that something is enough or satisfactory.


Passage number 273.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Sounds a little weird to change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses a personal opinion about something being strange or unusual.


Passage number 274.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But, it was “without sufficient.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a fragment of a sentence and does not provide enough information to determine if there is any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 275.
”   MR. EVANS.  It was a different context, though.  It was “without sufficient . . . accommodation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement providing a different perspective or context.


Passage number 276.
”  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I’m going to take a straw vote on “sufficient” versus “appropriate.”  How many would like “sufficient”.  One, two, three.  “Appropriate”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 277.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Does “appropriate” win.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The word "appropriate" is not being challenged or debated, and there is no conflicting viewpoint presented in the sentence.


Passage number 278.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Appropriate” is appropriate.  Okay.  “With appropriate policy accommodation.”  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement consists of affirmations and agreements.


Passage number 279.
 MR. WILCOX.  Just one other question on the “significant downside risks”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question being asked is simply seeking additional information or clarification.


Passage number 280.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Certainly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The word "certainly" does not imply any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 281.
 MR. WILCOX.  The preceding phrase says “continues to see,” and now we’ve changed slightly what you continue to see.  It’s not necessarily a problem—I just raise it for your attention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wilcox is simply bringing attention to a slight change in what the speaker continues to see.


Passage number 282.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I think we saw downside risks before; we see them now.  They may be a little different in scale.  But thank you for the point there. All right.  Finally, on B(4), I would strongly suggest that we leave this until March.  I think it would be entirely appropriate in a context of our discussion of benefits and costs to somehow reorient the language in a way that highlights the efficacy and costs in a different way.  But why not wait until March to do that, after we’ve had a discussion.  Any objections.  [No response] All right.  So we’re using the blue language in paragraph 1 and changing “sufficient” to “appropriate” in paragraph 2.  We’re striking “significant” in paragraph 2 and striking the bracketed language.  I believe those are the only changes.  Would you like to read the first two paragraphs and then take a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is primarily making suggestions and seeking agreement on certain language changes.


Passage number 283.
 MS. DANKER.  I can, if you’d find that helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments. It simply presents a question without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 285.
 MS. DANKER.  Okay.  “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December suggests that growth in economic activity paused in recent months, in large part because of weather-related disruptions and other transitory factors.” The second sentence of the next paragraph:  “The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic growth will proceed at a moderate pace and the unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate.  Although strains in global financial markets have eased somewhat, the Committee continues to see downside risks to the economic outlook,” et cetera.  This vote covers alternative B, as amended, and the associated directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The first sentence presents information about economic activity being paused due to weather disruptions, and the second sentence presents the expectation of economic growth with appropriate policy accommodation. The mention of downside risks to the economic outlook does not imply disagreement, but rather acknowledges the existence of potential challenges.


Passage number 286.
 Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes President Bullard  Yes Governor Duke  Yes President Evans  Yes President George  No Governor Powell  Yes Governor Raskin  Yes President Rosengren Yes Governor Stein  Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes Governor Yellen  Yes  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  It would be a good time for a coffee break.  Let’s return at 11:30.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individuals listed all respond with a yes, indicating agreement.


Passage number 287.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence the meeting.  The final item on our agenda is a discussion of potential enhancements to our economic projections.  As you know, we’ve been having an ongoing discussion about how to improve the communications of the Committee and, in particular, how to give a better view of the rationale for our policy actions and future policy decisions.  We did a lot of work on the consensus forecast idea.  I think that’s something we should keep on the back burner, but at this point, we were unable to come to a clear resolution on how to make that work.  Because our usual strategy when we’re faced with unavoidable problems is to ask Janet Yellen to solve them, we sent to her subcommittee a request to look at possible enhancements to the SEP, and that’s our subject for discussion today.  We thank Dave Reifschneider and Stacey Tevlin for their very helpful background memo, and Stacey is going to provide the introduction.  Stacey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing background information and setting the agenda for the meeting.


Passage number 288.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there any questions for Stacey or Dave.  [No response]  I see no questions.  Okay.  We turn now to the head of the communications subcommittee, Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there are no questions and then transitioning to another topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 289.
 MR. FISHER.  Can I ask a question, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The presence of "Can I ask a question, Mr. Chairman" implies that Mr. Fisher wants to question or challenge something, potentially leading to a disagreement with the chairman.


Passage number 290.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m sorry.  I saw the two-hander from the Vice Chairman first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker saw the two-hander from the Vice Chairman first.


Passage number 291.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, I wanted to ask a clarifying question.  The medians are in addition to the central tendencies, as opposed to replacing the central tendencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their desire to ask a clarifying question about the topic of medians and central tendencies.


Passage number 292.
 MS. YELLEN.  We currently have central tendencies for all participants in a table.  That would remain.  Nothing would be removed.  All I’m proposing is taking figure 1 in the staff memo, which has medians and ranges, and showing those top three panels for voters and a separate one for all participants.  New things; nothing removed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes a proposal for adding new information to a table, without removing anything. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 293.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the word "Okay" by itself. It is a simple acknowledgement or agreement typically used in informal conversation.


Passage number 294.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "President Fisher" without providing any context or details about their actions or opinions. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 295.
 MR. FISHER.  On question number 3, Governor Yellen, were you talking about fan charts for all participants or just for voters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person asking the question is simply seeking clarification from Governor Yellen.


Passage number 296.
 MS. YELLEN.  I think all participants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 297.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  If we’re ready, we’ll go on to the go-round, and I’ll turn to another member of the communications subcommittee, President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage is simply providing information about the next step in a meeting or discussion. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 299.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Thank you" and "President Kocherlakota" show gratitude and acknowledgment rather than any form of disagreement.


Passage number 300.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Can I ask a quick question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This question does not contain any contentious or disagreement elements. It is a straightforward request for permission to ask a question.


Passage number 301.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The term "Vice Chairman" does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 302.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  How do you think the market would react to us no longer providing this information that we were providing in the past.  There’s a path-dependency issue here, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "There's a path-dependency issue here, I think" suggests that the speaker has a different opinion or perspective on the matter, indicating potential disagreement or contention on how the market would react to the information no longer being provided.


Passage number 303.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, if I might try to address his question—I think that we should address this by saying that we have changed the way we’re communicating about policy in the statement, and we should be changing the way we’re communicating about policy in terms of the SEP as well.  That would be the way I would be doing it.  Now, the question is, does that mean that now we’ve got to start asking people, what’s your unemployment conditionality, et cetera.  That would be very hard to do, I admit, but I think the SEP is going against the flow of what we’re trying to do through the policy statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a different approach to communication.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 304.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I take your point about the date-based guidance, but I guess I have a problem with imagining us giving them nothing, just taking this away and having it replaced with nothing.  That seems really hard for me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker mentions having a problem with removing something and replacing it with nothing, indicating a disagreement or contention with the idea of providing no guidance in a situation.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite and brief exchange of words.


Passage number 306.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me just go through these questions.  On the medians of the projections, I agree that it makes sense.  I’m pretty agnostic on whether it should be participants or voters.  As Stacey pointed out, as a practical matter, it’s very close, so this won’t make much difference.  On the assessments of appropriate policy, I like the colored dots.  I could understand the picture, so I was happy with it.  For the reasons that both President Plosser and President Kocherlakota mentioned, I’m not a big fan of the fan charts, especially with respect to the policy variable, the funds rate.  In other words, the whole essence of this thing is to elicit a subjective view about appropriate policy.  As Janet mentioned, Lord help us if we have to provide the fan chart.  That’s an objective piece of information that’s going to come out of the model; it’s a very different kind of information.  And with the policy stuff, I worry that it’s going to confuse people—that the objective, historically based standard errors will be misinterpreted as our subjective degree of conviction in the policy.  I don’t think that’s all that helpful. With respect to the balance sheet, I guess I’m going to be a bit of an outlier here.  I think this is both important to do and simpler to do than people have made it seem.  If we’re going to do it, we need to do it in March, and we need to have something simple, because if we wait until September to figure it out, it is probably not very relevant.  I would ask one very simple question—and that’s the question we ask the dealers—which is, “Under your view of optimal policy, what will cumulative purchases be between now and the end of the program.”  The question that they answer $1.2 trillion to—we would try to answer that as well, and we could do the colored dots and distinguish between the voters and the nonvoters.  I think if we’re sincere about improving transparency, it’s incumbent on us to put this information out there.  This is what the market wants to know.  Now that we’ve gone to thresholds, essentially, as you suggest, we’ve done a much better job of helping the market think about the funds rate.  So the residual uncertainty that people really care about is about the scale of our asset purchases.  I believe it’s an information gap that we can make some progress on closing, and, if you believe in transparency, I think we ought to make an effort. I understand there are counterarguments.  One counterargument is, it’s complicated.  It’s complicated in the sense that anybody’s optimal view of asset purchases reflects a number of factors, more factors than, presumably, a decision about the funds rate.  In other words, if you want to raise the funds rate tomorrow, it’s either because you’re very optimistic about the economy or because you’re an inflation hawk.  If you want to stop asset purchases tomorrow, it’s either one of those two, or you think efficacy is low, or you’re paranoid about the size of the balance sheet.  So there’s just a higher dimensionality.  You’re absolutely right that you reveal less about the entire set of information.  That’s a fair point—I get it—but I don’t think it’s super-relevant in the sense that what market participants want is to be able to make the best forecast they can.  And it’s hard to argue that, in terms of an unconditional forecast, this extra information will make you worse off.  I think it will allow you to predict better.  Because you don’t have all of the information, it won’t allow you to make a perfectly state-contingent forecast, but it will allow you to do better.  You could do even better if we could elicit people’s ideas about each of these individual things—about how much they worry about the size of the balance sheet and all that.  But of course, if we do that, that will take a year for us to figure out, and I’d rather we do something simple. Now, a second counterargument, which I think is certainly right, is that given the heterogeneity of views among people in the room, a disclosure of this sort would likely amount to an undesired removal of accommodation.  I think that’s right, but of course, I guess if you’re operating on a transparency principle, it means revealing good news and bad.  It so happens that you get to test your fidelity to this principle when you’re having to reveal news you don’t necessarily want to reveal.  Much of our recent innovation in communication strategy has come during a period in which we so happened to be moving in an accommodative direction.  So transparency has been helpful in the sense of providing accommodation, but as a general rule, transparency won’t always do that.  And I think that in some sense, if we believe in that as an overarching principle, we should do it even when it’s a little less comfortable.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply the speaker expressing his views and opinions on various topics.


Passage number 307.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. It is a simple expression of thanks from someone named President Lacker.


Passage number 308.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The sentence "Thank you. President Lockhart" is simply a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 309.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before responding to the specific questions, I’d like to comment on my views of the overall purpose of the SEP and how I think its design follows from my sense of what we’re trying to achieve.  I’ve said in earlier meetings that the institutional set-up of the FOMC aims at consensus on the policy decision, not necessarily consensus on the rationale for the policy decision.  Member support for the policy action can derive from quite different individual diagnoses of the economic situation, different models, and different policy reaction functions.  The Committee isn’t built to require or ensure that we all see the reasons for a supported action in the same way.  We learned last fall that designing a communication approach to convey the collective judgment of the Committee, speaking in a single voice, is very difficult and probably too ambitious.  And in that vein, I think providing the public with a hard sense of the Committee’s reaction function may be a reach as well.  I favor more modest intentions for the SEP.  Even though it’s not perfect, I believe there is real value for the public in seeing the range and array of individual forecasts and opinions that inform the policy deliberations.  These can be presented as they have been, showing where the individual views coalesce and what represents something like a majority opinion about the outlook and policy path.  So my answers to the questions about possible enhancements to the SEP are offered from this perspective.  I think all of the proposals under consideration have merit, but I’ve come to the conclusion that our goals for the SEP should be modest and we should not let the perfect become the enemy of the good or even the enemy of the serviceable. Regarding medians, I don’t see much to be gained from providing a median in lieu of the central tendency.  I do not think median reference points should be interpreted as proxies for the collective judgment of the Committee or the meeting participants more broadly. Regarding voters versus nonvoters, I perceive that the press focus on who’s a voter and who is not has escalated in the last year or so.  I don’t think we should encourage excessive attention to the voter aviary, speculation about possible dissents, and all that kind of thing.  Consistent with a less ambitious concept of the SEP, I prefer staying with a presentation showing only the full 19 participants.  If there are material differences between how voters and nonvoters view the policy environment, this information is better communicated in other ways, like the Chairman’s press conference or the minutes.  Now, this is not a throw-your-badge-on-the-table kind of issue for me.  I don’t strongly object to tagging voters in some way.  There may be a modest contribution to the market’s understanding of our policy decisions and projection of a future policy by distinguishing voters and nonvoters.  I’ll point out that because the composition of the voting Committee changes fairly materially, at least 4 of 12 on an annual basis, the information loses some value as we approach year-end.  At the same time, a reader would know the projections of 8 of the 12 voters on an ongoing basis, and that may have some value.  Overall, I think there is a limit on how far we go in segmenting the broad Committee.  I would not break out dissenters or soon-to-be voters, for example, in the last SEP of the year. Regarding the fan chart questions, as Governor Stein said, I’m not a fan of fan charts.  I do prefer the idea of producing probability bands based on participant-supplied probability estimates that necessarily sum to 100 percent.  [Laughter]  I don’t believe that graphic depictions of how we would do this have been presented in the write-up, so I’m just reacting to the idea.  Support for a policy action on the part of an individual member is often about risk mitigation around the outlook, as opposed to an outright shift in the trajectory of the member’s forecast.  An assessment of uncertainties is necessarily a participant’s judgment at a specific point in time and cannot be represented, in my mind, by historical errors or simulations from models that are not reflective of the participant’s methods for judging uncertainties.  A probability-bands approach has been tried—successfully, in my view—in various other forecast exercises, like the Philadelphia Reserve Bank’s Survey of Professional Forecasters, the New York Fed’s capital market survey, and my own Bank’s business inflation expectations survey.  I don’t think the additional effort required of submitters would be too burdensome.   On the question of fan charts for the federal funds rate, I do not recommend that this information be provided.  The difficulty of communicating such information is that we as a Committee are not of a common mind when it comes to the appropriate policy rule.  Using any particular rule will necessarily be interpreted as the Committee’s preferred rule and therefore may create undue confusion when meeting participants try to communicate their individual policy perspectives. On the balance sheet question, at the moment, balance sheet policy is integral to monetary policy.  If the goal is to provide useful information about the spread of individual views on projections of key economic and policy elements, I think it’s desirable to provide some information on assumptions regarding the balance sheet and, by inference, the direction of balance sheet policy.  There are many moving parts to the LSAP program, and we are continually learning how to balance their efficacy versus costs.  These many moving parts and considerations make it difficult, in my view, to convey a lot of detailed information.  I favor adding questions to the SEP, the answers to which can be interpreted and summarized in the minutes.  In other words, put the burden on the staff, not us.  Questions might address, in some selection that’s appropriate to the current context, the duration of purchases, the pace of ongoing purchases, the mix of purchases, the timing of the beginning of unwinding, the sequence of unwinding, and the pace of unwinding.  Mix and match according to the context of the questions.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal views and preferences on various topics related to the SEP (Summary of Economic Projections). They acknowledge the potential merits of different proposals but ultimately offer their own perspective and suggestions.


Passage number 310.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Just for clarity, I believe that the medians were intended to be added to the central tendencies, not substituted.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying their belief about the intended use of medians in relation to central tendencies.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 311.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I found President Kocherlakota’s comments intriguing.  If we were to start from scratch right now, we’d probably pick a different set of charts than what we have.  And so I think that highlights the challenge:  At a time when the strategies we’re following are evolving relatively quickly, locking ourselves down on too many variables may not make sense.  While I agree with President Kocherlakota’s comment, I also agree with Vice Chairman Dudley that taking away particularly the information that people outside of this room find most useful—which is, when is the fed funds rate going to go up.—would be a fairly difficult thing to do.  I view it as a constrained optimization problem.  And as a constrained optimization problem, what I take from that is a word of caution about how quickly we add more things.  But I don’t know that we can take too many things away from what we’ve already provided.  With that caveat, let me just briefly go through each of the five questions.  I would highlight that with less than half of the group, we don’t have consensus on any one of the questions at this point.  I’m not sure I’ll help much with that.  For question 1, I think the median should be provided for the SEP for all participants.  It may be less critical to show the median for some of the subgroups, as, I believe, the memo highlighted.  For question 2, I think it is important for our communication to clearly convey the likely policy path if the economy evolves as we expect.  This is best summarized by the assessment of voters supporting the policy decision.  So, given that we’re showing the interest rates, I would make the distinction.  For question 3, fan charts are popular with economists but seem like an awkward way to discuss policy with the public.  If we presented fan charts, how much of the discussion of those charts is likely in press conferences or speeches made by participants.  I frequently do PowerPoint slides.  I’ve never used a PowerPoint slide that had fan charts in it for the general public.  I could do it for economists, but I’m not sure it’s that useful for the general public at large.  For question 4, I do not believe an SEP fan chart for the federal funds rate would be particularly useful.  And for question 5, we’ve been trying to focus our statement more on economic outcomes.  The idea of an open-ended quantitative easing, and then providing a range of forecasts of balance sheet size, will get everyone, once again, to focus on the size of the purchases and calendar dates.  So rather than focus on size, we should try to better explain what we mean by substantial improvement in labor markets and to provide a more detailed description of the costs and benefits of asset purchases and how we think those costs and benefits could potentially change over time.  That’s the purpose of the March meeting, but I don’t think that transparency on something that, at this point, we don’t have much of an agreed framework on makes much sense.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there is not consensus among the group on any of the questions and expresses their own disagreement on several of the questions, such as the use of fan charts and the transparency of quantitative easing.


Passage number 312.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.  Oh, I’m sorry.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage consists of expressions of gratitude and apologies, there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 313.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thank President Rosengren for bringing this up again, because I felt I did not give as sharp an answer as I would have liked to Vice Chairman Dudley.  I think the best that one could do on this dimension is the following.  The statement has thresholds in it.  One can point to the projections being offered by nondissenting voters, which will have some time frame for when we hit 6½ percent unemployment and some time frame for—well, we won’t have 2½ percent inflation, it is hoped, but it’ll have 6½ percent unemployment in it.  And when asked, “When does the Committee expect to raise rates.” I think the right answer is, “Sometime after this date.”  I think that trying to provide more information than that is inconsistent with what the policy goals of the Committee are.  We need to be willing to step back from what we’re providing in terms of information, if we feel it’s undercutting.  I think there’s a coherent answer that one can give to the question.  If the Chairman is asked, “What do you guys expect is going to happen to interest rates.” the answer is, “We don’t expect them to rise until after this date, given our expectations for the path of the unemployment rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 314.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as no specific information or context is provided.


Passage number 315.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage mentioned as the abbreviation "MR" is provided without any context to determine if there is disagreement or not.


Passage number 316.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 317.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you" and "President Bullard" do not indicate any contention or disagreement. They simply express gratitude and a mention of President Bullard.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 318.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think I’m going to agree with everyone here, and therefore I agree with no one.  I appreciate the staff memo and the communications subcommittee work concerning possible changes to the SEP.  In general, I did not see very much here that I thought would improve the SEP report.  I think there is considerable risk that tinkering further with the SEP will simply muddy the waters.  So, in that sense, I agree with President Lockhart’s characterization of what we need to do here—just be less ambitious for what we can get out of the SEP. I do support one aspect of the possible changes—namely, the fan charts for the forecasts.  I would support this only if we use historical forecast errors.  In this sense, I’m agreeing with President Lacker.  On this dimension, in contrast to what others have said here, the public needs to be continually reminded of the amount of uncertainty around macroeconomic forecasting.  I don’t think you can do enough reminding of the public about how much uncertainty is out there.  And so every opportunity that we have, it needs to be emphasized over and over again that lots of things can happen, that lots of things do happen.  If you just look at history, you’ll understand that.  I think that that’s an important element, and therefore I would support more representation of uncertainty in the SEPs via historical forecast errors. I also support President Plosser’s and President Kocherlakota’s comments to the effect that we should deemphasize the liftoff aspects of the SEP.  I see this aspect as counterproductive because, again, anytime you’re talking about the date of liftoff, you’re risking the idea that you’re sending this pessimistic signal that you think the economy is going to be bad far out into the future, rather than just saying, “Well, we’re hoping for better economic outcomes, and when we see those better economic outcomes, and not before, we will think about tightening policy.”  So I think that in the spirit of getting rid of that pessimistic signal, I would want to deemphasize the liftoff date aspects of the SEP. The general difficulty with the SEP is very apparent.  It is an aggregation problem across views that are not very amenable to aggregation.  In this sense, I agree with what President Evans was just saying.  I continue to think that the longer-run solution here is to produce a monetary policy report, which is essentially a staff forecast blessed by the Chairman.  The embedded monetary policy assumption should be the one assumed by financial markets at the time of the forecast.  The Chairman is naturally going to choose a forecast in the middle of the Committee views.  Committee members would then be free to say which aspects of the forecast they agree with and which aspects with which they find themselves disagreeing.  In my view, this method would provide considerably better communication to the private sector.  Again, using President Lacker’s characterization, we want to paint a picture of the future, and, at least in general terms, describe what the Committee is thinking about and what the Committee envisions.  And I think that something like the process I just outlined would do that most effectively. On giving forward guidance on the balance sheet, I especially wish to avoid anything that would interfere with the open-ended, state-contingent nature of the current policy, and in this sense, I agree with President Rosengren.  Giving an indication of the total amount of purchases expected would, in my opinion, be a step backward in this regard because it would deemphasize the state-contingent approach. On voters versus nonvoters, I don’t have a strong opinion, but I will say this:  What we are doing a lot here around this table is taking policy actions that include commitments over long horizons, such as several years.  If we go in the direction of distinguishing voters and nonvoters, then I think logic requires that the dots reflect those who are going to be voting in that particular year.  If we do not do this, then markets are naturally going to ask a lot of questions about, “Well, what have you got highlighted here.  And what about the out years in which there might be more action on the policy front—who’s going to be voting at that time.”  So I want to stress a sentence I wrote down here:  Everyone is a voter over the time horizons we’re talking about here.  We’ve gotten away from the way this Committee used to operate, with a meeting-by-meeting approach to monetary policy decisions, when we just did something that day and didn’t worry too much about the full continuity of the policy.  And one of the hallmarks, I would say, of the Bernanke era is to take the full time path into consideration because that’s an important consideration in policy.  If we do that, then I think the whole Committee is involved in that process. Finally, I agree with the intriguing comments of President Kocherlakota that we may just want to take the projections about future policy variables out of the SEP entirely.  I do think it has put us in perhaps more of a box than we would like, and maybe it’s not served the purposes that we originally intended.  It could be done if markets are prepared ahead of time, and I don’t really see that as being the biggest problem.  If we think that’s a better way to communicate, then that’s the way we should go.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. While the speaker agrees with some aspects of the possible changes to the SEP, such as the use of fan charts for forecasts and the de-emphasis of the liftoff date, they also disagree with other aspects, such as giving forward guidance on the balance sheet and including projections about future policy variables in the SEP. They also suggest a different approach of producing a monetary policy report instead.


Passage number 319.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President George.


Passage number 320.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll abbreviate my comments, given all of the good feedback that’s been offered to this point.  As a communications tool, it’s my sense that the public, at least those who have some interest in these projections, has come to understand both its value and its limitation.  So I take the caution that others have mentioned already—that trying to have it do too much in terms of representing the collective judgments of the Committee could be difficult.  But that said, I’ll just hit on the questions.  I would be fine with publishing the medians of the projections.  And frankly, notwithstanding the comments about collegiality, I wouldn’t oppose publishing the median of the nondissenting members as a way to reflect the governance of our decisionmaking and to characterize, as best we can, the collective judgments of those who vote for an action.  On questions 3 and 4, I don’t think fan charts would help us communicate with the general public as well as the minutes do, and I think those who regularly follow the SEP, or are familiar with forecasting, already understand that confidence bands are typically quite large.  On the last question about balance sheet policies, like others, I believe that this is clearly the more complicated one.  And I think maybe our discussion at the next meeting might be helpful in how we think about this aspect of policy communication.  But I do agree with Governor Stein.  I would be open to publishing estimates of our purchases in some manner, whether to show we’re tapering or stopping.  I’m open to that discussion.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their agreement with some of the feedback and suggestions that have been offered, and offering their own thoughts and ideas on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 321.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I congratulate you on your brevity.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of congratulations.


Passage number 322.
 MR. FISHER.  Is that a hint, Mr. Chairman.  [Laughter]  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is obviously like putting socks on an octopus here.  You’re getting all kinds of views.  That’s all I want to say.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look at this, from my perspective, somewhat practically.  To me, the most important thing that happens in our communication is your press conference.  By necessity, you have to prepare for that in advance.  And it is driven by what happens at the Committee and your sense of how the votes are going to work out.  So I think both your press conference and the statement we make reflect the voters.  I view the SEP, with all of its flaws, limitations, and imperfections—I think President Evans and I are in complete agreement on that—as filling in what otherwise would be a communications gap for those FOMC participants who are not currently voting.  That’s my way of saying that I would not be in favor of the dot bifurcation that was mentioned.  I think Stacey pointed out some of the drawbacks to that.  Governor Tarullo has a great phrase when he refers to the Kremlin watchers.  Imagine, as we get close to the end of this year—you will perhaps be rotating off, Mr. Chairman, in your chairmanship, and we have Governor Duke, who may or may not be staying—the intensity of focus on who’s trying to do what, in addition to the rotation of the vote.  Because I think it’s a chance for expression, imperfect as it is, I would like to see this to refer only, in all cases, to all participants and not distinguish among voters, nonvoters, and dissenting voters because that’s what comes out in the statement and in your press conference, and because that’s already accounted for. On the five points, I’m in favor of medians—again, all of this for all participants.  I am generally in favor of fan charts, certainly for unemployment and inflation.  I’m not in favor of it for fed funds.  I like the idea of eliminating dates of liftoff and basing ourselves on conditionality.  After all, we all know from theory and, I think, from practice that it’s what we do after liftoff that really counts.  So I’m not in favor of, and I want to get away from, that liftoff projection.  Lastly, I’ve aligned myself fully with Governor Stein on the assets and the balance sheet size.  I recommend that we assign Governor Stein and President Williams to figure out a way to express that.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and views on various topics, but there is no indication of any disagreement or debate with others.


Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And I congratulate you as well, President Fisher.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage shows agreement and congratulations being expressed towards President Fisher and President Pianalto. There is no sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 324.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Based on the careful assessment of the SEP enhancements that were provided in the Board staff memo, I concluded that we’ve enhanced our communication significantly over the past few years and that we’re running out of clear opportunities for significant further improvement.  And after listening to everyone’s comments this morning, I’m even more convinced that we don’t have clear opportunities for improvement.  So rather than answer each of the questions, I’m just going to comment on two changes that I think might be helpful to make and then on one that I would not be supportive of making.  The first of the two changes that I believe would improve our communications and would be worth pursuing is that we publish the medians of projections in the SEP covering all participants’ projections to better convey the Committee’s collective sense of the outlook.  Second, I would include more information on the views of appropriate balance sheet policy.  It should be feasible and helpful to collect and report in the SEP the range of views on the size and composition of the balance sheet at the end of this year.  Of the other proposed enhancements, there would be one that I would have difficulty supporting, and that’s distinguishing among the views of supporting voters, dissenters, and other participants in the information on appropriate monetary policy.  I’m not as troubled by the other enhancements under consideration, but I’m just still not convinced that their benefits are going to be enough to outweigh some of the costs.  Finally, if the Committee decides to pursue any of these enhancements, I do think that it would be important to gain some experience with them before going public with any of the changes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. PIANALTO is presenting her assessment of the SEP enhancements and expressing her support for certain changes while stating her opposition to one particular change. She also discusses the need to gain some experience with any changes before implementing them.


Passage number 325.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a polite expression of gratitude and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 326.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  First, I want to talk about President Kocherlakota’s point and President Plosser’s point that with the date-based guidance no longer in the statement, we shouldn’t have the fed funds date guidance in the SEP.  I’ve been sitting here thinking about that, and I guess I see your point, but I still think that you have to have something that you can offer up as a substitute, as opposed to just taking it away.  Otherwise, it contradicts everything we’ve been doing in terms of trying to be more transparent.  And, second, even though we don’t want to focus people on the date-based guidance in the statement, market participants still care about the date because the date is what drives market valuation.  Even if we didn’t provide any information on the date, they would try to look at the unemployment data and any other stuff and try to extract what the date is.  So I think they care about the date.  I think that practically, if we’re not going to provide the fed funds data by date, there has to be something that’s in place of it.  I haven’t heard anything around the table yet that seems to be convincing in that respect. Now, generally, I’m of two minds about the SEP.  I think it’s not very good, and so if it’s not very good, I don’t want to really use it and emphasize it as a communication tool.  On the other hand, if we can make it a lot better, then I’m actually willing to push it forward as a communication tool.  And I guess, based on what I’m hearing around the table, that I don’t feel as though there’s a consensus on ways to improve it.  So that pushes me back into the view, “Well, let’s just keep it as it is, not use it very much, and just deemphasize it a bit.” In terms of the questions, on medians versus central tendencies, medians are fine with me.  I don’t think it really changes much.  On the second question, about the voters versus other participants, I think the color-coded dots make sense, because it’s true that the Committee’s membership changes meeting by meeting.  By color-coding the dots, it gives you some sense of mass in terms of the voters.  If you don’t color-code the dots, you’re essentially overstating the mass of the presidents, frankly, in the SEP.  Because I think that’s a bit misleading, I would favor color-coding the dots.   On the fan charts, I just don’t see that it adds anything.  The fan charts will probably not ever change; they’d always look like this [gesture] so it’s not obvious to me at all that this would be a very interesting contribution.  Also, if you read the memo, the fan charts as proposed had all sorts of problems, because as you deviated away from the central path, the funds rate was modified but the balance sheet was not, which was a little strange.  Moreover, if you put in the fan chart for the PCE inflation rate, it would really mislead people about how likely it would be that you’d actually trigger the threshold on the inflation forecast, which would be, I think, a huge problem.  You’d make people think that this is highly likely that you’re going to trigger a 2½ percent inflation forecast, when in fact, I would imagine that it’s been very rare, in the last 15 years or so, for us to project that inflation is going to climb significantly over that type of time horizon.   On evolution of the balance sheet, I don’t think it should go into the SEP, because it would be confusing to people.  I just don’t think it would have the nuance to communicate a lot of good information.  But what I would like is for us to take a survey of everybody and for us to know what people actually think about this.  It would be nice to know where the Committee is relative to the Tealbook assumption of $500 billion.  I made a statement earlier that I thought the consensus view of the Committee was somewhere around $750 billion or $800 billion.  I have no idea if that’s right or not.  I think we should do that for the March meeting, regardless of the SEP.  It would be useful to get that information from people.  Finally, I want to thank the staff for setting me straight on something.  A while back, I basically said, “Look, one of the flaws of the SEP is that it’s a central tendency of individual variables, but it’s not a central tendency of a forecast.”  And so I asked the question “Should we actually try to select the median forecast rather than median variables.”  I want to thank you for taking that seriously and doing the work, and what you basically showed was that the differences were trivial.  So I’m very happy to never bring that up again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions on various topics, but there is no mention of disagreement with others or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 327.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage, "Governor Duke," does not provide any information or context to suggest contention or disagreement. It simply states the title or position of someone named Governor Duke.


Passage number 328.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m just going to go straight to the questions.  First, on the addition of medians, I think the addition of medians for participants could actually be useful for reporters and others who communicate about our actions.  When I watch the press conference, CNBC puts up a single number, which is presumably right now the average of the central tendency, and it seems as though, if they had a single number to pick up, that might actually be helpful.  On question number 2, the coloring of the dots or the bars, first of all, I would agree with President Plosser that the dot charts, which will someday communicate a path of policy after liftoff, are actually much more helpful than the date-based, liftoff-focused bar charts.  And so I do prefer the dot charts.  I generally have the view that was expressed by President Bullard that all will vote over the time horizon, but I’m coming to realize that all will never vote at the same time.  So I think there’s information to be conveyed by coloring the dots by voters, and besides, it would provide endless hours of entertainment to those who try to identify individuals.  I’m not, however, in favor of distinguishing those who voted for this statement from those who did not.  I understand the objective of trying to show the closer alignment in the views of those who supported the policy as a way to explain the decisions, but that’s not entirely consistent with my view of the appropriate threshold as an individual voter for supporting or not supporting a decision.  This choice also assumes a single dissenter or few dissenters.  If the votes became closer, then the same decision could argue for a chart of the views of the dissenters, in addition to a chart of the views of those who voted for it.  And I see some risk that this choice could actually increase the level of dissent.  For myself, as an example, rectification of the confusion that was created in April would necessitate not only distinguishing between those who supported the statement and those who didn’t, but also suggesting that perhaps I shouldn’t have supported the statement.  My view of dissent is that the bar for dissent is very high, and I try to find policy that I can support rather than necessarily look for the policy that I prefer.  I also view it as a new decision at each meeting, predicated on the stance of policy coming into the meeting.  So, for example, if I disagree with a previous decision to raise the funds rate, I would still view the decision not to change the rate at the next meeting as an entirely separate decision.  Moving on to questions 3 and 4, the fan charts, as delighted as I am to finally have the opportunity to express my personal views on stochastic simulations, I would suggest that the subset of the public that has interest in our future policy and would take important information from the fan charts may be small, and that the subset of those who might misinterpret the information provided by the charts may be larger. Moving on to asset purchases, I strongly agree with the comments made by Governor Stein, although I would suggest that rather than cumulative purchases, which just focuses on one tool, what we might do is a dot chart similar to the one on fed funds, with the size of the SOMA portfolio at the end of each year, because that would give information not only about purchases but also, ultimately, about sales and what we expected to do there.  That would help shape expectations and provide important information.  I do think it’s true that it could deliver both good news and bad.  But for investors and borrowers who are making the decisions through which our policy works, it’s the rate changes that matter.  It’s the timing and the level of rates much more than our rationale.  They really don’t care why we did it; they’re just more concerned about what we did and how it’s going to affect them.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While the speaker expresses their personal preferences and opinions on various topics, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 329.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply consists of a thank-you message and the mention of Governor Tarullo.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 330.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Eric, I don’t think much has been clarified since your intervention, and so my conclusion here is that it doesn’t feel to me as though there’s much of a basis for making any changes beyond, possibly, one of the median projection changes, at least at this moment.  So rather than go through all of the questions, let me just say a couple of things.  First, it’s a little hard for me to believe I was once such an enthusiast about the SEP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage demonstrates disagreement or contention. Mr. Tarullo disagrees with Eric's intervention and does not believe there is a strong basis for making any changes at the moment.


Passage number 331.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  It was a very brief period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply stating a fact about the length of a particular period. There is no contention or disagreement indicated.


Passage number 332.
 MR. TARULLO.  It was a brief period, and I probably should look at what my diet was during that period to see what led me to think that this could actually be a useful tool.  In all honesty, I think that, in part, it was the concerns about the communications challenges around the thresholds, which we successfully overcame through the interesting device of communicating about them before we actually adopted them; that thereby socialized them and made them successfully launched in December. It’s important, though, to focus on the starting point that Stacy had in her presentation and that was in the memo she and Dave circulated, which is where the crux of the problem really is.  It’s between the aggregation of individual views that the SEP has, on the one hand, and the statement of a collective—not consensus, but collective—view in the FOMC statement, on the other.  So the FOMC statement necessarily requires the voters to choose between a yea or a nay on something that maybe none of them would have written himself or herself, but you’ve got a binary choice.  You weigh it, on balance, and you say, “Okay.  On balance, I am for it or against it.”  The aggregation of the individual items can’t be too far out of line with that collective decision, or else it raises questions.  I actually don’t think, based on the limited sample of discussions I’ve had, that very many people pay a whole lot of attention to the SEP.  The market analysts don’t really seem to, at least based on what they’ve told me.  But one thing that we saw after that April meeting is that if there is an obvious discrepancy between the statement and the SEP, then at least reporters jump on it.  So, to me, that’s maybe the one thing that we should try to correct, even though, as Charlie Plosser, I think persuasively, points out, it’s very unlikely to be a frequent occurrence.  But it is one thing that caused some problems then, and it could reoccur in the future. I don’t think this is a huge deal—I should say that—so what I’m about to say is not really directed at this issue.  But I do think it is dangerous to be so dismissive of the law.  The law is something that not only is the source of our authority here—and we can’t just say, “Well, we like this part of it; we don’t like that part of it, so we’ll disregard it”—but also has functional implications.  And the functional implications in this instance are that, as Dennis pointed out, 8 of the 12 voters are actually permanent voters.  Now, it’s true, Richard, that individuals leave the Board or they leave their presidencies, but that’s always going to be the case.  Even if someone is a voter two years hence, they might not be here in two years.  The voting group does itself make a decision, which is reflected in the FOMC statement, and therefore its judgment now is something that does matter.  It’s for that reason that I think the coloring in the dots makes sense.  It will also give my grandson something to do, unless gray and brown are the two colors, in which case he’s not going to be able to distinguish them.  The problem that it somehow diminishes the import of the future voters is actually compensated for by the position that I held back when we first started discussing this, which is, we ought to include everybody as well as just the voters.  There was a proposal, when we first started discussing this, to have just voters, which I thought was a mistake.  But if you don’t identify the voters, you’re really underweighting the influence of the eight permanent voters because they will have a vote continuously.  And thus, at present, I think, we’re giving a somewhat distorted view of whose judgments not only matter now, but also are going to matter over time. The only other point I would make is a general one on all of these other issues.  There’s sometimes an assumption that any time you give out more information, by definition, that means you’re increasing transparency.  I think that’s a pretty thin idea of transparency.  So, what are we trying to do in the present context.  There is something that is uncertain—uncertain even to us and certainly to the world—and that is the thinking of the Committee about economic conditions and monetary policy now and in the future.  We’re trying to give information, beyond an action and even a statement associated with an action, that allows people to make informed inferences about the path that that policy might take in the future, depending on economic conditions.  By definition, whatever conclusions people reach are going to be incomplete and imperfect, and they know that.  So the test is not information for information’s sake.  The test is whether the information is likely to be supportive of people’s drawing a more accurate picture of where the Committee is.  This is not unlike what the rules of evidence do in a litigation setting.  Not every piece of information, even true information, is allowed into a trial, because there are judgments made as to whether that information is more or less likely to move the decisionmakers, in that case, into an accurate picture of what actually happened.  I think that should be the test that we apply, and to me, that argues pretty strongly for what Sandy and I guess others have said:  Anything we’re doing should probably be put into some sort of mock run so that we can try collectively to make that judgment as to whether it really is transparency-enhancing in the strong sense and not just in the literal sense.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement being expressed. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is providing his thoughts and opinions on various topics related to the FOMC statement and transparency, but there is no evident disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 333.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only expresses a thank you to Governor Raskin and does not mention any divisive ideas or arguments.


Passage number 334.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude and acknowledgment to Governor Powell.


Passage number 335.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to leave broader questions of starting over again and different approaches aside and go right to the five questions.  I’m fine with medians; I think there’s incremental value there.  I’m fine with identifying voters, and I would identify all voters.  I would, under appropriate monetary policy, also identify voters.  Because we are here today in the Kremlin, I would say that we live in an era of glasnost or transparency, and it seems to me that, in some cases, there is modest additional benefit of information in identifying voters.  The arguments against it don’t strike me as persuasive, so I would go ahead and do that.  In terms of fan charts, I think the benefits are also very modest.  What fan charts say is that there’s uncertainty and it’s asymmetrical.  If you think about the kinds of people who look carefully at the SEP, they already read all of our speeches; they know who votes and who doesn’t vote; they know that risk and uncertainty are asymmetrical.  So I don’t have a strong view on that.  I certainly would not do a fan chart for the federal funds rate for reasons well expressed. The one that I do feel strongly about is the last one, and that is disclosure of the direction of the balance sheet.  I think, as Governor Stein pointed out and others have echoed, it’s actually quite simple.  It’s one question, and it’s the single piece of information that we’re not giving to the public that they’d really like to have.  It’s true that we wouldn’t be disclosing our entire objective function, but it’s really a spectrum there.  We have disclosed, for example, that substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market is one piece of our objective function.  That’s a very broad term; it’s not clear; it’s not precise.  The public doesn’t have a precise understanding of it, and if they do, I would ask that they get in contact with me here.  I think it’s a case of letting the perfect be the enemy of the good.  So, I would strongly support an approach that would provide balance sheet projections.  And that’s what I have to say.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions on various topics, but there is no mention of any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 336.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Thank you, all, very much.  Obviously, the staff and the Committee will want to review these comments in some detail, but let me just make a couple of preliminary summary comments from what I drew from the discussion, and then we can have lunch.  On medians, in general, I think that there was support for providing medians of the economic variables.  I believe that information is already implicit in what we release.  So the Committee ought to decide whether just a table that makes it explicit would be useful to the press, for example.  Let me come back in just a moment to the voters versus nonvoters question.  On the funds rate chart, there was a lot of interesting discussion, and some valid points were raised regarding the fact that we’re now looking at a state-contingent strategy.  Is the time-based picture still relevant.  I guess I think it is still relevant, though less so than in the past.  The reason, as someone pointed out, is that our contingent strategy is about thresholds, not triggers, and therefore there’s at least some information there about what’s going to happen after the takeoff date.  And indeed, there also are some differences across the participants.  I guess what I’m saying here is that I’d like to keep the funds rate chart, and not change it.  There’s also the argument of not taking away information that is already there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing the discussion and presenting their own thoughts on the matter.


Passage number 337.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is addressing the chairman respectfully.


Passage number 338.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The question does not provide a passage for analysis. Therefore, it is not possible to determine the presence of contention or disagreement without any text provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 339.
   MR. PLOSSER.  Can I interrupt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The word "interrupt" suggests that there is a disagreement or a need to challenge or interject with the speaker's statement.


Passage number 340.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "sure" is an affirmation or agreement, indicating that there is no disagreement.


Passage number 341.
 MR. PLOSSER.  My proposal was to leave the dot chart but eliminate the liftoff part of it because you can infer the histogram from the dot chart.  But it focuses on the years, as opposed to the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is explaining his proposal to leave the dot chart but eliminate the "liftoff" part of it. He then explains his reasoning behind this proposal, stating that the dot chart already provides information from which the histogram can be inferred. There is no conflicting statement or disagreement presented.


Passage number 342.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  As you say, it’s the same information.  I don’t feel strongly, if the Committee would like to drop it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the other person's statement and expresses their willingness to drop the issue.


Passage number 343.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I wanted to clarify that I was suggesting that we drop just the upper portion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It is a statement clarifying a suggestion.


Passage number 344.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, but some people were suggesting that we drop the whole picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, but some people were suggesting that we drop the whole picture. Answer: Yes. The phrase "some people were suggesting that we drop the whole picture" indicates that there is disagreement or contention among individuals regarding whether or not to continue with the mentioned picture.


Passage number 345.
 MR. EVANS.  It’s not precisely the same information, is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement is not showing any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement questioning the similarity of information.


Passage number 346.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Actually there’s more information in the dot chart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about there being more information in the dot chart without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 347.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s a subset.  It’s inferable, is it not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is providing a statement and then asking a question for clarification. There is no expression of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 348.
 MR. POTTER.  If it’s monotonic—unless someone’s got a modal path that goes up and down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


