Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 18-19, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,D. C., starting on Thursday, December 18, 1980, at 3:30 p.m. and continuingon Friday, December 19, 1980, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Baughman, and Mayo, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Corrigan, and Ford, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Minneapolis, and Atlanta,respectivelyAltmann, SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretaryPetersen, General CounselOltman, Deputy General CounselMannnion, Assistant General CounselHolmes, Adviser for Market OperationsAxilrod, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger 1/,Ettin, Henry, Keir, Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel,Associate EconomistsMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account1/ Attended Fridaysession only.12/18-19/80Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Prell, Associate Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Gemmill and Siegman 2/, Associate Directors,Division of International Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Smith 2/, Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Boardof GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMr. Smoot, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof PhiladelphiaMessrs. Brandt, Burns, Keran, and Scheld, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta,Dallas, San Francisco, and Chicago, respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus, Mullineaux, Mrs. Nichols, and Mr. Rolnick,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Philadelphia, Chicago, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Burger, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of St. LouisMs. Clarkin, Sr. Trading Officer, Federal Reserve Bankof New York2/ Attended Thursday session only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply providing a list of the participants in a meeting. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 2.
-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofDecember 18-19, 1980December 18, 1980--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose we are on agenda item 1, whichis approving the minutes. Mr. Altmann wants to make a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating that they are moving on to discuss agenda item 1 and Mr. Altmann wants to make a comment on it.


Passage number 3.
MR. ALTMANN. With respect to the minutes for the meeting ofNovember 18, we've put in front of you today the revised minutes. Ijust wanted to call to your attention that there is an addition in theform of a Secretary's note. At the November meeting, if you recall,the Committee approved renewal of the swap arrangements subject tofinal approval of the specific terms by the Foreign CurrencySubcommittee. The Secretary's note merely states that on December 1and December 17 the Foreign Currency Subcommittee approved theprovisions so that the swap agreements are, in effect, renewed. Scottmay want to say something about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to discuss your negotiations,Mr. Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking if Mr. Pardee wants to discuss his negotiations.


Passage number 5.
MR. PARDEE. Yes, I'll discuss very quickly the agreement inprinciple on the two points we wanted to negotiate. One was theelimination of even sharing of risk, which applied to five of thedifferent swap arrangements. The other was shifting to use of aninterest rate in the foreign market as the basis for our drawings.That is, we would pay their interest rates rather than ours. Everyoneagreed rather quickly, but it was rather complicated in view of thenew procedures among the European Monetary System central banks. Theyall wanted to sit together and discuss it among themselves before theycame back. Again, they agreed. The second problem was to find anappropriate instrument in the other countries that came as close aspossible to the U.S. Treasury bill. There aren't many countries inthe world that have a Treasury bill, but we found in most of themsomething that was as closely comparable as [possible]. The [major]negotiation on this, of course, was with the Bundesbank. We are nowin an end game with them because they don't have a Treasury bill.Indeed, their Treasury tends to borrow at short-term interest ratesthat are higher than other short-term market rates. So we're comingdown to a formula [that is] now based on the interbank rate, with somediscount for us since we think that the Federal Reserve is a betterrisk than German banks are to one another. I'm reviewing this still,but the Treasury seems to think that that's an appropriate basis. Andwe're having an end game with the French as well, where all of asudden they have found that they don't have a Treasury bill whereaseverybody in the world thought they did. So these negotiations havebecome very complicated, but I think we can come out reasonably wellon them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker discusses the negotiation process and the complications that arose, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict between parties.


Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any questions about that. Ifnot, we can have a motion to approve the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone has any questions and if not, they can proceed with a motion to approve the minutes.


Passage number 7.
MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Schultz and the speaker are in agreement and support the motion.


Passage number 8.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they are approved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection they are approved" suggests that there was consensus or unanimity among the individuals involved, indicating the absence of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 9.
12/18-19/80MR. ALTMANN. We are talking about minutes for threemeetings: November 26, December 5, and December 12.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply states that they are discussing minutes for three meetings.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are not all approved in that motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that not all the individuals or ideas mentioned have been approved in a particular motion, without indicating any conflicts or contrasting perspectives.


Passage number 11.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage about Mr. Altmann.


Passage number 12.
 That's fine; I'll take it as--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will interpret that motion as includingthe minutes for all the meetings we've had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that they will interpret a motion in a certain way.


Passage number 13.
MR. ALTMANN. Fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. The word "Fine" indicates agreement or a positive response.


Passage number 14.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Next on the agenda is a] discussion offoreign currency operations. A memo was distributed that I believeyou have seen. Do you want to give any introduction, Mr. Truman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions a discussion on foreign currency operations and asks if Mr. Truman wants to give an introduction.


Passage number 15.
MR. TRUMAN. Not necessarily, unless you want it, Mr.Chairman. Do you want to do this before we do the regular report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Truman is simply offering the option to discuss the regular report before proceeding.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 16.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not looking at the agenda, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker's statement suggests that they do not have access to the agenda and are making an assumption or guess about it. There is a potential disagreement or difference between the speaker's knowledge and the actual agenda.


Passage number 17.
MR. ALTMANN. We have the report on operations first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Altmann about the order in which the report on operations will be presented. No disagreement or contention is expressed in the passage.


Passage number 18.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's do that first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 19.
MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a statement or position without any opposing views or conflicting opinions presented.


Passage number 20.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought all these German marks we werebuying were going to the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 21.
MR. PARDEE. Yes, recently, since we have come close to thelimit we have for the Federal Reserve. But at the time of the lastFOMC meeting, we still had over $400 million worth of leeway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the remaining leeway for the Federal Reserve.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 22.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought we weren't using it. Well, isthere any discussion about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of "I thought we weren't using it" implies that there was a previous agreement or understanding not to use it, which suggests a disagreement or contention. Additionally, the question "Is there any discussion about this?" implies that there is a potential disagreement or contention to be resolved.


Passage number 23.
MS. TEETERS. I have some questions. We have a limit on howmany balances we can hold by type of currency, is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is simply asking a question to clarify a point.


Passage number 24.
MR. PARDEE. Marks and yen, specifically, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Marks and yen, specifically, yes" appears to be a response to a question or statement and does not indicate any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 25.
MS. TEETERS. Does the Treasury have limits on how much theycan hold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question about the limits on the Treasury's holdings.


Passage number 26.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It doesn't work like that for theTreasury. Assuming that they have the resources in the ExchangeStabilization Fund, then the decision is made ad hoc. There is not aself imposed limit, assuming the resources are available. Now, theESF has limited resources which they expand by warehousing with theFed, up to the limits that we permit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply explaining how the Treasury operates and the conditions under which they make decisions.


Passage number 27.
MS. TEETERS. If they warehouse currencies, against whosetarget does that go. Or does it go against anyone's.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Ms. Teeters seeking clarification on the target of warehousing currencies.


Passage number 28.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, they bear the exchange risk ifthey warehouse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement that does not invite disagreement or discussion.


Passage number 29.
12/18-19/80MS. TEETERS. But there's no limit on how much they canwarehouse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 30.
MR. WALLICH. We have the warehouse limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 31.
MS. TEETERS. So it goes against our totals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the usage of the phrase "So it goes against our totals," which suggests that there is a contradiction or discrepancy in the information being discussed.


Passage number 32.
MR. PARDEE. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contradictory statements or conflicting viewpoints. It simply states that Mr. Pardee replied with the word "No".


Passage number 33.
MR. WALLICH. No, it goes against our limit on their creditlines with us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich simply states a fact about the limit on credit lines with "us," without conflicting with any other perspective or opinion.


Passage number 34.
MS. TEETERS. So we have a limit on how much the Treasury canwarehouse. Is that it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is simply asking for clarification regarding the limit on how much the Treasury can warehouse.


Passage number 35.
MR. WALLICH. Yes, on how much we would lend the Treasury forwarehousing purposes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about a topic.


Passage number 36.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's about $2-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 37.
MR. TRUMAN. No, the limit is $5 billion and they are up to$3 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a fact about the limit and the current amount reached.


Passage number 38.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's $2 billion left.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "There's $2 billion left" states a fact without any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a specific amount of money that remains.


Passage number 39.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only contains a short response from "Mr. Truman" without any accompanying statements or arguments that indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 40.
MR. PARTEE. And these appear in our assets, do they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Partee, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 41.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The response "Yes" given by Mr. Truman could be referring to a variety of things and does not necessarily indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 42.
MR. PARTEE. These are our assets. But we have a forwardcontract.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 43.
MR. TRUMAN. They appear on our balance sheet as ourholdings, but there is an off-balance sheet item which is a forwardsale of the foreign currencies back to the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the presence of an off-balance sheet item.


Passage number 44.
MR. PARTEE. We get the yield on them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a statement about getting the yield on something.


Passage number 45.
MR. TRUMAN. We get the yield for whatever rate is in theswap agreement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about getting the yield for whatever rate is in the swap agreement.


Passage number 46.
MR. PARTEE. At the German rate rather than the U.S. rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions considering the German rate instead of the U.S. rate, without any contradictory statements or conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 47.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, I suppose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges the statement and agrees with it.


Passage number 48.
MR. PARTEE. So we lose what--maybe 6 percent per annum onevery one of those we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 49.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, it depends on what [form] they are in.They are in a double-swap, double-forward so that they are earningabout 7-1/2 percent now, or something like that, versus Treasurysecurities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Truman is simply stating a fact about the form in which the securities are in and their current earnings compared to Treasury securities.


Passage number 50.
MR. PARTEE. I certainly wish I could find a commercial bankthat would let me warehouse like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses a desire to find a commercial bank that would allow them to warehouse, indicating a preference or wish. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 51.
12/18-19/80MR. TRUMAN. Well, it does affect our profits but as againstthe alternative of the Treasury holding them, it all washes out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the mentioned situation affects the profits, but ultimately, the outcome remains the same.


Passage number 52.
MR. PARTEE. But they can't, Tony said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact by saying that "they can't" do something, as Tony previously mentioned.


Passage number 53.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, [unintelligible] are up against the limitat present.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Truman is acknowledging and agreeing with the statement made.


Passage number 54.
MR. PARTEE. And this is a well-known device that theCongress knows about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating a fact about the Congress knowing about a well-known device.


Passage number 55.
MR. TRUMAN. Oh yes, they have said so every time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any explicit contention or disagreement. It only shows that Mr. Truman is acknowledging the fact that "they" have said something consistently. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine the specific content of what "they" have been saying.


Passage number 56.
MR. PARTEE. I mean that we're not hiding anything. There isno subterfuge involved here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are not hiding anything and there is no subterfuge involved.


Passage number 57.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, I've testified on it before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, I've testified on it before. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have previously testified on the subject.


Passage number 58.
MR. TRUMAN. The policy record shows the change in thelimits, and the System's annual statement at least indicates theamount that is warehoused as well as the sum of the holdings that arecovered by these forward transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the policy record and the information provided by the annual statement.


Passage number 59.
MS. TEETERS. So the total volume of marks, say, that we canhold is the $1-1/2 billion limit we have plus the $5 billion that isthe limit we have [on warehousing for] the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's $5 billion at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The statement simply provides information about the current value of something without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 61.
MS. TEETERS. That's it then. The maximum we can hold is$6-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement about the maximum amount that can be held.


Passage number 62.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, plus what they could hold outright ontheir own.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about what someone can hold on their own. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 63.
MR. WALLICH. That's on DM, but it isn't our total limit onall balances of all kinds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the limit on balances.


Passage number 64.
MR. PARDEE(.). Plus whatever the Treasury has in the ESF, ifyou're looking at the government as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a straightforward statement by Mr. Pardee about the combined resources of the government. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 65.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. What is left is mostly SDRs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 66.
MS. TEETERS. That covers all my questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is a simple comment by Ms. Teeters indicating that her questions have been answered.


Passage number 67.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage, as it simply asks for any additional questions or comments.


Passage number 68.
MR. RICE. Yes. Scott, I understood you to say that somecorporate treasurers were expecting a decline in the value of thedollar early next year. What's the reasoning behind that expectation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for clarification.


Passage number 69.
MR. PARDEE. I think there's also an expectation thatinterest rates will come down. In effect, these are people who wouldbe bringing funds home at the end of December for repatriating, forearnings, or whatever purposes. Say they have their investments inDeutschemarks. Rather than disturb those investments by selling themarks and buying dollars, they have borrowed dollars, say, in theEuro-market--even for one month. They would bring them home and would12/18-19/80repay in January when the borrowing matures. So it's an indication tome not so much of their interest rate sensitivity but of theirexpectation that the dollar will be weaker against the mark. It isinterpreted that way in the market as well, where it was reported.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Pardee about his interpretation of a situation.


Passage number 70.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the dollar/mark exchange ratetoday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply asks for information about the dollar/mark exchange rate today, without indicating any conflicting perspectives or opinions.


Passage number 71.
MR. PARDEE. It's just under 1.99. It got up over 2 againthis morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact that the number mentioned is just under 1.99 and had reached over 2 earlier that morning.


Passage number 72.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 73.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, what sort of rules do we have withrespect to moving the other way with this deck of cards in our hands.Is there a tendency as we pile up more reserves to want to peg ratherthan to smooth or whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Winn is asking a question about the rules and tendencies related to moving in a certain way with a deck of cards. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 74.
 I'm not quite sure what either of thoseterms means, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't you defer that question until weget on the general subject of holding currencies. Any other commentsor questions on operations. If not, we need a motion.SPEAKER(.). So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 75.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they are approved. Doyou have any recommendations, Mr. Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The "Without objection they are approved" statement suggests unanimous agreement, and the question about recommendations is a request for input rather than a point of disagreement.


Passage number 76.
MR. PARDEE. No. We're clear of the swap lines, and I'vereported on our negotiations with respect to the renewals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there is no contention or disagreement. It indicates that the speaker has reported on negotiations and there are no issues mentioned.


Passage number 77.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are then to the general questions. Whydon't you tell us where the U.S. government stands on numbers anyway,Mr. Truman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 78.
MR. TRUMAN. We have provided to the Committee--it's in thepile in front of you--an update of Table 1 from the paper we hadcirculated. As Scott just said, the [Federal Reserve] System has $1.4billion in German marks, as shown in the first line, and a total [ofall currencies] of $2.1 billion. The Treasury has a total of $8.8billion, of which $5.7 billion is in DM, which covers their Carternote issues [with an excess of] about $500 million. The grand totalis almost $11 billion. One could in principle set off against the DMholdings or all the holdings the fact that some of these funds wereraised, in addition to [sales of] Carter note issues, through sales ofSDRs and drawings on the Fund. They gave up those assets in returnfor DM and we haven't reconstituted those holdings in either form.That would show, at least as far as marks are concerned, that theTreasury and the United States would be somewhat negative, by about $1billion, as shown in the bottom line of the first column. And the netcomes out approximately at zero on that basis. I'd be glad to answerany questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information about the holdings of the Federal Reserve and the Treasury.


Passage number 79.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why shouldn't the Treasury take some ofthese currencies, buy back the SDRs, and repay the IMF drawings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence simply proposes a possible course of action without expressing any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 80.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, they can't repay the IMF because it was areserve [tranche] drawing. And the way rules go, that is never repaid12/18-19/80except in the form of further dollar drawings. Not only is there noobligation, there is no possibility of repaying to reduce your[unintelligible], increase your [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the rules and processes regarding repayment to the IMF.


Passage number 81.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Except by other countries' drawings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not clear from the given passage whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 82.
MR. TRUMAN. [The reserve tranches] are set up that way. Buton the SDR sales, they could do it, and it has been talked about fromtime to time. I'm sure President Solomon can tell you about takingsome marks or some of these other currencies and buying SDRs from acountry. We talked in the spring about buying back some of the SDRswe had sold to the Japanese, for example, when they were going throughthat phase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents information and does not indicate disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 83.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It would probably make more sense todo that later on, Paul, when the markets turn around. But, Ted, whydoes the Treasury carry in its formal balance sheet the IMF drawing of$2 billion as a negative. We still have $1-1/2 billion, roughly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The disagreement is evident in the contrasting opinions of the two individuals mentioned (Paul and Ted). Paul suggests waiting to take a specific action (presumably related to financial markets), while Ted raises a questioning point about the Treasury's formal balance sheet and the inclusion of a negative IMF drawing.


Passage number 84.
MR. TRUMAN. That has to do with the relationship between theTreasury's general fund and the Exchange Stabilization Fund. Thegeneral fund drew from the IMF and sold the currencies to the ExchangeStabilization Fund; [the latter has incurred as] a counter-entry aliability to the general fund. And [to the extent] that gets repaid,that in fact marks up the balance sheet of the ESF. That's one of thereasons it's so big now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of the relationship between the Treasury's general fund and the Exchange Stabilization Fund.


Passage number 85.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So it's a negative item for the ESFbut not to the Treasury as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It states a fact that something is negative for the ESF (Exchange Stabilization Fund), but not for the Treasury as a whole. There is no contradictory statement or conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 86.
MR. TRUMAN. As other countries draw dollars out of the fund,that calls on the credit line of the Treasury [for] advances of funds.And on an annual basis, they settle up with the ESF. At that point,the Treasury has to provide dollars to the Exchange StabilizationFund. So that's one of the contingent liabilities that the ESF stillhas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 87.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we in the super-gold tranche.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 88.
MR. TRUMAN. Oh yes, that is the point. Because we drew insuper-gold tranches--or what used to be called super-gold tranches--that is why we don't have to repay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about the reason they don't have to repay.


Passage number 89.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't call it a super-gold trancheanymore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a straightforward statement that something is no longer referred to by a certain name.


Passage number 90.
MR. TRUMAN. It's all called the reserve tranche now. Gold,as you know, was downgraded in the Articles.SPEAKER(.). Its price went up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states two facts - that the term for gold reserves is now called the reserve tranche, and that the price of gold increased. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 91.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you're out of the super-gold tranche,is it still considered a tranche.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is stating a fact without introducing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 92.
MR. TRUMAN. It's all called the reserve tranche now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a factual statement about the terminology used for a certain concept.


Passage number 93.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Up to 25 percent--a quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a statistic of 25 percent or a quarter.


Passage number 94.
-6-12/18-19/80MR. TRUMAN. Well, what used to be called the gold trancheand the super-gold tranche are both called the reserve tranche.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement explaining the terminology changes for what used to be called the gold tranche and the super-gold tranche.


Passage number 95.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no distinction between the twothen.SPEAKER(.). Even for Chrysler.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there is no distinction between the two (unspecified subjects). It does not introduce any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 96.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a memorandum describing someconsiderations here. It has been a while since I read it. The UnitedStates government, in one interpretation, is in a balanced position.That's the way the U.S. Treasury looks at it, anyway. I suppose theonly thing one could argue about is whether to include the IMF drawingin that or not. We are close to the top of the limit we set. Westill have $2 billion [leeway], roughly, on the warehousing[facility]. I don't know if the Treasury feels too strongly about whoholds the currency, but I think their view--just to put one view onthe table--is that we ought to continue operating pretty much as wehave been up until several billion more at least. The theory is thatit doesn't hurt--or to put it more positively that it may be desirable--to have positive currency holdings against an uncertain future,which raises the question about our currency limit and conceivably thewarehousing limit. But that is their feeling about it. The exchangemarket may be close to a turning point depending upon what happens onour interest rates. What happened last time [is that], as soon asinterest rates turned, the dollar went down quite sharply for a while,just on the mere fact of a turn in interest rates even though allduring that period, except maybe at the very end, there was a positivedifferential in favor of the dollar. By the time the positivedifferential disappeared, if it ever disappeared, the dollar hadstabilized. The movement was mostly on the turn, reflecting the factthat there is some expectation that the dollar will get stronger solong as they see interest rates going up. And as soon as they see[the differential] going down, the expectation turns around almostregardless of where the level is. I don't know what is going tohappen, obviously. But that is an operational issue posed for us.When I looked some time ago at the foreign currency directive, orwherever these instructions are, I thought perhaps it could stand somerewriting. But I don't think that would have to be done in any event,if it is done at all, before we look at this in terms of these generaldirectives. And there is nothing in here that is inconsistent withwhat we are doing or have done. I'll open up the floor for comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of information and observations about the United States government's perspective on currency and interest rates.


Passage number 97.
MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, what is the legal basis for ourholding the balances. Are there any legal constraints. Do we havelegal authority to do it or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is simply a question asking for the legal basis and constraints regarding holding balances. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 98.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we obviously think we have the legalauthority to do it or we wouldn't be doing it. I think that issue wasthrashed out and resolved in the early 1960s when these swaps firstbegan. The specific legal authority is in the [Federal Reserve] Act,which says specifically that we can hold foreign currency balances. Idon't think it says much about what purpose we can hold them for. AsI remember it's silent on that. I don't know whether Mr. Peterson orMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and understanding regarding the legal authority to hold foreign currency balances.


Passage number 99.
 Oltman or somebody else who was around at the time wants tocomment on--12/18-19/80MR. OLTMAN. Mr. Chairman, there is authority technically toacquire cable transfers in foreign currencies. As you say, in theearly '60s [the issue] was thrashed out to reach the conclusion thatwe were authorized to acquire currency balances and essentially to setup the various swap arrangements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the authority to acquire cable transfers in foreign currencies.


Passage number 100.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This was all done with the knowledge ofthe Congress, of course; it was developed at that time with theTreasury. The Treasury had pressed the Federal Reserve to do it inthe first instance. But it was all agreed to by the Congress; theywere fully aware of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement explains that the actions mentioned were done in collaboration and with the knowledge and agreement of both the Congress and the Treasury.


Passage number 101.
MR. OLTMAN. It was also noted in the Board's Annual Reportat the time that an opinion had been rendered to the Committee thatthe Federal Reserve could engage in those transactions. It is not anysecret legal authority.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the Board's Annual Report and the opinion rendered to the Committee.


Passage number 102.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Haven't we been doing it for 20 years.And our holdings now probably are as big as they have ever been,aren't they. We have had a bigger negative position on numerousoccasions. This is as big as they have every been on the positiveside. And there's no question about the Treasury's authority to beagents in these transactions either. There is a long record, too, inconnection with all of this--I want to attempt to be precise about thewords though it has been worded in different ways at different times--that it has always been pretty clear that these operations are done inconjunction with the Treasury. And The Treasury has a particularresponsibility in the Gold Reserve Act of 1933, or whatever the nameof the Act is, for international financial operations. It has neverbeen pinned down as a precise legal matter, but there are variousunderstandings that have gone on through the years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of statements and clarifications about the size of holdings and the authority of the Treasury in financial operations.


Passage number 103.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, there are formal limits, which Itake it have their origin in the instruments that are mentioned in theauthorization and the directive and so forth. And then there areinformal limits that are discussed in the memorandum. What is theorigin of the informal limits on the currency holdings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the limits on currency holdings without expressing any disagreement or stating contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 104.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know where what you call theformal limits are [located]. They don't seem to be in this directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's lack of knowledge about the location of the formal limits.


Passage number 105.
MR. ALTMANN. No, they're in the authorization and theprocedural instructions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Altmann.


Passage number 106.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are in the annual authorization thatwe set down. It's primarily a procedural matter. The annualauthorization sets down some general limitations, but there's afeeling that Mr. Pardee shouldn't go off on his own and operate withinthe general limits in the authorization but that he should be pinneddown more closely as an operating matter. That accounts for theemergence of what you call the informal limits, with the ForeignCurrency Subcommittee having certain authority in that respect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply provides an explanation of the process and authority regarding the annual authorization and the establishment of informal limits.


Passage number 107.
MR. RICE. So the informal limits are set by the ForeignCurrency Subcommittee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a fact. It does not express a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 108.
MR. TRUMAN. No, no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage only consists of two repetitions of the word "no" without any additional information or context, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 109.
12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, as you said, they are not exactlyinformal, they are procedural.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement about the formality of the procedures mentioned.


Passage number 110.
MR. RICE. Well, it's not my language; it's in the [memo].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Rice regarding the language used in the memo.


Passage number 111.
MR. TRUMAN. Let me try to explain it. In the authorizationthe limit on the open position in principle is symmetric, so we couldbe so much in debt or hold so much in the way of balances. That'swhat the authorization limits. And the procedural instructions governhow much that can change between meetings or certain time periods aswe move up to that overall limit that is set in the authorization bythe Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward explanation of the authorization limits and procedural instructions.


Passage number 112.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The procedural limits are what you arecalling the informal limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The sentence is simply defining what the author is referring to as the "procedural limits" by stating that it is what is being called the "informal limit." It is a statement of clarification rather than expressing a conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 113.
MR. TRUMAN. No, I haven't gotten to the informal limit.What I referred to in the paper as informal limits are limits thathave been established within the authorization, within this overalllimit which is now $8 billion, to govern in particular our holdings ofbalances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Truman, is simply stating that he has not reached the informal limit yet.


Passage number 114.
 But they have been updated and codified on the basis ofunderstandings rather than votes because in some sense--MR. RICE. Who establishes the informal limits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply explaining that the updates and codifications of the laws were done based on understandings rather than votes. The mention of MR. RICE seems to be a continuation of the same thought and does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 115.
MR. TRUMAN. This Committee by consensus. The Committee didit at its last meeting and the meeting before that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement indicates that the Committee made a decision by consensus in its last meeting and the meeting before that.


Passage number 116.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you say informal, are those recorded[votes] or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification or a specific definition of the term "informal" in relation to recorded votes.


Passage number 117.
MR. ALTMANN. No, they have not been formal votes and thusnot recorded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply stating a fact about the lack of recorded formal votes. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 118.
MR. TRUMAN. The logic is that you had a formal vote on theoverall limit [specified in the authorization].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have three types of limits: We havethe limit on the overall authorization, which is [voted on] annually;we have procedural limits, which are in the procedural document andcover occasional and particular problems; and we have had discussionswhere we have informally set limits within those other limits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating the different types of limits without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 120.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And there is a fourth set. WhenArthur Burns was here, he would sometimes give a daily limit to theNew York Desk. He discontinued that after a while. But there is alsosome consensus between the Treasury and the Fed and the Desk as tosome broad range of tactical day-to-day type limits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But those are tactical decisions,essentially. I believe we're clear now on the various types of limitsthat are in [place].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing a belief and acknowledging that there is understanding on the types of limits that exist.


Passage number 122.
MR. PARDEE. But it is important to know that the limit onhow much we can buy in Deutschemarks, which is $1.5 billion, has beenset by the Committee. It's not a formal action of the Committee as isthe $8 billion limit on the open position, but I feel it's equallybinding to me as any other action of the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the limit on how much they can buy in Deutschemarks, which is $1.5 billion. They also mention that it is not a formal action of the Committee but still feels that it is equally binding.


Passage number 123.
-9-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question that it's binding;it's not going to be changed without another action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is stating a fact that the binding agreement will not be changed without additional action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 124.
MR. WALLICH. It might be tipping our hand if we publishedthat month by month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that publishing month by month might reveal their strategies or intentions, while another person may have a different opinion on this matter.


Passage number 125.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, do we have any notion as to what theright amount of foreign currency balances would be and at what pointwe would feel comfortable that we've accumulated enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question posed by Mr. Rice, seeking information or clarification.


Passage number 126.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is one of the issues basicallybefore us. And I'm not sure. I don't have any answer for all time.In approaching that question in a rather tentative way, the Treasurydid some calculations and looked at the swings in interventionsbasically. I forget just how they did it; I think it was the grossswings in intervention over the period since 1973.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge about a certain topic. They mention that the Treasury did some calculations, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict within the passage.


Passage number 127.
MR. TRUMAN. They are in the paper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "They are in the paper," without providing any context or specific information to suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 128.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they're in the paper, you can look atthem there. They show that the swings have ranged, on a couple ofoccasions, up to $8 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage presents a statement or fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 129.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints. It simply states that Mr. Truman answered in the affirmative.


Passage number 130.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We actually got $8 billion in debt, orvery close to it, because we were starting from a zero balance--I wasthere--on only one occasion. It was up to $8 billion and another timeit was not very far from it, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about being in $8 billion in debt on one occasion.


Passage number 131.
MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides a title or identification of "MR. TRUMAN," without any context or information that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 132.
 Well, it's on table 5; the peak was about $8-1/2billion, and for--MR. RICE. It must have been 1978.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the peak being approximately $8-1/2 billion in 1978.


Passage number 133.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, '78 was one of the big ones. Whatpage are you on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that '78 was one of the big ones, referring to a certain event or time period. They then ask what page the listener is on, indicating they may be discussing a book or document.


Passage number 134.
MR. TRUMAN. It's on table 5 in the paper. About two yearsago in December, we were at $8-1/2 billion--that was cumulativeintervention--and that was simply all debt, although some of it wasfinanced by Carter notes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of facts regarding the debt accumulation during a certain period.


Passage number 135.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm looking at table 5, but I don't see an$8-1/2 billion total.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their observation about the absence of an $8-1/2 billion total in table 5.


Passage number 136.
MR. WALLICH. It's U.S. totals, $8.411 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a figure for U.S. totals without any conflicting information or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 137.
MR. TRUMAN. It's [column] five.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 
Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is disagreement or contention.


Passage number 138.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When it's a plus that means we were buyingthem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that when there is a plus sign, it indicates that "we were buying them." There is no contention or disagreement presented in the statement.


Passage number 139.
MR. TRUMAN. No, minuses are buying and pluses are sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply providing information without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 140.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Minuses are buying, okay. So that's $8.4billion we sold. Then there's a previous period of $8.2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating facts about the amount of money spent and sold in two different periods.


Passage number 141.
-10-12/18-19/80MR. TRUMAN. No, I'm sorry, it's $5.8 billion. Excuse me, Iwas reading the wrong column. There is nothing like being helpful.The peak was $5.8 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply corrects themselves and acknowledges their mistake.


Passage number 142.
MR. PARTEE. That's the U.S. total column, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 143.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I was looking at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they were looking at something, but there is no indication of any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 144.
MR. TRUMAN. Now, the $8.4 billion was last October. So it's$8.4 and $5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and providing a clarification about the amount of money discussed.


Passage number 145.
8--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, looking at these figures--there'snothing very scientific about this--they say we've run intofluctuations in both directions of [up to] $8 billion. And if youconsider a normal position at zero, in some sense, it seems natural tobe willing to hold at least $4 billion. I'm talking net now on thetheory that if we ran into another $8 billion drain, it would take usfrom a plus $4 billion to a minus $4 billion. Therefore, $4 billionsounds like a nice figure not to worry about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 146.
MS. TEETERS. Is that over and above our holdings to coverthe Carter funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking whether the mentioned amount is in addition to their current holdings.


Passage number 147.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information or context about potential contention or disagreement.


Passage number 148.
 Yes, they are saying on a net basis--MR. PARTEE. And to cover the swap, I take it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Yes, they are saying on a net basis" is a confirmation or agreement with a previous statement or question, suggesting that the speaker agrees with the information provided before that.


Passage number 149.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, starting from this net position thatthey interpret as roughly zero. They are not saying to go to $4billion necessarily. In this version we don't go out to acquirebalances. We operate more or less the way we've been operating anddeal with disorderly or erratic markets as it seems appropriate. Weare willing to do that more or less the way we have been, within thatkind of framework. That's one possible approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply describing a possible approach to dealing with disorderly or erratic markets.


Passage number 150.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, let me make what Ithink is the positive case for this. I arrived at this view prettypainfully at a time when I was handling this at the Treasury. As apractical matter, we are very reluctant as a government to sell largeamounts of gold when the dollar is under attack. If we don't havesubstantial balances of foreign exchange, which we accumulate asmarket opportunities offer, as part of this leaning against the windstrategy--I'm not talking abut pegging the rates, obviously, and therecord shows that we haven't pegged rates--then we have to go intodebt immediately. There are various consequences of that. First ofall, the markets are constantly aware that we don't have our ownresources and that we are going into debt. It affects the credibilityof our intervention. There are always speculations on whether we'regoing to run out of resources and whether the Germans will increasetheir swap debt [given] that we're dependant upon Germany's good willat that time. I am focusing on Germany because that's usually wherethe issues arise. Secondly, we would show a better profit position ifwe had our own balances because then if the dollar weakens, we sellbalances and only go into debt when the dollar is much weaker--ifwe've used up our resources--rather than going into debt immediately.The same [is true] on the up side. So it tends to improve the profit-loss picture; we can't guarantee a profit, but it improves theprospects of one. [We have more] credibility in the markets because-11-12/18-19/80of the independence we have, in terms of not having to submit to anyconditions from other central banks or other governments. The fact isthat we have more of a say in the judgment as to whether the exchangerate is overshooting or undershooting by a very large amount--again,I'm not talking about pegging--rather than leaving that interventionposition entirely to the foreign central bank.All these factors are very powerful reasons, in my view, whywe should accumulate a very substantial position. Now, one can argue:Why not let the Treasury do that. First of all, the ESF has limitedresources, even though it can be supplemented by warehousing. Butthere are limits to that. They can't warehouse more than they havethe resources for. Secondly, we have less to say. If the Treasury isgoing to have the only resources, then the Treasury is going to callthe tune on international monetary policy alone. Thirdly, it's veryimportant in terms of the market impact and to the Congress that theTreasury and the Federal Reserve be in this jointly. This has beenthe view of every Administration that I can remember. Being in thatkind of joint position, we both derive strength from the other.Finally, I must say that the previous Congressional objections to amore active policy disappeared at the time of the November 1, 1978[program] with the overshooting on the down side, when the collapse ofthe dollar was so strong that Proxmire, Reuss, and the others stronglysupported us when we put together the November 1st package. I toldthem at the time that the implications of that were that we wouldbuild balances as market opportunities permitted. They both said theyrecognized that and they thought that was appropriate. At the time Isaid that to Bill Miller who was Chairman of the Federal Reserve, andhe was supportive.For a country our size, and with the dollar being theprincipal foreign currency for transactions and reserves, one canargue not that we need $8 billion but that we should have $30 or $40billion if we are not prepared to sell gold in large quantities. Now,nobody is talking about [accumulating] that [much]. I think thechances of the market permitting us to accumulate those kinds ofreserves [are remote]; it's just out of the question. But it might befeasible to accumulate $8 or $9 billion or something in that area.And I would hope that we would go along with the Treasury and wouldagree to increase the line substantially. The immediate operationalquestion--we don't have to increase the limit too much if there is anunderstanding that from time to time the limit can be raised--iswhether we can go ahead with, say, a $1 or $2 billion increase now.But it seems to me that the long-run strategy is what the FOMC oughtto consider.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their views and making a case for accumulating substantial reserves, and they also mention that previous objections to this policy have disappeared.


Passage number 151.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as "Mr. Balles" is a name and does not hint at any conflicting views or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 152.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, Tony's statement has ratheranticipated a question I was about to raise. Ted Truman's paper wasuseful and interesting as far as it went. But what I was hoping tofind and didn't see--and I wanted some discussion around this table asa minimum if not a study paper--was something on the fundamentalpurposes of our intervention. In Ted's memo, on the top of page 2, hesets forth three types of reasons for intervening: The traditionalaim, prior to 1978, of heading off disorderly conditions characterizedby abrupt intra-day changes or wide spreads in bid and ask prices; abit more than that--countering disorder, characterized by so-called-12-12/18-19/80cumulative exchange rate changes that tend to feed on themselves; orthirdly, the disorder characterized by substantial exchange ratemovements that carry rates to levels that are judged to be unrealisticin light of fundamental economic factors. I gather, Tony, we havebeen more or less in that third mold since the crisis of November 1978and the $30 billion support package that was put together at thattime. I'm really skeptical about making judgments that are counter towhat the market is telling us. Who makes those judgments and on whatbasis. I guess I'm being a devil's advocate here. I think there's anawful temptation to substitute judgments for market forces. The keyquestion, since the dollar is in the very opposite position today fromwhat it was on November 1, 1978 when it was very [weak], is whetherthis very broad intervention, which in my view is at least semi-pegging within a range, is still justified. Is it necessary. Is itdoing something positive for the national interest. What are thecosts related to the benefits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles expresses skepticism about making judgments that are counter to what the market is telling us and questions the justification and necessity of broad intervention in the currency market. He raises concerns about the potential costs related to the benefits of intervention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 153.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. John, on that I'd say first of allthat we simply lean against the wind and let the market pressures showup in terms of the direction. It's the magnitude of the [market] movethat we try to lean against in the short run. The record shows thatvery clearly in the last two years since November 1, 1978. Now, whenwe get to a situation where we have something like the November 1stcollapse, then of course we have to intervene massively. We have notdone that. There have been substantial dips in the dollar in thesetwo years during which we simply leaned against the direction. Thetraders themselves feel that there is a stabilizing influence if thecentral banks are in. It doesn't mean we have to be in every day.There have been many long periods of time when we haven't been in atall. It can reach a situation, though, where there is a very clearconsensus within the government, and even in the markets, that by Godthis [market move] just has gotten momentum and is out of control, andit's not reflecting the fundamental factors. That still leaves anextremely broad range in which we would, if they were very largemovements, simply lean against them. But we would let the movement goin the direction it's tending to go. It does not involve a conceptionof where the rates should be. It does involve a conception of how far[the markets should move] in either direction, when we begin to getinto an area of extreme undershooting or overshooting. But as I say,the only really massive intervention we did was in a short period oftime--a two-month period starting November 1st up to December of 1978--and then [the markets] turned around beginning in January. It isjust the facts of life. And the markets themselves like that kind ofstabilizing force because there is just too much at stake. Now, interms of more basic economic considerations, it is also true that ifthe dollar collapses too far, aside from any financial problems thatcan create, it really does feed inflation. If the dollar over-valuestoo far--again I'm talking not about making narrow judgments but verybroad judgments--it hurts our competitiveness and we end up with majorbalance of payments problems. So there is some kind of rough sense.Also, the markets really don't believe that central banks arecompletely indifferent to exchange rates over some broad area. Theythink we have a target. When we practiced what they call benignneglect, they thought we wanted a continuous weakening of the dollar.No matter what we said, they thought that was what we wanted, ineffect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage includes disagreement or contention regarding the appropriate approach to intervening in the market and the role of central banks in influencing exchange rates. The speaker suggests that intervening massively in the market is necessary in certain situations, while also acknowledging that there is a range in which they would lean against large movements in either direction. The passage also mentions the perception of the markets that central banks have a target for exchange rates, indicating a potential disagreement between the speaker and the markets.


Passage number 154.
-13-12/18-19/80MR. BALLES. Well, first of all, I fully supported thatNovember 1978 action, Tony. I'm not questioning the need andnecessity of that. What I am somewhat skeptical about is whether westill need the same scale of resources today and ought to be[intervening as actively] in view of the strength of the dollar. I'dmake one other comment, if I can get it in here. I have a suspicion,and that's about all it is at this point, that these foreign exchangeoperations may have more of an impact on domestic monetary policy thanhas been realized. I mean that in the following sense: I think weprobably all view the exchange intervention operations as being in anaggregate sense, sterilized--that they aren't doing anything one wayor another to affect the grand total of member bank reserves. What wedo on one side, we offset on the other side. But by the same token,to the extent this intervention, this leaning against the wind tomoderate the rise in the U.S. dollar without affecting currentmonetary policy--if that should be the aim--succeeds in keeping thedollar below the level it would otherwise reach, then it follows,based on a study we're now doing but haven't completed, that it mustalso keep the level of U.S. interest rates below what they otherwisewould have been relative to interest rates abroad. I'm talking aboutthe size of the gap. The size of the gap will be smaller eitherbecause U.S. interest rates in an absolute sense are somewhat lowerthan they would have been or foreign interest rates are higher thanthey would have been. And the reason I think that has to be the caseis that the difference between the spot and the forward value of thedollar, based on our studies, tends to be very close to the U.S./foreign interest rate differential. One can track this, and it hasbeen tracked by different people around the System, including theBoard's staff as well as our staff. And since that difference betweenthe spot and the forward value follows very closely the two interestrate differentials, thus depressing the spot relative to the forwardvalue, then our interest rates must be depressed relative to thoseabroad. That is, the interest rate gap will be smaller.The next point in this line of argument is that, as we'vetried to study what has happened to the demand for bank credit and thegrowth of monetary aggregates this year, we're beginning to believethat the fluctuations in the demand for business loans in this periodhave had a pretty considerable effect on the monetary base, themultiplier, and ultimately the target aggregates. And if that view iscorrect--that the business community wants to stay out of the bondmarket when rates are exceedingly high as they are now--and turn tothe banking system, as they've done massively, in demands for bankloans, they create the deposits and create a need for requiredreserves two weeks down the road. We have to move in and supply therequired reserves. And to the extent that that business loan demandis based on the level of interest rates, and to the extent thatintervention has, as we suspect, somewhat lowered the level of U.S.interest rates, then the demand for bank loans gets even stronger, ifthere is any interest elasticity there at all.In a word, we have a suspicion that intervention keeps rateslower than they otherwise would have been and increases loan demandsto higher levels than they otherwise would have been and probablyresults in more demand for money than would have been the case in theabsence of [the intervention]. In short, if this view is correct--andit still has to be confirmed by some more work--then intervention isnot neutral in terms of its impact on domestic policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own skepticism and suspicion about the impact of foreign exchange operations on domestic monetary policy, but there is no disagreement with any other party.


Passage number 155.
-14-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you like to comment on thatsuspicion, Mr. Truman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only presents a mathematical expression and a statement requesting Mr. Truman's comment on a suspicion.


Passage number 156.
MR. BALLES. I'd welcome comments on that suspicion. It'snot even a hypothesis yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply welcoming comments or perspectives on a suspicion they have mentioned.


Passage number 157.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, that analysis is based on the assumptionthat the forward rate does not move; then anything can happen. Aswe've sketched out in the paper, depending on where the change comesfrom, if there's a shift in the market's sentiment in favor of thedollar, if anything that'll tend to push the exchange rate up and wewould see, absent anything else, interest rates [come] down. If weintervene under those circumstances, [unintelligible] can sterilizeintervention both here and abroad, and let the forward rate movearound, if anything interest rates would be higher than they otherwisewould be because some of the pressure that would come from that demandfor dollar-denominated assets would be taken out of the market bysupplying them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 158.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In addition to Ted's specific point,there is a more general statement that I think ought to be made. We'dbe more independent of the external environment if we had our ownresources in terms of [implementing] domestic monetary policy. If wehave a very serious decline in the dollar, which goes too far, and wedon't have the resources, then we've got to yank up interest rates.And we may not wish to do so. Lyle Gramley [can speak to this], forexample; he was on the Council [of Economic Advisors] when this was aserious problem. So I think that is the larger truth, which swampsthe technical effects. And even the technical effects, I think, arevery easily manageable in an economy as big as ours--and I've talkedwith Peter Sternlight regarding this and his open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion and thoughts on the topic of having domestic monetary policy resources.


Passage number 159.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only consists of the name "Governor Wallich." It does not contain any specific information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 160.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I agree very much with what Tony hassaid. I would add that we are really in a very abnormal situation.We are no longer a unique country. We are not pegged to gold and haveothers pegged to us. We are one of a group of countries whosecurrencies float. We are the only one that has virtually no reserves;we are the only one dependent on borrowing the reserves whenever weneed them. And we have seen that that borrowing can be denied orsubjected to conditions. So simply in terms of normalizing oursituation in a worldwide float [regime], I think we ought to movetoward getting reserves. The immediate prospect may well be that wewould be accumulating reserves. That's what we are talking aboutbecause the dollar is strong. If the dollar were weak, there would belittle point in talking about accumulation. But here we do have theopportunity and perhaps the desirability of slowing down thatmovement. That depends on how the domestic economy goes. A veryextreme case of a country that doesn't want to intervene is the UnitedKingdom where they are going to sky-high rates that are killing theirexport industries, because from a monetary policy point of view theycan't afford to intervene.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both individuals agree on the abnormality of the situation and the importance of accumulating reserves.


Passage number 161.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only states "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or information that could imply disagreement or contention.


Passage number 162.
-15-12/18-19/80MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "-15-12/18-19/80MR. WALLICH". This is because the passage appears to be a random assortment of numbers and letters that do not convey any clear argument or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 163.
MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 164.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.The fact is that they don't intervene. That much [is true].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a fact without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 165.
MR. WALLICH. Well, that's a situation that would not affectus. We certainly can sterilize the liquidity generated byintervention. I think it would be wise to avoid the situation thatthe British are in--a country with a high inflation rate being drivento very high exchange rates and then for the accumulated two reasons,losing competitiveness in exports. We can't, of course, control therate. There is no question of that. But we can moderate the movementand moderate the extremes.A further point we have not noted is that we've gone to amonetary control system that produces wide interest rate fluctuations.That means it produces wide exchange rate fluctuations. It would bedesirable to have the means of compensating for that in some degree ifwe are going to inflict this interest rate and exchange rateinstability on ourselves and the rest of the world, which I think wehave to. Intervention is a natural way of [reducing] the consequencesmarginally, obviously not totally. Now, we might have losses on aportfolio of accumulated balances. That is always a fear. If we buyas the dollar appreciates, that danger is less. We are buying foreigncurrency cheap. It may turn out not to have been cheap. So one mustnot ignore that risk. But I'd like to remind you that we have a riskon the domestic portfolio, too. A few years ago I believe we computedthat the then-loss on the portfolio was on the order of $2 billion. Iwonder what it is now; presumably it's no less than that. So we havelived with that situation without a great concern and I think the losson the foreign exchange portfolio would be a great deal more moderate,given the kind of balances we are talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 166.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Partee without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 167.
MR. PARTEE. I just wanted to say that I agree with JohnBalles about the effect, but I get there in a different way. I thinkintervention does add to the demand for money domestically because forany given level of economic activity when we intervene to keep therate from going up, we add to the domestic rate of inflation.Therefore, there's more nominal GNP relative to real GNP than wouldotherwise be the case. We either have a larger demand for money orhigher interest rates, one of the two. The result of an interventionon the up side is either to raise interest rates or inflation, orboth, in the United States. And I think we ought to realize thatthat's one of the costs. Surprisingly enough, I agree with Tony andHenry to a degree, mercantilistic as their arguments are. I'm also amercantilist and I wouldn't like to see our manufacturers excludedfrom world markets the way Britain's are being excluded when the poundgets to five dollars. When [the dollar] gets to a really high level,we certainly ought to do something about it. I also agree that weprobably need a small amount of [foreign currency reserves]. We can'tsell our gold holdings very readily; that's a very good point. So,although we have $150 billion in [gold] reserves, it's not available-16-12/18-19/80to us because we can't readily sell the gold because of public opinionand so forth. I do not like the idea of accumulating all these marks,as I think you must know. Number one, I don't know what the rightexchange rate is. There's always the presumption that our exchangerate somehow has gotten very high. We have a staff forecast in theGreenbook this time that says the exchange rate will rise over thenext two years. That doesn't suggest that the rate is all that highwhen our own professional staff expects a substantial appreciationover the next two years. More than that, though, I'm very concernedabout a lack of diversification. We've put all [our foreign currencyreserves] in marks. What if something terrible happens to Germany.We have this big stake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 168.
 So it seems to me that if we were toaccumulate--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have any big stake at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the author's opinion or observation.


Passage number 169.
MR. PARTEE. Well, you are talking about $4 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone is talking about $4 billion.


Passage number 170.
 Thatmeans--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, your comments are relevant lookingtoward the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is indicating agreement or acknowledgement of the relevance of the comments in terms of future considerations. There is no explicit contention or disagreement within the statement itself.


Passage number 171.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply replies "Yes" to a statement or question.


Passage number 172.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we don't have a net position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 173.
MR. PARTEE. Yes. I have always felt comfortable because wewere covered by a Treasury exposure. Now I find there's no Treasuryexposure and we are no longer covered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing a change in their previous understanding or situation, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement. They are simply stating a fact.


Passage number 174.
 But my point is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, wait a minute. The Treasury isn'tcovered. The United States is even. There is no extension there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a clarification or correction being made by the speaker.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 175.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I didn't really want to comment on that[unintelligible]. I don't think it's proper to have that drawingthere, which I didn't realize we couldn't pay back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, states that he believes it is not proper to have the drawing there, which implies disagreement with the presence or use of the drawing in question.


Passage number 176.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 177.
 One can argue about the drawing, but I--MR. PARTEE. My point is simply that I wouldn't like to seeus get a big stake. If we want to accumulate something that we canbuy and sell in foreign exchange markets without the difficulty ofdealing in gold, why in the world don't we buy SDRs, not marks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their perspective on the matter and expressing their preference.


Passage number 178.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then we'd have to sell the SDRs to agovernment; we'd need to find one that would be willing to buy them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 179.
MR. PARTEE. Aren't they always sellable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 180.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We'd have to sell them to agovernment in order to get the currencies to intervene in the foreignexchange markets. We can't intervene with SDRs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that in order to intervene in the foreign exchange markets, selling them to a government is necessary to obtain the currencies, while pointing out that intervening with SDRs is not an option.


Passage number 181.
MR. PARTEE. I would have thought they would be ratherquickly exchangeable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee is expressing his personal opinion or speculation about something. There is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 182.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, no. I had to negotiate prettyhard to get them to agree to the quantities of SDRs they would buy.-17-12/18-19/80Another disadvantage is that we have marks and yen, and if we had theSDRs, a good part of that would then have to be cashed into sterlingand French francs, which we normally would not want to intervene in.Eventually, if the evolution of the international monetary system issuch over the years that the SDR becomes more and more usable, thenthe time may come when that's a very practical suggestion. I thinkit's a rather attractive one in the long run to hold our foreignexchange reserves in SDRs. But there are very practical constraintsin the short run. We wouldn't want to be at the mercy of othergovernments, particularly since they have a limited interest; they'renot required in the Fund articles to buy whatever SDRs are offeredthem, whether we offer them directly or through the Fund. They onlyare required to have a certain minimum holding and both Germany andJapan are past that limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 183.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I guess there is no source of generalizedpurchasing power, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 184.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, there are two dimensions of the SDR.Thinking of SDR in terms of diversification, one could invest, ratherthan just in DM, in SDR deposits denominated in marks. That is thediversified investment. We could run those up and run those down, andthe effect would be a form of multicurrency intervention. We couldbuy DM or we could go to the market and convert those DM into a SDRdenominated deposit and we would then cover some of our exchangerisks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the concept of diversification and the potential benefits of investing in SDR deposits denominated in marks. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 185.
 We may worry about the investment side of things after--MR. PARTEE. You are talking about a market that doesn'texist now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit contention or disagreement. The statement "We may worry about the investment side of things after" implies a focus on priorities, and MR. PARTEE's statement agrees by acknowledging the nonexistence of the current market being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 186.
MR. TRUMAN. True.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is a potential contention or disagreement. The word "True" in this context suggests that Mr. Truman may be contradicting or challenging a previous statement or claim made by someone else.


Passage number 187.
MR. PARTEE. Well, since I don't know much about SDRs, Iwould just make a few comments. One, there is a cost. The cost ismore inflation in the United States, which we are committed toresisting, I thought. And we don't know how far these exchange ratesare going to drift and how much they reflect differences incompetitive shifts, structural shifts in these economies. Number two,I don't like to see a concentration of risk because I have confidencein no country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply makes a few comments and expresses concerns about inflation and concentration of risk.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 188.
 Perhaps, that's--MR. MORRIS. Confidence in [none], Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker's response ("Confidence in [none]") suggests a lack of agreement or disagreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 189.
MR. PARTEE. Absolutely none.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states "Absolutely none," indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 190.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Including your own.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a straightforward statement or question without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 191.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 192.
 Well, we owe it to ourselves--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll strike that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I'll strike that" indicates that the speaker is correcting or editing themselves, but it does not imply any disagreement with another person or idea.


Passage number 193.
MR. WALLICH. We can diversify our own portfolio if we wantto even in proportion to the SDR, although that's 40 percent dollarnow so we have to focus on the non-dollar part of the SDR. But theSDR does contain currencies we are not likely to want to intervene in.So I would say we ought to diversify a portfolio in terms of yen,marks, and Swiss francs, which are the principal currencies we haveintervened in, and we probably ought to broaden our scope of-18-12/18-19/80intervention to the smaller currencies to the extent that thosemarkets can take it. And we would get some of the protection that youhave in mind, Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 194.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 195.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I would certainly like to support Tony'sposition and Henry's. One thing we haven't talked about very much andit wasn't discussed much in the memorandum is the fact that theforeign exchange markets are heavily influenced, as are all markets,by the psychology of the traders. And it seems to me that a large DMposition owned by the Federal Reserve would be a very stabilizingforce for the psychology of the markets. The only reference I recallin the memorandum is one I disagree with. It says that if the UnitedStates were to hold a substantial portion of its internationalreserves in the form of foreign currencies, this might encourage somesmaller foreign central banks to shift the composition of theirportfolio out of dollars. It seems to me the effect ought to beexactly the opposite. If I were a central banker for a bananarepublic and I saw the United States building up a big holding ofDeutschemark deposits, that would lead me to be less likely todiversify out of dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, expresses agreement with Tony and Henry's position and further discusses the influence of psychology in foreign exchange markets. He also disagrees with a point made in the memorandum but does not directly clash with any other arguments or opinions.


Passage number 196.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've [unintelligible] yourself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is incomplete and does not provide enough information to determine any potential disagreement.


Passage number 197.
MR. TRUMAN. That was written in the old memo that wasattached [to the current one]. That was in the period right after theCarter notes issue. There were stories in the market that the UnitedStates was building up foreign currency reserves and that was beingseen as a signal at that time of weakness in the general movement to amulti-currency reserve system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the time period after the Carter notes issue and the market's perception of the United States building up foreign currency reserves.


Passage number 198.
MR. PARTEE. Even we were diversifying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as no conflicting ideas or opposing perspectives are presented.


Passage number 199.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, even we were diversifying. We were gettingthat from the market. That was a reflection of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that "we" were diversifying and implies that it was influenced by the market.


Passage number 200.
MR. MORRIS. You should have had a footnote that you nolonger believe that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 201.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, we've gone down that road and that [view]probably was going on. But it doesn't deny, once you go down thatroad, that the argument that building a war chest might add to[unintelligible] isn't valid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "once you go down that road, that the argument that building a war chest might add to [unintelligible] isn't valid" implies that there is a disagreement or differing viewpoint on the validity of the argument.


Passage number 202.
 But the signal we were giving in thatperiod is, I think, itself probably--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have any comments on theseobservations, Mr. Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is asking for comments or thoughts on certain observations.


Passage number 203.
MR. PARDEE. Well, I'm amazed that the discussion came closefor the first time since I've known anything about the FOMC to asuggestion by somebody that we should buy sterling on an uncoveredbasis, given all the support we have given to the pound sterling overthe years when it was weak. I'm very much in favor of building upbalances, of course, from my own bias as Manager in needing resourceswhen we go into the exchange market. I want to have enough in hand sothat I can have an effect on market psychology and on the market. I-19-12/18-19/80think that's the important element: How credible the Desk is at themoment when it appears in the exchange market.As for the comments about the possibility of pegging, I'dlike to reassure everyone, having gone through personally the periodsof fixed rates and the unwinding of fixed rates, that I do not want togo back to pegging. I've avoided over recent years any drift in thatdirection and will continue to avoid a drifting in that direction.This year we have gone through a Deutschemark rate of 1.70 to 2.03.That's 30 points, over 15 percent. It's hard to say that thatinvolves a pegging of the exchange rate even though we have [made]purchases and sales all the way through. So I would like to reassureyou on that issue. But keep bugging me because then I can bug otherswho are likely to drift in the direction of pegging once again.I like Tony's argument that starting with balances gives usmore flexibility, and then we can get into debt. We have lost moneyon our swap drawings in recent years largely because the first drawingon the swap line was at a very expensive rate and very early in thesequence of operations. And that drawing cost us money when we repaidit. So if we start with balances, on which we might quite frequentlybe making profits, then we can protect ourselves a little better. Theflexibility that that gives us is important. One other argument thathas not been raised comes out of the experience we had with theIranian freeze. There are a lot of countries out there now that aresubstantial dollar holders who are not our friends, And they may usethe weapon of a threat of large dollar sales in the exchange market.When that threat was posed to us last year,It's not that we necessarilyneed a war chest or big amounts of money in hand, but certainly havingmore than we have had [is desirable]. And to the extent that thesedollar balances abroad continue to grow, we should think in terms ofhaving larger amounts in hand to deal with these national interestthreats on top of the nitty-gritty types of things we have in theexchange markets on a day-to-day basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the idea of building up balances and their opposition to the idea of pegging exchange rates. They also mention potential threats and argue for the need to have larger amounts of money in hand to deal with those threats. There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement presented in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 204.
MR. WINN. Scott's comments are what scares me in the senseof the profit and loss being confused with the intervention issues.It seems to me that's the danger of large balances--that one starts touse them in the profit sense of the term rather than stabilization.I'd like to hear the pros and cons of establishing swap agreementswhen we're not under pressure as a way of doing this interventionversus the holding of large reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Winn expresses his concerns about confusing profit and loss with intervention issues, suggesting that large balances may be used for profit rather than stabilization. He wants to hear the pros and cons of establishing swap agreements as a way of intervention instead of holding large reserves. This indicates a disagreement or difference in opinion on the best approach to handling interventions and reserves.


Passage number 205.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker acknowledges their lack of understanding of the listener's intended meaning but does not express disagreement or contention.


Passage number 206.
MR. WINN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 207.
 Well, we protect ourselves with swap agreements sowe can get funds if we need them rather than--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have the swap agreements now. Thequestion that is being raised is whether to rely entirely on them whenwe're going to be on the selling side of the market. When sellingforeign currency, do we want to go immediately into debt, which is theimplication of relying entirely on a swap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is a disagreement or contention being raised about whether to rely entirely on swap agreements when selling foreign currency. One perspective is suggesting the reliance on swap agreements, while another perspective questions whether relying solely on them will lead to immediate debt.


Passage number 208.
MR. WINN. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply acknowledges and confirms that the statement made is correct.


Passage number 209.
-20-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it just comes back to the pointsthat Tony was raising. I think the most important point is that[without foreign currency reserves] we do lose flexibility. Noquestion. We've had a lot of arguments with the Germans over theyears when we were dependent upon them and they were telling us howmuch of the swap we could use.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is agreeing with Tony's point and discussing the importance of foreign currency reserves for maintaining flexibility. They mention past arguments with the Germans to support their point.


Passage number 210.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 211.
 The profit-loss factor, which Imentioned and Scott mentioned, is only an incidental one in the sensethat--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not even sure it's true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The phrase "I'm not even sure it's true" suggests that there is disagreement or uncertainty about the truthfulness or validity of the profit-loss factor.


Passage number 212.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's a view on the Hill, that ifthe intervention is accurate and reflects the fundamental factors,then we won't end up losing too much money; we'd probably make money.It's a political fact of life to try, and it's attractive as well notto be in a loss position where that's possible. But that doesn'tinfluence or dictate in any way when we intervene or the scale of theintervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 213.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In an area where one purpose blends intoanother at times, I think we ought to be as clear as we can be on whatwe have been doing. In particular, I think those three sentences[describing the purposes of intervention] at the top of page 2 are agood characterization. For a long time, we have presumably followednumber 1, which might be quite episodic. I think irregularly on boththe up and the down side, we have paid some attention to number 2. Sofar as number 3 is concerned, the only clear incident of that was onthe down side in November '78. And one could raise the questionwhether it isn't appropriate now in the [other] direction, but nobodyhas argued that case. I almost would be inclined to argue it attimes, but I don't think intervention is all that powerful inaffecting some of these things in most instances. I'm not raisingthat issue, but I just want to be clear that [late 1978] is the onlytime I think it has been raised and has been followed as a matter ofnational policy. I don't think that was at all inappropriate. But Idon't think there has been any question of pegging all during thisperiod. I don't think that's at issue on anything we are talkingabout at the moment. Obviously, we don't have to set down a policythat is good for all time, and it's very hard to do so in this areabecause conditions change.Specifically, we are in a situation where the Treasury,unless we want to change our minds, has access to something like $2billion through the warehousing facility. We are pretty close to thetop of the so-called informal limit that we set for ourselves onmarks. I think the diversification point that a number of people havewondered about is a reasonable one, but the market is basically a markmarket. And we're stuck with it to a degree, although it's worththinking about that a bit. I would guess, but I could easily bewrong, that we are nearer to the top of any dollar rate than thebottom of any dollar rate. I could be wrong--if the Russians marchinto Poland and our interest rates take another sizable increase orwhatever. But I'm not sure how much more room we are going to need.I just did some arithmetic and, if I exclude the Fund drawing--if Idon't calculate that the way the Treasury did--we are just over $1billion long in marks.-21-12/18-19/80SPEAKER(.). That can disappear in 3 days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply giving their perspective and clarifying certain points.


Passage number 214.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right; that's not terribly much. Iwould think if you're persuaded by the general arguments presented and[agree with] what is clearly the Treasury policy at this point, itprobably would be wise to increase this limit, let's say, by a billiondollars. What's the limit we have in the other currencies now. Thereis a limit on yen, isn't there. Is it $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking questions and making a suggestion.


Passage number 215.
MR. PARDEE. Yen has a $1 billion limit and we've only usedsome $400 million of that. And then there is a $500 million generallimit [on all other currencies] of which we've used about $300million. That's mainly in Swiss francs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is purely informative and does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the limits and usage of different currencies.


Passage number 216.
MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, if you want a suggestion, it is alittle hard on the Desk to have all these individual currency limits.One approach might be to do away with them and add things up a littledifferently. You could add $1 billion or whatever you wanted and dealwith an overall limit as to what the understandings are about andwhat's available in diversification. That might simplify theaccounting in New York. I don't know whether that's right or wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Truman is offering a suggestion to simplify the accounting process, but he does not express any disagreement with the current system.


Passage number 217.
MR. PARDEE. On these matters, I'm just as happy having theindividual [currency] limits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's preference.


Passage number 218.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it hurts right at the momentto have the individual limits. Now, as I understand it anyway, nobodyis talking about buying currencies for the sake of building a warchest. It is all a by-product of what we're doing for other purposes;and it does govern the flexibility we have for intervening for otherpurposes. We don't have much room for buying any more marks for ourown account, if we don't raise that limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the current limits on buying currencies and the need to potentially raise those limits.


Passage number 219.
MR. WALLICH. I do think that the diversification argument isvery important, and we ought perhaps to build that in from the startso that we not only have limits on [individual] currencies but an[instruction to] the manager. I don't think one can be rigid about itbecause it might make one buy currencies that one doesn't want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the importance of diversification in currency management, and suggests building it into the system from the beginning. They also acknowledge the need for flexibility in the approach to avoid purchasing unwanted currencies.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we can't buy yen now unless we reallyadopt a different policy that says we want to build up a war chest inyen. That would involve just going into the market for the sake ofbuying yen. I don't think we want to raise that issue today. That isnot to say that if the yen turned weak, we couldn't buy some. But Idon't think we want to buy it when it's strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that they do not think it is a good idea to buy yen at the current time, while acknowledging that if the yen were to weaken, they might reconsider. This suggests a difference in opinion or perspective on whether or not to buy yen.


Passage number 221.
MR. WALLICH. There is an issue in terms of the [overall]magnitude of balances; we should remember that we have a limit on theoverall open position--that is our total risk exposure--of $8 billion.So at one time we must have contemplated being in debt [to thatextent].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Wallich regarding the overall magnitude of balances and the limit on the overall open position.


Passage number 222.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We did and we were, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "We did and we were, I think" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement or reflection of the speaker's thoughts or opinions.


Passage number 223.
MR. WALLICH. So I think one has to see the limits we haveput on the [individual] balances in the light of that limit we havealready set for overall risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the limits and risks in a balanced and objective manner without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 224.
-22-12/18-19/80MS. TEETERS. Are you suggesting that we raise that limittoo, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about raising a limit, without any explicit disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 225.
MR. WALLICH. No, I'm just saying once we have decided thatwe can afford to be in debt up to $8 billion, we shouldn't be tooworried--if we say we can take the risk of $8 billion--about having $4billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and suggesting that if they have already decided to take the risk of being in debt up to $8 billion, then they should not be too concerned about being in debt by $4 billion.


Passage number 226.
MR. TRUMAN. $8 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the amount of $8 billion without any opposing viewpoints or contrasting opinions.


Passage number 227.
MR. WALLICH. No, I mean we are talking about $4 billion inbalances now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions. It simply states a fact about the amount of money being discussed.


Passage number 228.
MR. PARTEE. You don't want to make it $8 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply presents a suggestion or opinion from Mr. Partee without any indication of disagreement or contention. It doesn't mention anyone else's perspective or refute any claims.


Passage number 229.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to make it $8 billion, but Iwant to remind you that $4 billion is smaller than $8 billion.Somebody should be looking at the foreign currency directive and theother [foreign currency instruments] anyway before the March meeting,and I think that might be an appropriate time to look at any of theselimits. I accept the other arguments. I'm just saying as a practicalmatter that we ought to give ourselves enough leeway to operate on acontinuing basis now; looking forward, so far as I'm concerned, if theconditions were right, we could raise those limits if it becamenecessary. But I don't think we have to raise them so dramaticallynow that they would probably be bigger than what's necessary, or insome sense desirable. I would propose for the moment that we raisethe mark limit by $1 billion; we can raise it further if you want to,but I'd be satisfied with that. I think we have enough leeway in theother [limits] should conditions change. Against the background thatthese general considerations are persuasive, and recognizing that [thecurrent limits] are low in terms of the numbers that some people havesuggested, we can have an understanding that if it's desirable, we'dlook at it again either in terms of the warehousing or the System's[overall] limit itself. But I suspect that just raising the [mark]limit by $1 billion is probably enough to take care of this for aforeseeable time period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement proposing a practical solution.


Passage number 230.
MR. ROOS. By doing this, though, we're not signaling anyencouragement for more intervention than we are [doing].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roos is stating that by doing something, they are not encouraging any more intervention than what they are currently doing.


Passage number 231.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, definitely not. No, this implies nochange in policy in the exchange markets at all as I see it. Now, itmay involve some modification of policy in another sense in that wemay end up holding more balances than we have ever held before. Butit doesn't imply any operational change in terms of what has beenhappening in the exchange market. It implies that we're willing togive the Desk enough leeway to continue the kind of [operations] theyhave been doing, that's all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining their position and stating that there is no change in policy in the exchange markets as they see it. They also mention a potential modification in policy regarding holding more balances, but they clarify that there is no operational change in terms of what has been happening in the exchange market. They express willingness to give the Desk enough leeway to continue their current operations. Overall, there is no conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 232.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, if we raise the limit on D-marksby $1 billion, if we decide to [acquire] that whole amount, we have toraise the limit on total balances, excluding yen, do we not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 233.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, I would assume so. You would raise thetotal from $2 billion to $3 billion and then the DM limit would begoing from $1-1/2 billion to $2-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Truman simply makes an assumption and provides information about the changes in total and DM limit.


Passage number 234.
-23-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what "the total" is. Whichlimit is that. I thought the overall [limit] was $8 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification about the total and the specific limit being referred to.


Passage number 235.
MR. GRAMLEY. The [informal limit relating to the] overalltotal currently is $2 billion excluding yen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 236.
MR. WALLICH. [It's $1-1/2 billion] for D-marks and $500million for other [currencies].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states the amounts given for D-marks and other currencies without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 237.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By putting on these special limits, wehave caused ourselves a bit of a problem in that sense. Obviously, ifwe raise the mark [limit], just to conform we have to raise theoverall limit we now have, which seems to be expressed excluding yen.That is $2 billion, which implies we have $500 million for other[currencies] of which we only have what--about $200 or $230 million orsomething.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 238.
MR. PARDEE. $233 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a monetary value without presenting any opposing viewpoints or conflicting claims.


Passage number 239.
MS. TEETERS. May I ask if I'm correct that if we raise this,then we have an extra $1 billion for ourselves for marks and there isstill $2 billion of leeway on the warehousing. So does that give atotal of $3 billion of leeway at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question asking for confirmation and clarification.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. That is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple acknowledgement of correctness.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 241.
MR. TRUMAN. For the United States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This can be seen through the use of the word "for" which indicates that Mr. Truman is presenting an argument or position that may contrast or differ from others.


Passage number 242.
MR. RICE. Is there any reason for stating this excluding theyen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there is any specific reason for stating something, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 243.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I doubt it at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "I doubt it at this point" expresses uncertainty or lack of belief, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 244.
MR. TRUMAN. The reason for the yen being separate, as wasexplained in the paper, was that the last time around on this, in1979, we were contemplating buying a lot of yen to help the Japanese.It turned out that we didn't do that. But [the yen limit] was set upoutside [the total informal limit] at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing an explanation for why the yen was separate in the previous situation.


Passage number 245.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any particularpurpose in stating it that way now, but we better be careful aboutwhat we're doing. If we change it, what would you [recommend]. Wecould change the overall limit to $3.5 billion including yen, I guess.Right. Is that the arithmetic implication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about potential changes and recommendations, without any conflicting opinions presented.


Passage number 246.
MR. TRUMAN. We could do that, but then the limit is prettytight on yen if you ever want to buy any more because you have this,in effect, limit of $500 million [on other currencies].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the limit on yen purchase.


Passage number 247.
MR. PARDEE. Nobody [has said] let's sell them. I'm not sureI want them any more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Pardee, is expressing uncertainty about wanting to keep something. There is no mention of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 248.
MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I'm not opposed to accumulatingbalances, and these seem like like reasonable increases in theamounts. I would say, though, that I am disturbed about the fact thatin this most recent episode with the mark and the dollar we've doneall the intervention. Granted, we needed the marks to pay off ourCarter bonds and all the rest, but the Germans have done literally-24-12/18-19/80nothing as far as I can figure out. And that bothers me in terms ofhow effective our policy is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their concern about the effectiveness of their policy but the passage does not indicate any direct disagreement or contention with another party.


Passage number 249.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I spoke withthe other day to get his feeling of the situation. I'm just passingthis along.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the person had a conversation with someone to gather their opinion or thoughts on a certain situation, and they are now passing that information along. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 250.
 Their view is thatCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Including the repayment of swap drawings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a view without presenting any conflicting opinions or disagreements.


Passage number 251.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And in that they include therepayment of the swap drawing by us; that's they way it shows up ontheir books. They're afraid that if they draw too heavily on theirreserves, they will increase the pressure on the D-mark. Secondly,through the Ministry of Finance [they are] selling D-mark denominatedassets to the OPEC countries. They also feel that this is a temporarysituation--that there will be a turnaround because they keep pointingto their inflation rate of 5 percent, compared to ours. Theyappreciate a modest amount of intervention by us, and they feel thatwhat we are doing now is modest. They are not asking us to do a largeamount of intervention. We really have made this decision in terms ofour own interest, although checking with them to make sure there is noobjection. [It's the same] when the situation is reversed; we expectcooperation from them. But if the Germans wanted massive interventionand we were opposed to that, it's understood that we wouldn't do it.If the Germans wanted no intervention, obviously I think we wouldrespect their wishes unless we ourselves had a view that we werelosing competitiveness to such an extent that we insisted [onintervening] to protect our own interests. But that's their view onthe amount of intervention. They feel that the [intervention] alsohas more effect on their domestic money supply. We don't seem to havethose [effects] for reasons that we can go into detail some other day.But more effects on their domestic money supply arise when they do theintervention. So, that is their view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents different viewpoints and perspectives, but there is no direct disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 252.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the consideration raised isa relevant one. I feel less eager--I've never felt eager aboutintervening anyway--but there was the excuse of repaying the debt,which the Treasury felt very strongly about, complementing the otherreasons. That reason is gone. And if the Germans don't want tointervene, that affects the eagerness with which I want to interveneas well. So that has an influence on the [issue]. Consistent withour past practice, do any of these limits have to be written down andvoted on, Mr. Altmann.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and feelings, but there is no mention of conflicting opinions or conflicting views from others.


Passage number 253.
MR. ALTMANN(.). I don't think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 254.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to have a subcommittee,whichever the appropriate one is, look at this directive. Among otherthings, they can straighten out these [limit issues]. The simplestthing to do is to leave everything the way it is at the moment so wedon't find out that we are doing something we don't intend. But we dohave to [raise the limit on] the total as well as the mark, I think,to be consistent here. So, we would have to raise the [informal]overall limit ex yen to $3 billion and the mark limit to $2.5 billion.That leaves [the framework] exactly the way we have it with theimplication of another $1 billion in marks, which I think is what weintend at the moment as a kind of holding action here until we-25-12/18-19/80straighten all this out. If that's agreeable, and I don't hear anyopposition to it, we will just assume that. I also judge just as amatter of guidance that should something happen--I would guess thatthis amount is adequate, but it's a very uncertain world--we wouldhave to discuss it if we want to go above this amount; but I don'thear strong [views] that that's an impossibility. Given thecircumstances, [that issue] might arise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly involves the speaker expressing their thoughts and suggesting a course of action, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas being presented.


Passage number 255.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to ask a question. Whatis the limit or what constraints are there on our warehousing for theTreasury. Is that based upon the Exchange Stabilization Fundavailability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is simply asking a question about the limits and constraints on warehousing for the Treasury.


Passage number 256.
MR. TRUMAN. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 257.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we ought to be clear onthis. I want to make it as much as possible dependent upon aconstraint of the Exchange Stabilization Fund because it could beconstrued as a form of Treasury borrowing from the Federal Reservewhich isn't covered by the other prohibitions on their borrowing. Weneed the justification that it is the Exchange Stabilization Fund'slack of assets, not a general lack of funds on the part of theTreasury, that gives rise to this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion and concerns about the use of the Exchange Stabilization Fund.


Passage number 258.
MR. TRUMAN. The $5 billion rough order of magnitudeoriginally came from the amount of Carter notes that they haveoutstanding. In fact, [the Treasury] wanted more than that. Thenotion was that as they reconstituted those DM, which they can'tabsorb into the ESF, they would warehouse them. So that's how we gotto the $5 billion that exists now. Other kinds of claims, as theChairman said, happened in the past--like claims on the ESF where theymight want to help out a country or something like that through theirown lending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 259.
 They might not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I had not recalled that this had beenexplained to the Congress, but you [say it has].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I had not recalled that this had been explained to the Congress, but you [say it has]" suggests a difference in memory or understanding between the speaker and the person they are addressing.


Passage number 260.
MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as there is no specific information or context provided.


Passage number 261.
 Well, it's all in the public--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's in the public record, I take it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the information being referred to is publicly available.


Passage number 262.
MR. TRUMAN. It is in the public record in those terms,relating to warehousing on the one hand to help out the ESF in generalwhen it gets into emergency situations. And the $5 billion limit isrelated loosely to that but explicitly to the Treasury's obligations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Truman is explaining a fact about the public record and the relationship between warehousing and the $5 billion limit.


Passage number 263.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Treasury is aware that we want ajustification in terms of the ESF capacity to hold [these funds], notjust that they find it convenient to park them with us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 264.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, is there any leeway at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is simply asking if there is flexibility or room for negotiation at the present time.


Passage number 265.
MR. TRUMAN. There's $2 billion left.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a simple factual statement about the amount of money left.


Passage number 266.
MR. GUFFEY. $2 billion left.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about $2 billion being left.


Passage number 267.
-26-12/18-19/80MR. TRUMAN. They do hold quite a lot of DM for their ownaccount, obviously. They have, for whatever [reason], balances of$8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 268.
8 billion of which--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have given us a rationale as to whythey have to warehouse this in terms of the capacity of the ESF. Ithink we have to insist on some reasonable rationale for that. Okay,with that understanding, we will proceed and Mr. Kichline will talkabout the economic scene.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning the rationale given for warehousing 8 billion and insisting on a reasonable rationale. This indicates disagreement or contention.


Passage number 269.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the Appendix or any detailed passage, I cannot provide an answer to your question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 270.
]MR. ROOS. May I ask a question, Mr. Chairman. I noticed,Jim, that you're now basing your Greenbook projections on assumed M-1Agrowth. I'm a little curious in view of the fact that M-1A isprobably the most volatile and least predictable aggregate in theshort run. Why do you use it as a predictive device.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Roos expresses his curiosity and disagreement with the decision to base the Greenbook projections on assumed M-1A growth. He argues that M-1A is volatile and unpredictable in the short run, suggesting that it may not be a reliable predictive device.


Passage number 271.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I assume that when I answer, you'regoing to say "Why not use M-1B." So, why don't I wrap the twotogether. In our view, they're both better than the other aggregatesin the sense that we want something closely related to transactionsdemands. I think one could make a very strong case that over time thepreferable aggregate to look at is M-1B. In our forecast, even thoughwe have assumed M-1A, the Bluebook specifies the M-1B numbers that gowith it. So, in effect, we have a consistent forecast. If you preferlooking at M-1B, it's the equivalent growth rate for M-1B that's inthe Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's view and a suggestion for using M-1B as an aggregate.


Passage number 272.
MR. ROOS. In other words, there is no significance to theshift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a straightforward statement.


Passage number 273.
MR. KICHLINE. No, it's of no significance in terms ofinfluencing the forecast because the equivalent M-1B is specified inthe Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact and expressing that the mentioned detail has no significance in influencing the forecast.


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a bit of a timing problem as wellas a great big substantive problem. We're going to have to terminatethe meeting at 5:30 p.m. or shortly before. I don't know how far wewill be able to go on this whole matter of next year's targets at thistime and I'm not sure it's desirable to go too far. As a technicalmatter, can somebody inform me if these targets we present for nextyear are supposed to be consistent with the plans of the oldAdministration, not the new Administration, as I assume. Is thatcorrect as a technical matter when we write the Humphrey-Hawkinsreport.SPEAKER(.). I think that's probably right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on a technical matter.


Passage number 275.
MR. PARTEE. It's related to the President's Economic Reportisn't it. And that would be the old Administration.SPEAKER(.). I think it will become irrelevant before we'vestarted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Partee and the Speaker are discussing the President's Economic Report and expressing their thoughts about its relevance.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be the technical requirement, butit has a certain air of unreality about it. The reality is that onewould like to know something a little more definitively about the-27-12/18-19/80plans of the new Administration before we make up our minds on this ina final way. It may not be useful to talk in anything other thanquite general terms. The very general question it seems to me is whatkind of strategy anybody has to achieve satisfactory economicconditions consistent with a decline in the inflation rate and howthat balance is reached under unknown factors, budgetary andotherwise. Views of the economic outlook get mixed in that, but Ithink it may be desirable to discuss the economic situation in thatvery broad policy context as well, which leaves me in a slight dilemmaas to what to do yet this afternoon. If I let Mr. Axilrod talk, he'sgoing to say that [his comments] will result in using up the time, Ipresume. Maybe that's just as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mainly discusses the need for more information and the broad policy context of discussing the economic situation. There is mention of a slight dilemma regarding time management, but it does not indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 277.
MR. AXILROD. Now may be the best time [for my comments]. Ithink that would just about do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker indicates that now is the best time for their comments and suggests that the conversation has reached a sufficient point.


Passage number 278.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the provided passage without the actual content of the passage.


Passage number 279.
 Paul, if we do choose to postpone until somefuture time our discussion of the longer-range strategy--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm not suggesting that. I'm justsaying that I don't think we can be very definitive about it. On thisschedule we would open the meeting tomorrow morning with thatdiscussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is clarifying their intention and stating that they are not suggesting postponing the discussion, but rather expressing that they may not have a definitive plan for it.


Passage number 280.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about MR. ROOS or any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 281.
 Well, I was just going to ask: After the study ofoperating procedures is completed, is the plan to give the FOMC alittle more time than usual to chew over it because it seems to me--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When are you expecting to have somethingfor us on that, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a request for clarification and a question about timing.


Passage number 282.
MR. AXILROD. At the February meeting. We were assuming thatthere would be an extra day at the February meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the assumptions made at the February meeting.


Passage number 283.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that mean that it's all going to besprung on us that day or are you going to distribute something inadvance or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification or information about how something will be distributed, but there is no disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 284.
MR. AXILROD. Well, if God's willing, we will distributesomething a week or two in advance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their hope that they will distribute something in advance, showing a positive and cooperative tone.


Passage number 285.
 That is our plan, but this is avery large--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we also face some uncertainties. Weare very close to the point, which is relevant even to our short-termdecision, where these numbers are going to go all over the lotpresumably. It's conceivable that we may need another meeting here inJanuary. I don't know that we have to decide that, but it may be agood idea to keep that in mind for a variety of reasons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and discussing the possibility of holding another meeting in January.


Passage number 286.
MS. TEETERS. Have you thought of the possibility ofrequesting a delay in the Humphrey-Hawkins Report pending newAdministration policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the possibility of requesting a delay in the Humphrey-Hawkins Report pending new Administration policy.


Passage number 287.
MR. ROOS. I think that might be seen as a sign of weakness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their own opinion.


Passage number 288.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't thought of it. Let me say thatI hope it's not necessary. You still have time, Mr. Axilrod, so whydon't you proceed and then we will start with a mixed discussion of-28-12/18-19/80 -29-what the general tenor of policy might be in the light of comments onthe economic and inflationary situations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their thoughts and hopes about a future situation.


Passage number 289.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a simple statement or response without any indication of opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 290.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will be looking forward to all yourcomments tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 291.
MR. SCHULTZ. Our course is clear, you know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states "Our course is clear" without any contradicting statements or opposing views.


Passage number 292.
MR. PARTEE. It's crystal clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "It's crystal clear" suggests that the speaker is expressing a strong certainty or agreement, indicating no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 293.
[Meeting recessed]12/18-19/80December 19, 1980--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had an introduction to our problemsyesterday. I'd like to go around and get comments. It would beuseful if people commented on their proposals in relation to how theysee the business scene and what they think they are accomplishing--what the implications of their proposals are in that respect. Weobviously don't have to settle, and I don't intend to settle, what thetargets should be next year. They inevitably will be influenced bythe larger setting in which we find ourselves with respect to fiscalpolicy and other matters, which is somewhat uncertain at this time,as well as what approaches are going to be taken in other directionspsychologically and really. But it might be interesting to see howpeople reconcile our various concerns at the moment not only againstthe background of the real economy, but the rather enormous technicalproblems we will have in knowing what the M1 numbers will mean, in anyevent, for some indefinite period of time. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a continuation of a meeting where the speaker is asking for comments and opinions on proposals. There is no disagreement or contention evident in the passage.


Passage number 294.
MR. MORRIS. I have been giving a lot of thought to thisafter reading that horrendous Bluebook, and it seems to me that theguidelines for next year ought to meet three criteria. First, I thinkwe have to keep it simple. And having failed [unintelligible], thatmeans immediately that we should not have guidelines for M2 because Idon't think there's any way in the world that we can explain to asimple-minded monetarist press a 2-1/2 percentage point increase [fromthe tentative range] in the guideline for 1981.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is expressing his own thoughts and opinions about the guidelines for the next year. He is not addressing any opposing viewpoints or engaging in any argument or debate.


Passage number 295.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just interject. I don't know howthe staff arrived at that conclusion. I have not seen the analysis,and I'd want to look at it fairly closely; I think we all would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their lack of knowledge and states that they would like to review the analysis before forming an opinion.


Passage number 296.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I think it's because there is a largecyclical component in M2 because of its interest-rate sensitivity.And that does not make it very suitable for [use as] a long-termguideline. Would you agree with me on that, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is expressing his opinion and asking for agreement from Steve.


Passage number 297.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a cyclical element in Ml, as wesaw this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that there is a cyclical element in Ml, based on what was seen in the current year. There is no contention or disagreement present in the statement.


Passage number 298.
MR. AXILROD. I'm not so certain, President Morris, althoughof course I would tend to prefer a narrower M to a broader M becauseof [the former's] closer relation to income over time. But if I mightjust take a minute on your question, Mr. Chairman, we came to theconclusion in two ways that intersect. One relates to the public'sdemand for assets based in part on this year's experience and how wethink the public would respond, given our projection of interest ratesnext year. And secondly, going through the credit picture we asked:Would the credit demands expected to come out of that nominal GNP andthis conservative allowance for growth of thrifts and banks satisfythem. They need [how] much in deposits in order to meet these kindsof demands. It was the intersection of those two strands of analysis[that led to our conclusion].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own opinion and analysis on the matter, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 299.
MR. MORRIS. But isn't it true that in the first year of abusiness expansion M2 typically grows much faster relative to M1 thanin boom periods.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of information about the growth of M2 and M1 during different periods of business expansion.


Passage number 300.
-30-12/18-19/80MR. AXILROD. Yes, but that was in a period, PresidentMorris, when interest rates were generally low and deposits weresubject to ceiling rates. We have a very different situation now,with most of the movement in M2 and M3 occurring through these moneymarket accounts and saving certificates that are at market rates. Sothere's more of an institutional volition in them than there used tobe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 301.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me say that this is going tobear more analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that further analysis is needed.


Passage number 302.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's right" is simply confirming what was previously mentioned.


Passage number 303.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When we are going through it, I don'tthink we are aware of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The statement expresses a personal belief or perspective without any conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 304.
MR. MORRIS. Well, that is my first principle anyway, Mr.Chairman: Keep it simple.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Morris is expressing his personal opinion about keeping things simple. There is no evidence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 305.
MR. PARTEE. Because M-1A and M-1B are not good, we are goingto throw out M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, simply states that M-1A and M-1B are not good, and suggests throwing out M2 as a result. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 306.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I'll explain. The second criterion isthat the '81 guidelines have to be lower than the '80 guidelines, ifonly marginally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is simply explaining the second criterion.


Passage number 307.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Lower than the guidelines or theperformance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The mentioned term "lower than the guidelines or the performance" is not further elaborated upon, making it unclear if there is any disagreement.


Passage number 308.
MR. MORRIS. Lower than the guidelines. And third, we haveto have something that we have a reasonable shot at hitting.SPEAKER(.). That's true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 309.
MS. TEETERS. You've just wiped out two--SPEAKER(.). That wipes out the whole thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 310.
MR. MORRIS. Those are my three simple criteria. This leadsme to the conclusion that we can only do two things: One, havetargets only for the M1 measures; or alternatively, go to a bankreserves target. And with respect to the M1 measures, I think thetargets should be exclusive of the impact of NOW accounts and weshould explain the divergence later rather than try to put an estimatein the targets initially. We've learned from the 1980 experience todate that we don't have a very good basis for estimating and I thinkwe'd be in a stronger position to explain it later. And particularlybecause one of the M1s is going to be lower and one is going to behigher, it seems to me that the explanation might be easier to makethan otherwise.Now, I'd like to emphasize a point in reference to the NewEngland NOW account experience. [Our Bank is] about to publish anarticle, which is very relevant to this discussion, that shows theinitial impact of the NOW account in New England by states. The storyis, as you wouldn't be surprised to hear, that the rate of penetrationin NOW accounts is a function of the number of institutions thatdecide to offer NOW accounts and the terms upon which they are-31-12/18-19/80offered. In the case of Connecticut and Vermont for example, theyboth got NOW account powers at the same time. At the end of the firstyear, there were about 8 NOW accounts per 100 households inConnecticut and only 4 in Vermont. So the penetration rate inConnecticut was twice the rate of Vermont. In Connecticut, 62 percentof the institutions were offering NOW accounts, but in Vermont only 27percent. In Connecticut, 27 percent of the institutions were offeringfree NOW accounts, and in Vermont no institution was offering a freeNOW account. So here we have a case of two states in New Englandwhose NOW account experience in the first year was very differentdepending on the way in which the institutions decided to go aboutoffering NOW accounts. That is why I don't think the New Englandexperience gives us any basis for estimating how rapidly NOW accountsare going to grow nationally; the differences within New England wereenormous. And that's why I think we ought to use the Mls as targets,exclusive of the NOW account effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an explanation and analysis of the New England NOW account experience and the suggestion to use M1 measures as targets.


Passage number 311.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Part of the trouble is that we can citethat as a target but it's an abstract notion; and we will not know,even when we get the data, what the adjustment should be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing a challenge or difficulty in determining the appropriate adjustment.


Passage number 312.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, but that gives us an element of strength,Mr. Chairman, because nobody else knows it either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement with the statement that nobody else knows the information, which provides an advantage.


Passage number 313.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, but one can argue quiterealistically that we haven't got much of a target because nobodyknows what it is, including us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any specific disagreements or contentions. It is expressing uncertainty about the target and suggesting that no one, including the speaker themselves, knows what it is.


Passage number 314.
 Now that may be an advantage, but Idon't think we ought to give--MR. MORRIS. Alternatively, it seems to me the only thing wecan do is to go to a reserve growth target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents two different perspectives or options, but there is no conflict or argument between them.


Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think that helps either, ifI may say so. [I don't know] how long this [conversion to NOWs] isgoing to take, but the reserve growth is just an image of the Ms. Andto the extent the Ms are distorted, the reserves are distorted. Idon't think we can escape the problem. We can make it differentvisually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and presenting their thoughts on the matter but they are not arguing or disagreeing with anyone else.


Passage number 316.
MR. PARTEE. But it does blend M-1A and M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that it combines M-1A and M-1B without any conflicting opinions or arguments mentioned.


Passage number 317.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it blends them in some proportion oftheir actual change, which is subject to all the [uncertainty].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is describing how something blends or combines various elements, including uncertainty. It does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 318.
MR. PARTEE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply affirms that something is right without any opposing statements or conflicting views.


Passage number 319.
MR. MORRIS. I'm not saying these are perfect; I'm sayingthat they are the least bad of the alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging the imperfect nature of the alternatives but asserting that they are the best options available.


Passage number 320.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand that, but let me just take aminute. We have a lot of people to talk yet. What do you see goingon in the economy. What are you trying to accomplish, particularlywhen you say these targets should be tighter. What do you visualize.[The staff says] we're going to have an expansion. Do you want aneconomic expansion. Are we going to affect inflation. What are wegoing to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and seeking information from the staff.


Passage number 321.
-32-12/18-19/80MR. MORRIS. I think we're headed for a flat year. In thefirst quarter, we are going to have a mini-recession and the moneysupply is not going to grow at all. Did you want to get into what weare to do in the [short run].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply sharing his perspective on the potential economic situation in the first quarter.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but I obviously have to decide to windthis up somehow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses the need to make a decision about how to conclude or wrap up the current situation.


Passage number 323.
MR. MORRIS. It's hard to answer that question withoutgetting into the policy for the next four weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply stating that it is difficult to answer the question without discussing the policy for the next four weeks. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 324.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Things overlap, obviously, but looking atthe year as a whole, give us some indication of what you conceive ofas the appropriate strategy of the Federal Reserve and what thatmeans. Let me put it specifically. If you accept the analysis of avery tight money supply figure or if you make a proposal of a moneysupply figure, I would be interested in knowing whether you arewilling to accept the consequences or see as a consequence of thatextremely high interest rates, perhaps higher than we have now. Doyou not mind if we have a recession, all things considered, if that'sthe price we have to pay. Is that what you're talking about or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification on the appropriate strategy of the Federal Reserve, specifically in relation to the money supply figure and its consequences. The speaker mentions the possibility of extremely high interest rates and a potential recession as consequences of a tight money supply figure, and wants to know if the speaker is willing to accept those consequences. This indicates a disagreement or contention over the potential effects of the strategy.


Passage number 325.
MR. MORRIS. I think the implication of even a modestrevision in the Ms, say 1/2 of 1 percent, would be that we would haveto be willing to accept a year of no growth or very little growth inreal terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 326.
MR. RICE. Is this a downward revision from the targets wechose in July or is it a downward revision from the actual moneygrowth we experienced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on whether the downward revision is compared to the targets previously chosen or the actual money growth that was experienced.


Passage number 327.
MR. MORRIS. I would say that we have to establish the '81targets on the basis of the '80 ranges and not on the basis of wherewe happened to end up at year-end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of Mr. Morris's opinion about establishing targets.


Passage number 328.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 329.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the behavior of the economyin '81 is going to be determined more than anything else by whathappens to inflationary expectations. If we can somehow or otherconvince the public that we are dealing effectively with inflation, ortrying to, I think expectations are going to improve and we may haveeven more [growth] than the staff is projecting, although I certainlyagree that we're likely to have a dip in the first part of the year asthe staff is projecting. But I think we'll have more real growth, andI hope less inflation, in the last half. This point is made very wellin paragraph 9 of the Bluebook. And I would like to emphasize that,because to me the key factors in determining the outlook are thepeople's inflationary expectations and how the public views the stanceof Federal Reserve policy. Because I feel so strongly about that, I'mconcerned about the possibility of base drift, although we thought wehad eliminated it when we went to the Humphrey-Hawkins Act and gotaway from the quarterly shifting of targets. I am concerned that thatcould be a factor.As I know all of you noticed as you went through theBluebook, most of it is written as if we would use as our jumping offplace the actual behavior of the aggregates--where they actually ended-33-12/18-19/80up at year-end. And like Frank Morris, I would make a pitch that weshould avoid doing that at this time. My reason, if we use strategyI, just to take an example, [can be seen] in the charts that Idistributed yesterday. I suspect most of you probably don't have thembefore you now, but I have shown the long-run targets for '80 on theleft-hand side of each of those first two charts, in the first casefor M-1A and in the second case for M-1B. We have adjusted thoseranges for the ATS and NOW accounts as we think they actually affectedthose [aggregates] during those years. And then there is a secondcone on each chart, which uses as the end points the end points thatthe Board's staff has shown in strategy I. But, of course, the basewas the actual behavior of the aggregates, which is quite differentfrom what you would see if you drew the cone to the midpoints. Andlike Frank, I think we really ought to eliminate this base drift.So I would suggest that we put the jumping-off place as themidpoint of the targets for 1980, although one could certainly arguethat it might be moved up somewhat so long as we had it within that1980 range. I worry that if we don't do something like that, then ourcritics are going to confront us with pictures like the one I've drawnhere, though maybe in a different form. And I think that could berather damaging to our credibility. So far as setting the '81targets, if you look at charts 3 and 4, you'll see what I would liketo see us do. I think the most reasonable thing is to reiterate thetargets that we selected in July, lowering these effective rates by1/2 percentage point in both cases. The cones on the right show whatwe would have in the case of both M-1A and M-1B if we came down 1/2percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and concerns about inflation, inflationary expectations, and Federal Reserve policy. They also suggest a specific course of action for setting targets for the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 330.
MR. WALLICH. Excuse me, Bob. I don't understand the conceptunderlying the midpoint base. That's not really the route on whichwe'd be going. You'd have the aggregates expanding rather fast from alevel at which they are not. So they would not actually, with respectto the future, expand that fast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich expresses his confusion and disagreement with the concept of the midpoint base. He argues that the aggregates would not actually expand as fast as suggested.


Passage number 331.
MS. TEETERS. But if you look at chart 3, Henry, where themoney supply is held flat into next year, we are hitting the midpointof that range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the money supply and its impact.


Passage number 332.
MR. BLACK. Yes, I think [I could] address it a littlebetter, Henry, when we get to the short-run part, which I was notgoing to go into here. But we obviously have to take off from wherewe are. And what I would suggest for the short run is that we try tomove the aggregates back somewhere within those ranges, or whateverranges we agree on, which as Nancy points out does not involve muchgrowth for the first three quarters of the year. But if you go backand look over a longer period of time, back to August and September,it involves ironing out the excess. Viewed in reference to thatlonger period of time, that's not a very restrictive policyparticularly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is suggesting a course of action and acknowledging the need to address the short-run part. Other individuals mentioned in the passage are not expressing any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 333.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you mean it's not a veryrestrictive policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply asking for clarification or further explanation of a policy.


Passage number 334.
 If I may pursue that, on your own chart themidpoint of the new range you have--I don't know what that growth rateis, but it looks like 2 percent a year or something--MR. BLACK. Well, it's even less. It depends on how we comeback; it can even be negative, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on a specific point (the growth rate) and the other person provides the information requested.


Passage number 335.
 But what I was saying---34-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, given what has happened, all I cansay is that we have had no real growth in GNP this year. We've had amoney supply increase of 6 percent or thereabouts and we have ended upwith 20 percent interest rates. What interest rates are you going toend up with, Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating facts and expressing their perspective on the situation.


Passage number 336.
MR. BLACK. Well, I think we're in a downturn right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. It only states Mr. Black's personal opinion about the current economic situation, without any conflicting views or arguments being presented.


Passage number 337.
 AndI would guess--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not talking about the next threemonths; I'm talking about the year as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply describing a timeframe for discussion.


Passage number 338.
MR. BLACK. Well, I think one of the main reasons rates arehigh is because we have put out what the public perceives as too muchmoney. If we show that we are going to deal with that, I would expectinterest rates to come down largely in response to the elimination ofpart of the expectations effect problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating their opinion about the reasons for high interest rates and what they expect to happen if certain actions are taken. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 339.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You think that's going to affect thefederal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement or question about the potential impact of an action on the federal funds rate.


Passage number 340.
MR. PARTEE. People won't demand as many federal funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. The statement made by Mr. Partee is presented as a factual statement without any disagreement or opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 341.
MR. BLACK. Yes, I really do. I think that's the main reasonrates are high. But that's certainly a debatable point. In any case,I would recommend that we stick with the ranges we decided on before.And I've shown that in the form of cones on the last two charts. Thatbrings down the effective [growth] rate by 1/2 or 1 percentage point.I think it would be unwise to widen the range as Steve suggested--although I know exactly why he suggested it--because our critics wouldsay we were trying to obfuscate or that we really didn't have anytargets in mind. And, of course, we do have targets in mind, but wedon't know exactly what the figures are; I realize that. I'msympathetic with that and also with what Steve perceives as a greatdeal of difficulty in explaining this NOW account effect to the publicor even to those of us in this room. I find myself getting confusedevery time I go around on it. So when we announce the targets wedecide on, [I would] express them in terms of effective rates as thestaff is advocating and as Frank advocated. I would differ a littlefrom Frank in that I'd put out a statement at the time saying that itlooks to us as if the actual figures for M-1B might run, say, 2percentage points higher. And if [the adjustments turn out] asexpected, then the ranges we are setting for M-1B really ought to betilted up about 2 percentage points or whatever the incoming evidencesuggests. And similarly, in the case of M-1A we would suggest thatthe rates might come in around 4 percentage points [lower]. If wedon't say something like that, the people who are trying to track whatwe are doing on a week-to-week basis--and I'm talking aboutprofessionals here to a large extent--are going to see incomingfigures that are affected to whatever extent they will be by the NOWaccounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, disagrees with Steve's suggestion to widen the range and argues that it would be unwise. He also acknowledges the difficulty in explaining the NOW account effect and differs from Frank's approach by suggesting that they should announce the targets and express them in terms of effective rates.


Passage number 342.
 And if they try to plot those figures in cones or what haveyou that haven't been adjusted for what these likely [NOW] effectsare, then they're going to reach incorrect conclusions about--MR. MORRIS. Well, that's the advantage of my proposalbecause one is going to be low and one is going to be high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is explaining the advantage of his proposal, which suggests that there are different possible outcomes, one low and one high.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 343.
-35-12/18-19/80MR. BLACK. I understand that. But I'd favor being a littlemore open than you suggested, although when we are so confused herethere's certainly some argument for perhaps not being that open. ButI do think the data will be misinterpreted unless we at least makesome mention of that, as we've always done. Mr Chairman, when youtestified on this, you said that we would have to adjust these data.And I believe we ought to say it even a little more strongly than wehave in the past. People are going to be tracking them and thefigures are not going to look like our targets--even assuming we getperfect success--unless we have told them something about how thetargets have to be adjusted. It's going to be confusing as the devil.I'm under no illusions that it will be simple, but I just don't seeany alternative to doing that sort of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, expresses a different opinion than the person he is addressing. He suggests being more open about the data and mentioning the need for adjustments, while the other person might be hesitant to do so.


Passage number 344.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage you provided is incomplete and does not contain any information or statements to assess whether there is contention or disagreement. Please provide a complete passage or statement for further analysis.


Passage number 345.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I'm going to address my briefremarks to the year 1981 in a broader context than usual. And I'mgoing to base my analysis on three fundamental factors that seem clearto me. One is that there has been an unusually strong indication thatthe public as a whole places inflation at the top of its list ofpriorities requiring attack by the government, by agencies such asours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Roos and there is no indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 346.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interject a comment, myperspective may be somewhat different. I am impressed by the numberof comments I hear along the lines of: "If this is what dealing withinflation means, I'd rather have inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as the speaker is simply expressing their perspective on the topic of dealing with inflation.


Passage number 347.
"MR. ROOS. Well, I don't disagree with you. But I brought aletter that I received last week from a builder in our area. The gistof it was: "I'm going down the tubes; I'm going broke. But please,Mr. Roos, express to your colleagues my hope and desire, in spite ofmy personal anguish, that you stick to your guns because until weresolve the fundamental problems, we are going to have a repetition ofthis periodically."The second factor that I recognize is that there is anenormous degree of disillusionment about the ability of the FederalReserve to act responsibly under these circumstances. I don't basethat merely on cocktail party or locker room conversation. When theSt. Louis Democrat, which is an ultra-conservative newspaper, and thePost Dispatch, which is a liberal newspaper in our area, botheditorialized that perhaps we all ought to be impeached, I think thereis a degree of disillusionment with us that hasn't existed for sometime.The third factor that I would inject into my analysis is thefact that, fortunately, we are no longer the only game in town in thatthe incoming Administration appears to be willing to base its policyon tough measures, if necessary, to deal with inflation. So we won'tbe the sole recipients of any dissatisfaction that might occur withsome rather bitter medicine that may be needed. I think the issue wehave to address, as you very clearly set before us Mr. Chairman, is:Are we willing to tolerate--and in fact contribute to--a certainamount of further economic distress in the months and the year aheadif that is necessary to break the back of inflation. And I would sayyes. If these are the choices we have, I would opt for gritting our-36-12/18-19/80teeth and being willing to support a monetary policy that might bringeven greater pain than presently exists if that is necessary to getover the hump and to restore some long-range tranquility, if possible,to our economy by reducing inflation.Specifically, I would recommend a policy of gradual reductionin the rate of growth of money based on our announced targets of lastyear. I'd reduce those targets by maybe 1/2 percentage point thisyear and say we are going to persist with this for several years tocome, enunciating this in simple yet forthright terms. And I'd saythat it might cause further trouble but we are willing to do this inorder to meet the longer-term objective of reducing inflation. Indoing this we should concentrate on a few of the Ms or perhaps areserve target. We should make it as simple as possible, even thoughwe will have to state the difficulties involved in projecting theeffect of NOWs on the aggregates. I'm not as despairing as some ofyou seem to be about our ability to explain to the public what we aretrying to do. I think there has been a tradition in the FederalReserve, as in other central banks, to play the game in a rathersecretive and mysterious manner--to put out little signals here andthere, hoping that participants in the financial markets would be ableto reach some conclusions through this less-than-forthright statementof what we are trying to do. I think the greater candor we canexpress, the better we will achieve our purposes. We must do whateveris necessary to improve our ability to achieve our announced targets,and I think that involves a very agonizing reappraisal of ouroperating procedures and operating techniques. I hope that we willtake whatever time is necessary to review how we can improve ourability to achieve the goals we announce because I think ourcredibility depends upon that. Finally, I believe we should make agreater effort to communicate more effectively with the public--tosharpen up our public information techniques, if you will--becausethere is a feeling abroad that we don't always address clearly andcandidly what we are trying to do. A lot of people who arecriticizing us don't understand the issues. I think that can beclarified by making an intelligent and planned effort to communicate,just as any industry or any institution attempts to do from time totime when it's in trouble. All these things are part of achieving animproved future; I think the monkey is very much on our back to faceup to these challenges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 348.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 349.
MR. BALLES. First, it is fairly obvious that the winds ofchange are blowing hard. If the Administration proceeds, for example,with its widely publicized plan--I don't know whether it's a trialballoon or what--for possibly declaring a national economic emergency,we can hardly make firm decisions, and I know you don't intend totoday, on 1981 targets. We don't know what steps that plan mightinvolve. I suspect we will know a lot more when we reassemble inFebruary about what lies ahead in terms of other parts of economicpolicy of the new Administration.My comments first on the near-term outlook: I suspect wehave already loosened some powerful potions of restraint; and I wouldexpect a mild downturn in the first half of 1981, as does the Boardstaff. Our staff does as well, although we are not quite aspessimistic in terms of the decline in real GNP as is the Board staff.-37-12/18-19/80But I suspect we are in for a decline and that it's too late to avoidit. One thing, unfortunately, that we didn't see in the downturnearlier this year was any progress at all on the inflation front. Andthat has to be a source of great concern. Hopefully, as has alreadybeen expressed, we won't be the only game in town as we move into1981. It could strengthen our hand somewhat if we got some betterperformance on the fiscal side.Moving to the various options that are open on which M tolook at, this is a real horse and rabbit stew, and I don't have anymagic answers. But I do have some thoughts on which are the leastundesirable, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions, but there is no disagreement with any other party.


Passage number 350.
MR. SCHULTZ. Which is the horse and which is the rabbit.That's what we need from you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz is simply asking for clarification or identification of something, without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 351.
MR. BALLES. I'll give you the conclusion and then thesupporting arguments. All things considered, I would look mostly toM-1B. The reason is that I think it's going to be less sensitive tothe shifts out of demand and savings deposits than M-1A. When we lookat the New England experience, we find that in the aggregate--this maynot be true case by case, as Frank has pointed out--that about two-thirds of the funds going into NOW accounts came from demand depositsand one-third came from savings. On the basis of the national ATSexperience, today it appears that about three-fourths came out ofdemand and one-fourth out of savings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents information and personal opinion without any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 352.
 Based on some work we have beendoing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you conclude that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrase "Based on some work we have been doing," which implies that there might be conflicting opinions or findings.


Passage number 353.
MR. BALLES. If you are talking about the national ATSexperience, that's from the study we have done in our shop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply providing information about a study that has been conducted. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 354.
MR. PARTEE. Of the experience in California or the wholecountry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply mentioning two different possible options - the experience in California and the whole country - without expressing any disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 355.
MR. BALLES. The whole country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It appears to be a straightforward statement or response from Mr. Balles.


Passage number 356.
MR. PARTEE. That seems different from the figures we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing that the figures mentioned differ from the ones they have.


Passage number 357.
MR. BALLES. Yes, it does. It will. We'll be glad to sharehow we got there. I don't have the time to get into the details now,but that's the way it looks to us. We've also have been doing somework with demand for money equations based on data that go through1979, which we are also about to circulate to the staff of the Boardand the Reserve Banks. And it looks to us as if the split will bemore like 9/10ths out of demand and 1/10th out of savings. Theseupdated money demand equations give considerably different resultsthan the ones that have been used heretofore by the Board staff. Andwe'd be anxious to share the technical evidence with you and get yourjudgments on it.In any event, based on what I have seen so far, I'm leaningpretty strongly toward the view that M-1B is going to be more reliableby a considerable margin than M-1A. By the same token and for thesame reason that Frank stated, I am very suspicious about placing muchreliance on M2. The big jump shown in the [M2] range in the Bluebookapparently Steve has based on what is expected to happen to interest-38-12/18-19/80rates in 1981; at least that is my guess. And, of course, what willin fact happen to interest rates is highly conjectural at this point.I'm afraid we're in a situation where, with this big expansion we havehad in the content of M2, that aggregate is going to be very interestsensitive. In the days when we had the old M2, some of you may recallthat I argued quite strongly on a number of occasions that M2 was asuperior target to M1. I can no longer say that because of theinterest sensitivity we have in the new M2; that's because it nowincludes money market mutual funds, for example. Now, with regard tothe ATS and NOW account issue, I don't think that source ofuncertainty is as serious as some might believe, and I would come outpretty much where Frank did. We can monitor the actual growth of theNOW accounts. We can set ranges, which I think is what he wassuggesting. And I believe that's one of the options set forth in theBluebook--that we abstract from the NOW account growth and thenmonitor the month-to-month developments in NOWs. We could set thetarget within the range [for the year] based on incoming evidence onhow NOWs are actually growing in practice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 358.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to repeat: [The actual number] isnot going to tell you, from anything I know, where the money is comingfrom. There is no way we can know. We can make guesses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 359.
MR. BALLES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 360.
 I'm not sure that we couldn't ask forinformation from a sample of banks, for example--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will ask. According to the ones we'vetalked to, the most they can tell us, if they tell us accurately, isthat they understand they have a frequency distribution ranging from10 percent to 90 percent out of transactions balances, which makes mea little suspicious about what data we are getting. The most they cantell us is where the check came from to establish the account. Thatdoesn't tell us what the ultimate substitution is. It may give us aclue, but I am very suspicious when those results come in over such awide range as they do. As I understand it, they have made an estimateof 2/3rds from the sample of banks that literally ranged from 10percent to 90 percent in one direction or another; the arithmeticaverage came out to around 2/3rds on the initial deposit. But that isnot a statistic which fills me with enormous confidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage demonstrates disagreement or contention. The speaker expresses suspicion about the data and lack of confidence in the statistic provided by the sample of banks.


Passage number 361.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage related to Mr. Morris.


Passage number 362.
 That's a great quality, Paul, that no one cantell--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No one else can tell either. I fullyagree with that. Nobody else can tell any better than we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage expresses agreement and understanding among the speakers. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 363.
MR. BALLES. Well, Paul, it's better than nothing. And thealternative is nothing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers seem to agree that having something is better than having nothing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 364.
MS. TEETERS. Isn't there another [option] that will reduce[the uncertainty]. If we took as our target M-1B plus savings, thatwould cover most of the sources we think the funds are coming from.It would be a new concept in some ways, but it's also the one behindwhich we put reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker suggests another option that will reduce uncertainty and introduces the concept of using M-1B plus savings as a target. This implies a potential disagreement or contention with the current approach or suggestion being discussed.


Passage number 365.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. The logic of that is impeccable, butthe only trouble is that there are a lot of independent influences on-39-12/18-19/80savings deposits that make them unstable. If it weren't for that,then we'd have a fairly easy answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a disagreement by acknowledging the impeccable logic behind a certain idea but highlighting the existence of other factors that complicate the situation.


Passage number 366.
MS. TEETERS. How unstable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage as it simply states Ms. Teeters' name and a descriptor ("unstable") without any conflicting or contrasting ideas.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Pretty unstable. Savings deposits havebeen going up and down a helluva lot in the past year. If thatweren't going to be unstable, then I think you'd have a good answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is stating a fact about savings deposits going up and down in the past year. It is not expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 368.
MR. AXILROD. May I make a clarifying comment on M2, Mr.Chairman, extending that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 369.
MR. BALLES. Yes, please do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking the person to proceed with whatever action they were about to take.


Passage number 370.
MR. AXILROD. Since about the middle of last year or longer,we have been projecting a much higher M2 growth than the Committee hasbeen targeting, consistent with the M1 growth and what we expected innominal GNP. So this is a sudden change from what the staff has beenindicating is likely to happen to M2. And on the question of interestsensitivity--though it's a phrase that means different things todifferent people--from our point of view, M2 in a sense has lessinterest sensitivity without fixed ceilings on interest rates. [When]ceiling rates disappear, institutions can adjust to the market. Asmarket rates go up, we are not seeing a substantial reduction in flowsinto those types of deposits; and as market rates go down, we are notseeing a substantial increase in those flows. So interest sensitivityin that sense is lessening. And what we are seeing is that theseflows are more responsive to what the institutions for one reason oranother think they need in order to maintain competitive positions andto meet credit demands. That's essentially what is at the base of ourprojection of a further fairly sizable increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily providing an explanation and analysis of the staff's projection of M2 growth and interest sensitivity.


Passage number 371.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hate to make this even more complicated,but I am afraid it is pretty complicated. What the banks are fearfulof, given a decision to make interest rates on NOW and ATS accountsthe same as those on savings deposits, is that they are going to get amassive shift from savings deposits into ATS and NOW accounts becausefrom the standpoint of the customer there is no disadvantage to it.And the banks don't like it, of course, because their reserverequirement is higher when the customer makes that shift. I don'tknow whether that's going to happen, but we have gotten franticletters from the ABA and many state bankers' associations saying thatthey expect that is just what is going to happen. They are going tohave an enormous exodus from savings deposits into NOW or ATSaccounts. If that happens, these past relationships may be all offbecause we haven't had that [particular] relationship before. Theymay not be, but I just don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily the speaker's personal opinion and uncertainty about the potential consequences of a decision.


Passage number 372.
MS. TEETERS. But if that happens, then M-1B is going tobecome interest sensitive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a possibility or hypothetical situation, without any conflicting opinions or perspectives being expressed.


Passage number 373.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether I'd say interestsensitive, but it's going to skyrocket. Your solution would take careof that if there were no independent influences working on the savingsdeposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing uncertainty and providing a potential solution.


Passage number 374.
MS. TEETERS. But that's true of any of these. It's a matterof going to the one that is the least unstable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Ms. Teeters is expressing her opinion about the stability of different options. There is no contention or disagreement being presented.


Passage number 375.
-40-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it is a numerical expression. Agreeing or disagreeing does not apply in this context.


Passage number 376.
MR. AXILROD. I don't mean to take too much of theCommittee's time, but in response to Governor Teeters, one of my lessfortunate suggestions to the Committee a couple of years ago was tointroduce an aggregate called Ml+ when we had this very problem withATS transfers. That was going to be demand deposits plus savingsdeposits. And that happened to be introduced at a time when savingsdeposits began to drop sharply because market rates were high andsavings deposits were subject to a ceiling rate. So the Committee wasconfronted with a series that was declining very sharply and it wantedit to increase a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 377.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At the present level of market rates thismay be the way to hit the target. Well, we're complicating the jobfor you, Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. It presents a statement about the current market rates and suggests that it may be a solution to achieve the target. Additionally, it acknowledges that the job is being complicated for Mr. Balles. The overall tone is neutral and does not indicate any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 378.
MR. BALLES. Just to wind up my comments, I'm going to beinterested to see if someone else can come up with something betterthan M-1B. And I'd be willing to listen to the arguments for areserve target. Obviously we are choosing among the lesser of evils,and it's going to be a very difficult year. Coming back for one morecomment on the very near term: As I said, I think we have already setloose some powerful forces of restraint and that is obviously showingup in key sectors of the economy like housing and autos. And we'vesimply already missed our announced targets for [1980]. I wouldn'ttake any Draconian action at this time to try to get back within themin a near-term timeframe. In terms of the period immediately ahead, Iwould recommend the specs shown in the Bluebook under alternative Bfor November to March, and I wouldn't let the federal funds rate goany higher than 20 percent, which is where it seems to be right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly a statement of the speaker's thoughts and recommendations.


Passage number 379.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 380.
MR. FORD. To pick up on the criteria questions, I did feelthat Steve's talk highlighted the problems and the complexity ofexplaining this multiple set of targets and, therefore, I stronglyshare Frank's criterion number one, which is that we should narrow thenumber of targets we aim for, preferably to one target. With regardto the volatility of the transfers of funds between the differentcategories, we also have been making some serious efforts to try todetermine in our District how much shifting of funds there will be.And on the subject of the number of institutions offering NOWs, wehave done some stratified samples of thrifts to see how manyinstitutions are offering them, compared to the New Englandexperience. We found in one survey that out of a stratified sample of60 S&Ls, at a minimum 56 are going to offer the account immediatelyfrom day one, out of the box at the turn of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily expressing agreement and sharing of criteria and research findings.


Passage number 381.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you say NOWs, do you mean NOW or ATSaccounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification.


Passage number 382.
MR. FORD. NOWs, or share drafts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions the topic of "NOWs or share drafts" without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 383.
MR. PARTEE. Savings and loans, he said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement by Mr. Partee, and there is no indication of contention or disagreement within the statement itself.


Passage number 384.
MR. FORD. Yes, I'm talking about savings and loans. Wedidn't do the credit unions, although in talking to Jerry last night I-41-12/18-19/80was very interested in what he had to say because we are both comingup with similar feelings in our Districts. That is, given what we seefrom surveys of the thrifts and the amount of pre-emptive advertisingof NOWs, share drafts, and so on, I'm afraid we are going to beoverwhelmed and that the New England experience is likely to be lessrelevant than some of us had thought earlier. We expect to see anaccelerated learning curve on the part of the consumer, whichtherefore highlights everything you have been saying all year long,Paul, about the problem of M-1A versus M-1B. It says to me that wehave to come up with some sort of measure that averages them. So Itend to lean, again on the choice among evils theory, toward somemeasure that averages the two, [perhaps on a] total reserve basis,which Chuck said might be [a blend of the two], recognizing that it,too, has many inadequacies. So, I'd go for the one target approach.I don't think you or anybody else on the face of the earth canpossibly explain all those adjustments, which I agree are relevant,that the staff came up with. We just can't explain all of thoseadjustments for four different targets. We have to pick one thing andtry to explain it and simplify it with regard to how hard to come downon policy.I think by the time we meet in February we may find ourselvesagain worrying about missing all the targets on the down side. If myguess is right about where the markets are going, as John Balles andothers said, we're leaning on so much stringency now that even thoughthe immediate figures still show the economy surging, except onhousing and autos, we are going to pay for this stringency and we'regoing to pay before the next meeting of this Committee. I think it'smore likely that we will see something similar to what we had earlylast year--though I wouldn't say it will be an exact replay--than thatwe will have to worry about the aggregates running away. So for theimmediate future, my feeling is that we can have a reasonable set ofgrowth targets like one of the [alternatives suggested], but I'd honein on one [variable] rather than all of them.And we are likely to find that our problem is that theeconomy will cool off. I don't think there is much we can do about itbetween now and early next year. Whatever is going to happen isalready built into the policy we've been making. Then the questionwill arise next February, if we do get some relief due to a cooling ofthe economy, what we should make of it in terms of setting the year-over-year target. I end up, bottom line, being a little optimistic inthat if the stringency we've put on bites within the next 90 to 120days, bringing many of the numbers down so that we are starting toworry about the numbers being too weak rather than too strong, we maythen have an opportunity to set targets for the whole year to catch upa little on this base drift. That would make us more credible,[particularly if] backed up, hopefully, by a Reagan strategy thatdeals with the other things we have to worry about, like the deficitand so forth, which you have been giving speeches about. So I comeout wanting to pursue a very moderate growth policy for the next 90 to120 days, but narrowing down to one target. I have a slightpreference, amidst all the anxiety about which one to use, for a totalreserve target. That's about where I would leave it at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions, but there is no indication of a disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 386.
-42-12/18-19/80MR. WALLICH. I think we should make every effort to avoid areplay of 1980, with a sharp drop in interest rates which misleadseverybody as to what our policy is, and then probably a replay of whathappened this fall. I don't think there is a way of formingmeaningful expectations in that environment because if we have aweakening of the economy in the first quarter or first half, as Iwould expect, then the aggregates will slow and interest rates willcome down. And a few hundred monetarists in some sectors of the presswill say that we are tightening terribly, but the other 220 millionpeople will perceive this as an easing because they can get creditagain at lower rates and they will say the Fed has given up. So Ithink we have to let the facts speak rather than bank on generatingexpectations. I would say, therefore, that we should undershoot ourtargets, whatever targets we set, if necessary; to do otherwise wouldmean to force in reserves and to push down interest rates sharply.That doesn't mean we shouldn't have some decline in interest rates,just not anything like what we had in 1980. That would also have abeneficial effect as far as the dollar is concerned. The dollarwouldn't make that down-trip to the extent it did and that, in turn,would have some beneficial result with respect to inflation, althoughI think the gains for inflation from a high dollar are not all thatstrong. The reason is that the price of oil is fixed in dollars,unfortunately, and [the value of] the rest of our imports isn't verylarge. I think we should look very closely at interest rates and usethem to monitor the meaning of the aggregates. I have a suspicionthat the way we are doing things now we are getting in our own way bygenerating a cyclical movement in interest rates and monetaryaggregates--so-called instrument instability. And the level ofinterest rates is one way of judging what it is we are really doing--provided, of course, that we look at real interest rates.As to the strategies to follow, I would lean toward 1 or 4.Those are the tight strategies. I'm aware that these are going to bevery different from what the Administration is going to present, boththe current Administration and also very likely the next one. Andthey are very different from what the market thinks about 1981. So wemay have a problem reconciling that in our Humphrey-Hawkinspresentation with what the Administration is proposing, which issomething we have to do under the Humphrey-Hawkins rules.As for the techniques, [accepting] base drift versus startingat the midpoint, I have a sense that we are not likely to get the fullshift in demand that is implied in our projections. We may get some.We may get all, but if we don't, these targets are going to beextraordinarily tight because they are predicated on getting the full3 percentage point shift. Now, tolerating a bit of base drift heremay be an antidote. Otherwise, if we don't get the shift, thestraightforward thing to do--if it weren't so devastating in terms ofexpectations--would be to raise all of our aggregates by a couple ofpercentage points or whatever the shift implies for M-1A and M-1B. Iwould hate to do that. We have here a means of equivocating a little.If we do move from the old base, the last quarter '79 base, it meansthat the present targets would involve slightly higher rates ofgrowth, but not as sharply higher as those in Bob Black's first chart.For instance, M-1A of 3 to 5-1/2 percent would become under thatcalculation 4.3 to 5-1/2 percent; and M-1B instead of 3-1/2 to 6percent would become 5.5 to 6.8 percent. These, I think, arereasonable to tolerate. If we do raise the M2 target, however, then I-43-12/18-19/80would say we don't have that much leeway to tolerate past overshootsand perhaps then we'd better go back to the old base and try to growfrom the midpoint as Bob Black's charts suggest.Again, I think we have to put more weight on interest ratesthan on the aggregates. My preferred aggregate is still M-1B; itconceptually makes the most sense. But it will be looking pretty badand its interpretation will be enormously difficult. I think weshould simultaneously state M-1A as a compromise, but neither inspiresany reliability. M2 inspires little reliability. I've never feltthat was a very good indicator. Bank credit isn't going to be a goodindicator because the share of bank credit in total credit is going tofall drastically, according to the flow of funds analysis, fromsomething like 40 percent of total funds raised to something like 20percent of total funds raised. This has to do with the bunching ofcredit recently at banks as a result of a drop in bond issues and adrop in the use of commercial paper. So bank credit, too, may not bea good indicator. One is left with the idea that we need positivereal interest rates; that idea is gaining ground internationally and Ithink we ought to move in that direction. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. There is disagreement between Mr. Wallich's preferred strategy (1 or 4, which are tight strategies) and what the Administration and the market think about 1981. Additionally, there is disagreement about the use of interest rates as an indicator and the reliability of different monetary aggregates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 387.
MR. FORD. Excuse me, Paul. May I ask one clarificationquestion. Did you say that you would or would not allow the basedrift. It sounded to me as if you said on M-1A and M-1B you wouldallow base drift and on M2 you wouldn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is seeking clarificatio


Passage number 388.
MR. WALLICH. Sorry, I was obscure. I would say that if wedon't raise the M2 target, then I would accept base drift. If weraise the M2 target and make that very conspicuous, then I would havesecond thoughts about accepting the base drift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 389.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 390.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to start withthe premise that for the long-run 1981 target the most attractiveapproach to me is strategy I, which has some implications. And you'veasked that each of us speak to that. I would agree with those who saythat we do have some powerful forces in place, that we are quitelikely at or near the turning point, and that the first quarter willbe a negative figure and perhaps a fairly substantial one. First ofall, that doesn't bother me very much. It seems to me that whathappened in 1980 is that the so-called recession had no impact onprices, and that is an experience that I hope we'll avoid this nexttime through. It seems to me we do need a downturn; we do need awashout. And I would be prepared to do what the Federal Reserve needsto do to accomplish that, having well in mind all of the pain thatcomes from that. As for the alternative, I think there is noalternative at all for the nation in the long term.Secondly, the prospects of hitting the targets under strategyI may be quite good in the first half of the year with this downturnwe have spoken about. And there's another factor that may come intoplay: If indeed the Administration comes out on January 20th or soonthereafter with a program in which there is some fear, if you will, orsome realization by the public that we really mean business, there aretwo possible results. One is that there will be some euphoria and wewon't get the dip that I just predicted. The alternative, and what Ithink is more likely, is that we will see a withdrawal from the market-44-12/18-19/80--something similar to what we saw after the credit controls went intoeffect earlier in 1980. In other words, we will have no problemhitting the targets simply because there will be little or no moneygrowth. Having said that, it seems to me our important task in 1981is not to duplicate the 1980 effort and permit interest rates to drop.Therefore, I would join with Henry Wallich in the belief thatthere will be a time in the first quarter and maybe through the firsthalf when interest rates will be more important to me than thetargets. We can tolerate the lesser money growth that I would expectto happen and manage interest rates on the down side a bit more thanmight be acceptable to those who would want to follow our proceduresstrictly. There have been a couple of comments having to do with basedrift; I would not opt to correct for the base drift. That is to say,I would center the targets for 1981 based upon the projections that weannounced in July of 1980. I would go from that point forward andaccept what happens, hopefully on the down side, and the base driftmight correct itself by our getting some low growth. It seems to methat there is presently a window that the Federal Reserve can movethrough in anticipation of Administration programs coming on to helpus for the first time in the years that I've sat with this Committee.The prospects are that if we adopt strategy I, which incorporates thisrather large downward shift in the demand for money--I don't knowwhether that will occur or not, but it may not need to occur if theseother things come to pass--we will have a window to move through to doour part and we perhaps will have another player on the field to helpus. I would hope that we would take advantage of it and not wash theeconomy out to a very long and deep recession but accept one and dothose things necessary to achieve [our objectives].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 391.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 392.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to make some generalremarks first about the economy and then about long-run strategy.With respect to the economy, it's clear that economic activity isstill lively. That is indicated by the most recent data we've seen onindustrial production, capacity utilization, employment, retail sales,the average workweek, and GNP. We're in a quarter where we expect GNPto increase at a rate in excess of 4 percent. We have seen the latestdata, of course, and they obviously add up to strength, with housingstarts holding up and real disposable income not slipping very much.The major areas where we see weakness are in business capital outlaysand nonresidential construction. Despite this strength in theeconomy, it's difficult to see how this expansion can continue muchlonger in the face of interest rates as high as we are experiencingcurrently. Consumer demand, which has provided the main support tothis expansion, seems unlikely to hold up as inflation continues toplace strains on household budgets. And it's hard to see howhouseholds can continue to increase real spending as real disposableincome slips, particularly at a time when the saving rate is alreadylow. Therefore, I'm inclined to accept the staff forecast as the mostprobable outcome.However, I do have two concerns. The first is that thesaving rate, while low, may go lower as consumers try to maintaintheir living standards. That, of course, would impart continuingstrength to the economy and that strength could possibly continuefurther into 1981 than we currently anticipate. Now, if we have-45-12/18-19/80underestimated the consumers' tenacity, that would suggest thatinflation may become worse and interest rates may have to go higher.And ultimately, we may have in reaction to this a sharper decelerationthan we would like to see. The other concern is that the currentmonetary restraint and the current high interest rates, particularlyif continued longer as I'm sure they will be, may generate unbearablestrains in the business sector. If that continues and becomes severe,rather than a moderate drop in economic activity in the first half of1981 as projected by the staff, we may well see a very sharp declinethat becomes cumulative. And we could find ourselves in or headedtoward a severe recession. And, of course, if that happens, we willsee the kind of thing that Henry fears a great deal: We'll seeinterest rates fall sharply and will probably find ourselves insomething of a replay of 1980.Given all this, I think the best we can hope for is anoutcome that closely approximates the staff's scenario. And I think apolicy should be established which would maximize the likelihood thatwe will get only a moderate contraction or moderate slowdown in 1981.If we adopt a more restrictive policy than is being currently pursued,I think we'll insure that we will get a sharp contraction, which willresult in the downturn and the sharply lower interest rates that we'reconcerned about.With respect to the question of whether we should adjust ourgrowth targets downward from the ranges set in July or from the growthactually experienced in 1980, I think we should move in the latterdirection. We have been through a year when monetary growthcontracted sharply, even declined absolutely, and remained sluggishfor a while and then we've seen explosive growth in money, with growthrising above the upper limits of the targets that were established.Clearly, we don't know as much about money demand as we need to, andthat's an understatement. So it would seem to me a mistake to startwith targets that we already know to be unrealistic and to a degreemis-specified. So I would start with the actual results that we willhave seen in 1980 and shave off [some] from that rate of growth. Iwould like to see actual growth targets that have an upper limitsomewhere around the actual growth rates we experienced from thefourth quarter of '79 to the fourth quarter of '80 and, as I said, Iwould shave off from there toward a desirable midpoint. This wouldbring us somewhere in the vicinity of strategy II. It seems to methat following the strategy I that is suggested in the Bluebook wouldbe much too constraining for the economy. If we are to believe thenumbers, we would be buying some possible credibility with the hope ofinfluencing expectations, with a large sacrifice in real GNP in 1981--nearly a 1 percent decline in GNP--and with no effect on the projectedinflation rates. If we take strategy II, which seems more desirableto me, we get only a 0.2 percent higher inflation rate in [1982] and0.4 percent more in [1983]; and output is 0.4 percent higher by 1983.So I would be more comfortable with strategy II as a means ofachieving a moderate contraction in early or mid-1981 rather thanrisking a more severe recession later on with all the attendantinstability in interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Rice expresses concern about the current state of the economy and offers a different viewpoint than the staff forecast. He suggests that the economy may not be able to continue expanding with high interest rates and inflation placing strain on household budgets. He also raises concerns about the low saving rate and the potential for a severe recession if the current monetary restraint and high interest rates persist. He disagrees with the more restrictive policy being pursued and advocates for a strategy that would result in only a moderate contraction in the economy.


Passage number 393.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 394.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as there is no mention of any conflicting ideas or opposing views. The passage only mentions "Mr. Gramley" without providing any additional information or context.


Passage number 395.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I, too, see signs that theeconomy is catching on to the fact that interest rates are awfully,awfully high and that there's a lot of pain out there. And we aregetting some weakening. I don't see signs of an imminent recession inthe numbers, but I agree with the staff that we are going to get amoderate drop in economic activity in the first quarter and probablyin the second quarter, too. And the outlook for growth in real termsover the whole year is very, very poor. The reason it's poor, Ithink, is basically because we have adopted targets for growth of themonetary aggregates that in a world with 10 percent or so inflation,just don't provide any room for real growth. And I don't think weought to back away from that. That's what we've been trying toachieve with our policy this past year. I'm not at all convinced thatwe should be sure the efforts of the new Administration are, onbalance, going to be anti-inflationary in 1981. They may be or theymay not be. I'm prepared to accept a weak economy. Like severalother people, I want very much to avoid the kind of volatility we hadin 1980. I don't think we can absolve ourselves from someresponsibility for what happened. It wasn't entirely the Fed's faultby any means, but I do think we went way too far in pushing upinterest rates last spring. We would have been much better off if wehad tried to hit our monetary targets over a somewhat longer period.If you think about monetary targetry generally, I think you have tocome to the conclusion that monetary targetry works best when thedemand for money is stable. During the postwar period there hasn'tbeen any period in which we have had greater instability of moneydemand than the years since 1974. And next year, at least withrespect to two of the aggregates, M-1A and M-1B, we simply do not haveenough information about the demand for money to know where [to setthe targets for] those two aggregates. If, for example, one were totake the range we had for M-1A in '80 and subtract 1/2 percentagepoint from it and then take the staff's estimate that the growth of M-1A will be reduced next year by from 1-1/2 to 6-1/2 percentage points,the range for next year that is consistent with that uncertainty wouldbe -3-1/2 to +4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their views and opinions on the economy and monetary policy, but there is no direct contradiction or argument being made.


Passage number 396.
 And we have a reasonable chance of--MR. SCHULTZ. Are you sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of someone interrupting another person mid-sentence.


Passage number 397.
MR. GRAMLEY. About the same chance as we had for hitting therange in 1980.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley simply states that the chance is about the same as it was in 1980.


Passage number 398.
-49-12/18-19/80MR. PARTEE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's right" indicates agreement or confirmation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 399.
MR. GRAMLEY. For M-1B the same exercise would give us arange of 4-1/2 to 9 percent. I think ranges like that are ridiculous.And I think the public would so regard them. Yet if we put out thekind of ranges we have been putting out in the past couple years,there is almost no hope of hitting them. So if we are going tocontinue to play the game of monetary targetry for 1981, we have tofind a monetary aggregate that is not going to be moved around so muchby shifts in ATS and NOW accounts. Now, I see some thinking going inthe other direction in the comments of Governor Wallich, PresidentGuffey, and President Corrigan; and if the whole Committee wants to goin that direction, I would certainly strongly support it. But if wewant to stay with monetary targeting, I think the way to go is witheither M2 or Governor Teeters' suggestion of M-1B plus savingsdeposits. And if you don't like the fact that savings deposits havebeen very volatile, then what you could do to counterbalance thatwould be to add all small time deposits. Then the aggregate would beM-1B plus savings deposits plus small time deposits. The logic therewould be that this year when we have seen very steep declines insavings deposits, we have seen accelerated growth in small timedeposits. And, conversely, when saving deposits have picked up,growth of small time has ceased.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage includes disagreement about the appropriate monetary aggregate to use for monetary targeting. Mr. Gramley expresses his belief that the ranges currently being used are ridiculous and unlikely to be hit. He suggests using either M2 or M-1B plus savings deposits as alternatives, while acknowledging that there is some thinking going in the other direction among other members of the Committee.


Passage number 400.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What have you left out of M2 in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 401.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it leaves out of M2 money market mutualfunds, RPs, overnight RPs, and Euro-dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states what is excluded from M2 money market funds without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 402.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why. I guess I would ask, if you go thatfar, why would you leave those out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrases "I guess" and "if you go that far." These statements indicate that the speaker is expressing doubt or disagreement with the idea of leaving certain things out, suggesting a different perspective or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 403.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'm not sure we should. But if the argument isthat we need something against which reserves are held, this would atleast be a start in that direction. And I would hope as we go intothis year that we take carefully into account Henry's suggestion thatwe think about what real interest rates are. And I hope we try toshoot for monetary targets over a longer period in recognition of thefact that if we try to chase the money supply too closely in the shortrun, we may end up pushing interest rates much further than we wantand much further than is consistent with a fairly stable pattern ofgrowth in economic activity. And, finally, I by all means do not wantto correct for base drift. We ought to start from where we are ratherthan try to make up early on for mistakes that may have been made inthe past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his own thoughts and hopes about monetary policy, without contradicting or opposing any other viewpoints.


Passage number 404.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage, "Governor Schultz," does not provide enough context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a person's name without indicating any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 405.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I'm going to argue that short term weought to look pretty carefully at interest rates and long term weought to get maximum flexibility. We have a very tough situationhere, a real dilemma. We have put the economy through all this agonyand we don't want to [waste] that if possible. On the other hand, asa friend of mine said: You were sending a message to the countryprior to November 4th, but since then there hasn't been anybody thereto receive it. So we do have a little problem about what we're doingat this point in time. It seems to me that the policy of the newAdministration is really critical: the psychology they generate, what-50-12/18-19/80they can do about credit demands to allow the private sector to re-liquify, what long-run program they can come up with that lookscredible on balancing the budget and getting the economy going.Obviously, monetary policy has to do its part. But one good thingabout all this is that we are very effectively proving that monetarypolicy can't do it all. And maybe that is going to have the effect ofgetting us a little more help.But if monetary policy is going to do its part, it seems tome that we've talked so much about reducing the growth of theaggregates to non-inflationary levels over time that we somehow haveto stick to that approach. Everybody looks at that and thinks aboutit and I believe we have to continue on that path. I, too, wouldignore base drift. If we don't start from where we are, we willreally have problems. I see no way to make it work.So far as what we target on, internally maybe we can developsome better single target but externally I would argue for putting alot of targets out there for the simple reason that I haven't heardanybody make a very convincing argument that there's any singleaggregate that is going to work very well. And it seems pretty clearto me that we really don't know how they're going to work. So I'd putout an M-1A and an M-1B, adjusted for the NOWs because I don't see howwe can [operate] if we don't. I don't know what to do with M2 at thispoint, but surely we can find some way to massage that so it doesn'tlook too bad and is consistent. I guess what I'm really arguing forthe long term is flexibility. We don't know what the Administrationis going to do. We don't know what the next month or two is going tobring. We can't have very much confidence in any one of theseaggregates, as I see it. So it seems to me that we ought to bethinking about a family [of targets] and the point of view--the waythat the public looks at this situation and the kind of signal we aregoing to send short term. It's just amazing to me that banks seem tobe willing to pay almost anything for money if they think they cansell [the funds] for more money. There are no institutionalconstraints at all and what we are doing is trying to affect thecredit demands of individuals and businesses out there. It justdoesn't seem to me that putting interest rates any higher at thispoint is going to accomplish very much. So I would argue that weought to look at the level of interest rates at this time and we oughtto put more emphasis perhaps on targeting the funds rate short termthan we might ordinarily do. I am not willing to give up theprocedure that we are using. I think it does make some sense to arguefor heavy emphasis on monetary aggregates over time. But there aretimes when interest rates become very important and ought to receivemore emphasis, and I think now is one of those times.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 406.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a bit of a time dilemma. At therate of speed we are going, we're going to continue this afternoon. Ihaven't any great inclination to speed the meeting up all that muchbecause people have things to say. I think we might as well have acoffee break now and continue after the coffee break and we'll see howfast we go after that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges a time dilemma and suggests having a coffee break to give people a chance to speak before continuing the meeting. The suggestion of having a coffee break shows a willingness to accommodate the needs and opinions of others.


Passage number 407.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply mentions a "coffee break" and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 408.
-51-12/18-19/80MR. WINN. Paul, this morning I feel as if I have beensitting with a group of blind people describing a passing scene andI'm starting to lose confidence in my seeing-eye dog. I would like totry not to repeat what has been said [since I] share many of theirfeelings. But I'll pick up a little on our credibility problem intrying to find how we go from where we are to where we ought to be [interms] of having a realistic target. It seems to me that severalthings might be said on that score. First, we are where we are andthere's no use trying to assume some other basis; we have to go fromwhere we are. But we could aspire still to get back into what wethink would be appropriate target ranges that have some relationshipto what we've decided in the past. The critical issue is the timeperiod that we say it's going to take us to get there. It may not bewithin the year; it may take us longer than that to work in thatdirection. But that at least should be in our statement. Second, weshould recognize that we are dealing with a number of variables here.We tend to concentrate on the Ms. And I think the shifts that Jerrywas talking about have effects on the velocity of money and at leastwe ought to get that more into the conversation, not that weunderstand what's happening on that score. We have price developmentsand we probably should pay a little more attention to some of thesethan we do. For example, I got nervous about commodity marketdevelopments and the speculative activity and the credit being used insome of these areas. Maybe we should be somewhat more vocal on someof these things rather than ignore them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and suggesting that certain things should be considered or discussed more, but they are not in disagreement with anyone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 409.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you mean by that. We shouldn'tpermit speculative loans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "What do you mean by that" suggests a questioning or disagreeing tone, indicating a potential disagreement or misunderstanding. Additionally, the statement "We shouldn't permit speculative loans" expresses a clear opinion or stance, contrasting with the potential viewpoint being questioned.


Passage number 410.
MR. WINN. No, it's not that, but maybe we should takeanother look. We don't have control over the margins in all areas,but I'm not sure those are all proper in this kind of environment. Onthe output side, I have a gut feeling that the year may turn out to bestronger than we're expecting rather than weaker. I say that forseveral reasons. One is that we may have a sharper decline in thefirst part of the year than some of us are expecting. But whatstrikes me is the underlying demand that is building up in a number ofareas, from autos to office space and certainly housing. If attitudeschange and the environment changes, we could have a sharper snapbackin some of these areas than many of us are expecting.So, I would still stay with trying to address our concernabout prices through our targets. I would not try to confuse peopleby shifting, although I recognize all the shortcomings of the presentmeasurements that we have. I would build the targets from where weare, but with regard to what we thought our targets zones would be.And I'd accommodate the concerns of Henry and others in this area;maybe we ought to think not of a symmetrical zone around the medianpoint, but [aim] somewhat on the lower side--perhaps 2/3 below and 1/3above it. That may help us a bit in terms of the kinds of pressuresthat will build externally should the numbers fall short during theearly part of the year. And hopefully doing it that way will avoidsome of the pressures for a very sharp reduction in interest ratesshould the quantities fall short of [our targets]. I'd talk a littleabout our hope to be back in that zone over a period of time. Andthat doesn't have to be fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter; it could besomewhat longer. You will recall, Paul, our visit with some businesspeople [in my District]. I interpreted them as recognizing the pain,-52-12/18-19/80but they didn't really see any other show in the works that would helpus relieve it. While some of them were feeling [the pain], theyweren't suggesting that we remove it. In spite of the outcries we'regetting in other areas, I think we ought to try to balance that with[unintelligible] across the board.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions on the matter.


Passage number 411.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 412.
MR. PARTEE. I've practically forgotten what I was going tosay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee simply states that he has forgotten what he was going to say. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 413.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to wait.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "do you want to wait" is a question that does not necessarily imply contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for a preference or decision.


Passage number 414.
MR. PARTEE. Let me make two points. One is important--perhaps old hat, but important. And that is that we all ought torecognize that in our discussions around this table in the last coupleof years we have greatly shifted [our views about] what we expectmonetary policy to do. Traditionally, what we want to do is to keeppressure off markets so as not to have excessive demand. We werediscussing as recently as a couple of years ago questions of whatconstituted excessive demand and what was full employment. I wellremember that John Balles had a rather elaborate analysis of fullemployment in terms of utilization rates for industry and employmentand unemployment numbers. And it seems to me now we have gone far,far away from that. We no longer care what employment is so long asit's plenty low. We now say that in addition to seeing to it thatmonetary policy doesn't lead to a situation in which demand pressesagainst inflation, we are going to work to reduce inflation throughmonetary policy, [which] increases some costs in the economy. Thathas to be the implication of our policy. In that context, I think weneed to have a view of how weak an economy we are prepared to see overthis one or two or three-year period that we are talking about, as welook at the longer-run outlook. We have a pretty good idea at theextreme of what the economy may be like, because we have an example inBritain. There is a lot of similarity. There's a lot of similarityin the posture of the new Administration and the posture of theThatcher government when it came in. And there may be a lot ofsimilarity in terms of the budgetary results between the two. And yet[see what] it has produced. I think a question that we really oughtto discuss seriously is how deep can we expect and how deep are weprepared to see a recession go. I read in the paper this morning thata good many of the English pubs are in danger of closing because oflack of business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily an observation by Mr. Partee about a shift in views regarding monetary policy and a suggestion to discuss the potential depth of a recession.


Passage number 415.
MR. SCHULTZ. That brought it home to him.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. Instead, it states that something "brought it home to him," suggesting that the individual had a realization or understanding about something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 416.
MR. PARTEE. I was trying to think of a counterpart, Fred,for the United States. Pubs aren't so important here. And I decidedthat it was professional sports. So maybe we'll be in the sameposition the British are when professional sports teams go out ofbusiness. I say that not too lightly because I think it is an areawhere people get a sense of inflation in excess with the multi-milliondollar contracts.As far as I'm concerned, we really ought not to plan a policythat produces less than zero growth. I really don't want to followthe British [model] over a period of time. And zero growth, I'mafraid, is probably associated with a pretty fair sized expansion in-53-12/18-19/80the monetary aggregates. We have this cosmetic, psychological problemwith the aggregates, and I don't know how we can get out of the box.I fully agree with Lyle that there is a great deal of uncertainty hereand to have an equivalent range now means we have to go from -4 to +4percent or something like that. And as a matter of fact, I agree withBill that there is going to be a very big competitive situation in themarket for NOW accounts and that we might well miss on the other side.In thinking about all that, first, I wouldn't want to make upfor the overshoots in the aggregates. If we have to state thisproperly, perhaps the way Emmett has done it is the right way: Tostate that last year the aggregates were a little strong in realterms, abstracting from this NOW account problem, and we certainlywouldn't want them to be any stronger than that; we would like to seea lower rate. That would be one reasonable way of addressing thatproblem. Or, we could--after all there's no particular importance tothe midpoint of the ranges--extend the ranges. We are not so farabove the top end of the ranges and we could say that we have been atthe top end of the ranges and, therefore, to the extent we can get[monetary growth] down to fall more within the ranges, we would dothat. That's a possibility, too, Paul; that might be looked at.This is a preliminary discussion, so I would suggest that asthe staff focuses on this over the next month they take a careful lookat total reserves. I believe there may be some averaging advantage intotal reserves. After all, a good many of these NOW accounts aregoing to come from passbook savings, which has a 3 percent reserverequirement. They are going to go into a 12 percent reserverequirement. But some amounts are going to be coming out of demanddeposits where the effective requirement has been higher than 12percent, I think. In any event, somebody ought to take a look to seewhether the possible range of variation would be somewhat narrower byusing growth rates on total reserves as an approximate target forpolicy. It also associates well with what we say our operatingprocedure is, so it has that advantage. The disadvantage is that itdoesn't mean a damn thing to anybody except those 200 economists thatHenry mentioned. We ought to have a real market implication somehowthat comes from this, assuming that we can't do anything more thanspeak in rather subjective terms about the traditional monetaryaggregates. I'm wondering whether we ought to take another look atwhat we could postulate in terms of a financial number that we wouldlook at in judging the reserve growth along our target path, andwhether it could be credit. Bank credit happens to have been withinthe range during 1980. And maybe bank credit expanded to include theother institutions, so-called institutional credit, is a variable forwhich we could give a quantitative notion of what we think would beappropriate and related to our objectives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the different viewpoints expressed by the speaker. For example, the speaker mentions the potential negative effects of professional sports and the need for policy that produces growth, while also acknowledging uncertainty and the potential for missing targets in the market. Additionally, the speaker suggests different approaches to addressing the issue of monetary growth, including adjusting the ranges or considering alternative financial numbers.


Passage number 417.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's about the same as M3, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The statement is in the form of a question, asking for confirmation or agreement.


Passage number 418.
MR. PARTEE. It is pretty much the same as M3. The reason Iwouldn't go for M3 is that people would say we are just moving toanother monetary aggregate and one that no one has ever paid anyattention to. I think if we talk about credit flows and limitingcredit flows to a reasonable range, we would be talking aboutsomething that people could understand. I don't mean that we wouldn'tsay something subjectively about narrow money and broader money. Butwhen it comes down to it, this is quite within the scope of the-54-12/18-19/80Humphrey-Hawkins Act, which as you remember refers to the targetedrates of increase in "monetary and credit aggregates." So it is quitepossible to do it and still be legal in connection with Humphrey-Hawkins. That is one possible variant I would suggest: To emphasizetotal institutional credit growth, which will be understandable topeople generally and to associate [that with the aggregates]conceptually, as a way of approaching [policy] without followingslavishly the idea of holding to the midpoints of the 1980 ranges.Those were established really a year and half ago now, and I thinkthat [approach] would be a mistake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 419.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Teeters without providing any information or context to suggest there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 420.
MS. TEETERS. Frankly, I don't find any of these strategiesacceptable. We're not getting any decrease in inflation and any oneof them leads to at least a 1 percent increase in unemployment nextyear. And we still have a fairly rapidly growing labor force, withlots of young people and minorities and so forth that won't beaccommodated in that situation. I happen to agree with Chuck: Wereally are choosing how bad we are going to make the economy ratherthan anything that is positive at this point. However, I am alsoimpressed by the 15 percent projected CPI for the first quarter; Iworry about that because last year CPI numbers in that range causedpanic, and rather severe panic, and led finally to putting inemergency credit controls. Given those considerations, I think wehave to choose between a variety of unsatisfactory alternatives. Idon't think we can achieve either alternative I or IV if we're worriedabout our credibility. With the inflationary forces that are loose inthis economy, it is going to be impossible to [achieve] those targets.We might have a chance of achieving strategy II or III; besides, theyare certainly the least damaging in terms of employment and output andwe don't lose anything basically on the inflation rate. So I wouldopt to stay as near as we can [to those].Maybe the best way to handle the public relations problem interms of M-1A and M-1B is simply to extend the current ranges and usethe [explanation] that we're above them and are coming back into them.However, I would lobby strongly for the idea of at least lookingcarefully at M-1B plus savings. If savings are too volatile and ifwhat Jerry worries about happens, savings are all going to move intoM-1B. Then whatever volatility is left will just move into M-1B. Sothat doesn't seem to be a reason for not using that particular[aggregate] at this time. We should at least find something that wecan work on. I would also point out to you that this projectionprobably contains as much as any of us knows about theAdministration's program. It has the $35 billion tax cut; it has whatI think is our own good judgment that they won't get the nondefense[cuts]; and we still get a zero rate of [economic] growth. So I doubtwe are going to get very much stimulus out of the Administration,certainly not over and above this [tax cut].As far as base drift is concerned, I think that's asking toomuch. If we take [off] from the midpoint of the old ranges and try tobring the new ones down from that, that is a restriction on the rateof growth of money supply that we'd never be able to accomplish giventhe way things are going now. And I urge you to be very careful. Wecould create a very, very severe problem at the rates of interest wenow have. Obviously, people are hurting and it's not just [affecting]-55-12/18-19/80automobiles and housing. People can't make decisions with rates thishigh. And I would caution that we should decide how far we're goingto let rates drop, depending on what develops, rather than have somepreconceived idea that they should be kept at a certain levelthroughout the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the strategies presented and argues that none of them are acceptable.


Passage number 421.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is insufficient information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage since it only states "Mr. Solomon," which does not provide any context or content to evaluate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 422.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think we do any service tothe country let alone ourselves if we present long-run targets thatare almost impossible to explain with these screwy numbers, no matterhow much fine print and explanation we give. I feel we would beperfectly justified and would get a reasonable reception if we saidthat we have a year of transition ahead in which there are going to bemajor and unpredictable shifts in NOW and ATS accounts and, therefore,during the year ahead we'll be targeting a broader monetary aggregate.Then we would publish once a month the results of our broaderaggregates. Of course, the components that make up M-1A and M-1B arestill in those published numbers, but we don't have to publish them assuch. People can reconstitute them but there would be a difference inpress treatment. We've examined pretty carefully whether there aresubstitute targets. We looked even at the monetary base; we looked attotal reserves. I, at least, came to the conclusion that thosealternatives were worse than simply targeting a broader aggregate inthis year of transition. I feel also, as Lyle Gramley does, that wedidn't help inflation any by letting interest rates go to suchextremes as we did this year. It doesn't help to go to 20 percent forone or two months and then down to 10 percent for a couple of months.I think we have to pay much more attention to real interest rates andfactor that more into our policy decisions. I also agree with quite afew people that we have to accept the base drift--that the targets fornext year would be incredibly restrictive if we started the new rangefrom the the midpoint [of the 1980 range].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of presenting long-run targets that are difficult to explain with "screwy numbers." They argue that it would be better to target a broader monetary aggregate and publish the results once a month. They also express disagreement with the approach of letting interest rates go to extremes and argue for paying more attention to real interest rates. Additionally, they agree with others that the targets for the next year would be overly restrictive if starting from the midpoint of the 1980 range.


Passage number 423.
MR. PARTEE. From the midpoint, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply confirms that there is agreement ("yes") in regard to the "midpoint" mentioned.


Passage number 424.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I tend to place enormous emphasis onthis problem of communicating something simple, as Frank Morris said,and also targeting something that will enable us to have a bettertrack record this coming year than we had [this year]. I thinktargeting a broader aggregate is easier to defend than what waspresented [in the Bluebook]--coming out with targets for M-1A and M-1Bas well as the broader aggregates. That's all I have to say on thelong range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the speaker's opinion and preference for targeting a broader aggregate.


Passage number 425.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Smoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 426.
MR. SMOOT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's probablyappropriate as the only First Vice President here that I go lastexcept for you. Are there others left.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their position and requesting to speak last.


Passage number 427.
MR. MAYO. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The given passage does not explicitly state any disagreement or contention. It is a simple response to a question without any indication of argument or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 428.
MR. SMOOT. Excuse me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or information that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 429.
MR. MAYO. That's all right. I had my hand up long ago, butI didn't get noticed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo simply states that he had his hand up for a while but was not acknowledged.


Passage number 430.
-56-12/18-19/80MR. SMOOT. I would be in agreement with those who expressedthe view that the 1981 targets have to be lower than the 1980 targets.And I would endorse strategy I. There is a consensus, as I read itand see it in the [documentation], that we have a soft first halfcoming. And as President Ford outlined, that's going to make itpossible to achieve those lower targets for that period and give ussome time to think about the second half. I have heard some[comments] that we should be reluctant to let interest rates declineas rapidly as we did in 1980. However, I haven't heard anyone suggestyet that that may have been all right but perhaps we should have movedmore promptly when the aggregates started to come in very strongly,rather than tolerate as much of the strength as we did and that,therefore, we may have higher interest rates today than we otherwisewould have had. So I would put that on the table for consideration.You mentioned, Mr. Chairman, that you are hearing people say:"If this is what dealing with inflation means, I'd rather haveinflation." I suspect that means: "If this is what dealing withinflation is via monetary policy only, then I'd rather haveinflation." I think that simply indicates the extreme reluctancewithin the economy generally to make the kinds of adjustments that arereally necessary to deal with the inflationary problem that we have.There are less painful ways, I'm sure, to handle this. And there aremore equitable ways. In that regard, everything I have read aboutstrategy conflict--and I think we have some here between monetarypolicy and fiscal policy and between labor union policies and otherpolicies--is that we have to speak as strongly as we can on theresoluteness of the Federal Reserve in this endeavor. When we areinvolved in these strategies of conflict, people have to believe thatwe mean to carry out our stated strategies or certainly we will lose.Finally, two minor points. One is that I would agree withthose who have suggested that we look at some aggregate other thanM-1A or M-1B, or M2, on the order of perhaps an M1-C. I don't endorse[any alternative] wholeheartedly at this point, but it is certainlyworth further staff consideration. My second point is that on ATS andNOW accounts, there is some evidence in New Jersey that about 20percent or maybe a little more of the money that went into NOWs cameout of ATS accounts. We are doing some further work to try tohighlight more of what that was all about. But, of course, to theextent that those kinds of transfers took place, that would have noeffect on M-1B. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 431.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I need more context or a specific passage to analyze the contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 432.
MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, Messrs. Schultz and Corrigan gavequite a bit of my speech, so I can shorten it up. But I must joinvery strongly with what Jerry had to say [about our performance], andmaybe even more strongly than he said it. If our record in meetingthe targets for 1980 is the temperature gauge one is going to use forour success or failure, I think we got a B in the course. The reasonwe didn't get an A is the volatility; I feel very sensitive about thatand agree with what has been said here. But if you look at themonetary aggregates--adjusted for OCDs as I guess we call them now,Steve--we are within 10 percent of our ranges on all four of the Ms.If we got so statistically crazy as to average all of our targetresults with some sort of weighting, we could prove that we werewithin the targets for 1980.-57-12/18-19/80SPEAKER(.). I'd like to see that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Mayo disagrees with Jerry's assessment of their performance, stating that he feels even more strongly about it. However, he agrees with Jerry's point about volatility. There is also disagreement about the interpretation of the monetary aggregates and their relation to the targets for 1980.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 433.
MR. MAYO. You know how statisticians are. Anyway, even ifone acknowledges that we are outside of our ranges, we are lessoutside of our ranges than are I believe most, if not all, of thecountries in the western world that have set up monetary targets. Allthe chips aren't in for this year, but I think that's a fair statementif not a completely accurate statement. Having said that, I agreewith Jerry's point that there are too many apologists around,including I suppose most of us on some occasions when we feel on thedefensive and spend more time pointing out why we didn't do this anddidn't do that and what went wrong than we do explaining the positiveside of this. We didn't have a failing record for 1980 by any stretchof the imagination.Point two is that I share Fred Schultz's question mark aboutthe extent to which we are going to get real relief from our "onlygame in town" syndrome during calendar year 1981, despite the sincereand I think conscientious intentions of a new Administration, whichstill hasn't gotten its act together. I hope it will get its acttogether. We have to do something in terms of a coordinated policybut until they put out their statements in January, there isn't muchmore we can do other than what we are doing today, repeating [thatdesire for a coordinated policy] in discussing the background for ourproblem in February. There is uncertainty in both directions fromprecipitous action by the new Administration, one of which is beingconsidered seriously and obviously has congressional support. Theother is whether they are going to jump in too fast and jeopardize theentire program or whether they will take a more reasoned approach,with all of the adequate staff work that requires, and meld these twothings. We won't know for some time yet.As for the outlook, I think we will have a recession, thoughnot as steep as in the second quarter of 1980, but I fear a littlemore during the first half of 1981 than is implicit in the Greenbook.That may make our [success] in controlling the aggregates seem alittle better, but [that could provide] a false sense of security. Ihope we handle it a bit better despite what I said about the basicadequacy of our record. We have to keep our eye on the ball and digin.I also don't think there is any alternative whatsoever to theconfusing technicalities we--and even more the Chairman--have toexplain on Capitol Hill and to the public next year. There is no potat the end of the rainbow. Even to Nancy's suggestion, of which I amsomewhat enamored, or the suggestion that we go back to reserves orthat we average M-1A and M-1B, or come out with some new M I sayforget it. In terms of our public stance and keeping our eyes on theball within this group there is no simple answer. It's like putting aquestionnaire around this table and asking "If you had only one thingto eat in the next six months, and could have plenty of it, what foodwould you choose." Would it be peas or beef or milk or what.Everybody would say that's a ridiculous questionnaire. Everybodyknows it is necessary to have some balance in one's diet and thatone's excitement over a given type of food is relative to somethingelse. We're trying to get the ideal M and there isn't any ideal M.So let's realize that and, as the British say, just muddle through onwhat we can do. That means a lot of technical confusion and a lot of-58-12/18-19/80public relations confusion. I see no alternative to that. Any way wedo it, it's going to affect at least our statistical credibility,which I think is a little different from our economic credibility.Let's keep those two things in mind.I certainly would not go to the proposal in Bob Black'scharts. That would not only give us great problems in 1981, but is avery dangerous precedent. If that precedent is one we like, let'smake up all of our overshoots for 1975, 1976, 1977, and 1978 while weare at it, which to me would be a reductio ad absurdum. Let's faceit, we have a confessional at the end of the year in this church andwe are going to start a new year. Let's observe it that way. We havejustified or will be justifying what happened in 1980. Let's go onwith 1981 and not try to make it up. I must say that when push comesto shove, as they say, strategy I is okay with me. It maintains apublic position which is quite acceptable; perhaps in some ways it's acowardly "don't rock the boat" approach, but I still believe in it.The differences among the strategies in 1981 and their economiceffects [are minor]; the differences are all within the margin oferror in my book. So let's not take those differences too seriouslyas we try to aim for a simplistic approach as to what [the outcome]might be by 1983. I suppose I should stop there. But I also have aeuphoric goal in that I'd like to see us get rid of the blankety-blankweekly figures; given the state of the world, I guess that's still animpossible goal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are too many apologists and expresses dissatisfaction with the new Administration's lack of action. They also express concern about the recession and the potential negative impact it may have on controlling the aggregates. They also disagree with some proposed solutions, such as going back to reserves or averaging M-1A and M-1B. Additionally, they express disagreement with Bob Black's proposal and advocate for maintaining a public position that is acceptable.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 434.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman, you have the honor, givenyour status of attending your last meeting, of being the next to thelast commentator. I have to reserve the right to comment last formyself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker reserves the right to comment last for themselves, implying that there may be a disagreement or desire to have the final word in the discussion.


Passage number 435.
MR. BAUGHMAN. It seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that it might beappropriate for a lame duck to quack last.SPEAKER(.). No quacks, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Baughman is making a lighthearted suggestion, and the response from the speaker is simply a directive to not make any quacks.


Passage number 436.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Important things first: My answer to BobMayo's question is pecan pie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement about Mr. Baughman's answer to Bob Mayo's question is unrelated and not in conflict with anything else.


Passage number 437.
MR. SCHULTZ. He had no trouble with that one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Schultz had no trouble with a certain thing.


Passage number 438.
MR. BAUGHMAN. As for the economy, it seems to me that theoutlook is for no growth or worse for the United States. Further, asNancy has already alluded to within that framework, the numbers onhousing and autos just chill one's teeth. But I'm inclined to agreewith that as the outlook. With respect to the Southwest, it looks asif things will continue to boom along and for two reasons primarily:the energy situation and the fact that the Southwest apparently willget a break compared with some other parts of the country from defenseexpenditures. We assume they will be increased or, even if they arenot increased significantly, that the shift in their make-up will [bebeneficial to our area].As has been the case for the last several years, the forcesof inflation in the economy seem stronger than the forces ofexpansion. Unless something different is done, we will continue to becompelled to trade off employment and production as we attempt torestrain inflation. And the results of that exercise will not be-59-12/18-19/80particularly satisfying; in fact, the results may well be a continuingacceleration of inflation and a decline in the growth [of economicactivity]. This suggests that the gradualism strategy or the slowpersistent pressure hasn't been working, and I don't see any reason toexpect that the situation will change. Therefore, if the incomingAdministration is inclined to embrace something they call an emergencyphilosophy and propose some program of action under that caption--andto my surprise there is some noise of that around now--I think that isa development that should be encouraged and supported. And hopefully,under that kind of program, we would succeed in getting some restrainton the rate of growth in government spending and a fairly broad arrayof actions to begin to free up the economy and make it somewhat moreflexible than it is. Only by making progress in that area are welikely to be able to get the benefits of monetary and fiscal policythat we'd like to have in the way of a favorable tradeoff among growthand employment and inflation.A suggestion came up in our board of directors meeting lasttime around--and it came from the directors not from the staff--that achange in our targets on the order of a reduction of 1/2 percentagepoint would simply be shrugged off as inconsequential, particularlygiven the ranges of the targets. And they finally wound up adopting aresolution suggesting that I carry their view down here that thetargets should be reduced on the order of 20 to 25 percent for 1981compared to what they were for 1980. There was a good deal ofdiscussion. It was initially suggested that we reduce them by 1-1/2points; but after some discussion they settled on 20 to 25 percent asbeing a preferable characterization. As to the base for the [1981]targets, I would rather present the targets to the Congress and to thepublic using the 1980 base; in other words, I'd avoid appearing toaccept the drift in the base even if that necessitated using largernumbers than if we did accept the base drift. It seems to me thatbase drift has become a pretty sensitive issue and one on which we arelikely to lose if we take on its defense in the public arena.With respect to wider ranges, I can appreciate thestatistical evidence in support of the need for that but, again, apublic proposal of wider ranges is likely to erode our credibility.So I think we would be better off not to widen the ranges even at somefairly high risk of not coming within them. It also seems to me thatwe are almost going to be forced to talk in terms of something morethan the next year if we are going to look credible, particularly ifwe were to take the position of accepting base drift and having ratherwide ranges and then saying we are going to cut our targets by 1/2percentage point. That would be construed as raising rather thanreducing the targets and probably would be construed as abandoning orweakening our resistance against inflation.With respect to [which aggregates to] target, granting allthe [uncertainties] involved, we probably would be best off to try toemphasize M2 because it has less danger built into it for 1981 thanthe alternatives. With respect to the strategies suggested, we prettymuch have to go either with I or IV. And since we have talked enoughabout gradually moving toward non-inflationary monetary growth rates,strategy I is preferable to strategy IV in that respect. If we wereto go to strategy IV, feeling that growth rates of that magnitude for1981 were feasible, then I would think [we'd want] some downwardprogression there. But we need to bear in mind that unless we put-60-12/18-19/80them out, nobody is going to know what our projections are for '82 and'83 and, therefore, we will be read and evaluated on what we put outfor '81. Looking at [the scenarios described in the Bluebook], we'dlook better giving them the whole picture than just the firsttimeframe. I admit I still hold the view that with all theuncertainties involved we can get more mileage out of announcing ourplans and intentions over a longer timeframe than one year, even atthe risk of necessitating revising it later on. Well, for what it'sworth, those are the views of the lame duck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting his own views and opinions without any conflicting viewpoints being mentioned.


Passage number 439.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the wisest decision we have made isnot to arrive at [a conclusion on] these long-term targets andstrategies today. I suspect we might be here for quite a length oftime [if we tried]. Many of the problems have been well exposed, withquite different views toward them. I took a few notes as [thediscussion] went along, so let me try to work my way through thesenotes and make some points that stand out to me.First of all, I think Governor Partee's point is aninteresting one that deserves reiteration: We are in completely newterritory for the Federal Reserve or for economic policy. An implicitassumption that we are just avoiding excess demand is not the presentpolicy. We have been put in a position or have taken the position--wisely or not, but I think probably wisely given the economicconditions--that we are going to do something about inflation maybenot regardless of the state of economic activity but certainly morethan we did before in looking at it in the form of avoiding excessdemand. It is a very important distinction. I also think his commentabout the English experience is worth reiterating. If you want toknow about the difficulties of monetarism, look there. They have agovernment with a 5-year lease on life, totally dedicated to theproposition of monetary restraint as the way to kill inflation andtotally prepared verbally to take the budgetary measures that theythought appropriate to accompany that. They were almost unsuccessfulon the budgetary restraint side, and on the monetary side missed atarget not by 1/2 or 1 percent but by 100 percent from the midpoint ofthe target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing and reiterating points made during a discussion, without expressing their own opinion or indicating any disagreement with the views presented.


Passage number 440.
MR. PARTEE. Although M1 was very good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Partee states that M1 was very good, showing a positive opinion without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 441.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given statement. It is a simple identification of "MR. STERNLIGHT" without any conflicting views or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 442.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say one thing. This market hasbeen affected yesterday and today by rumors about the money supplyfigures. One rumor involved whether the figures were affected by thischange and/or reserve saving games a couple of months ago, which isthe thing that worried me. But we haven't been able to identify it inany significant way and we are not making any revisions on thataccord. [Another rumor is] that there may be a decline in the moneysupply figure this week. I'm very much disturbed that it sounds as ifthere has been some kind of leak. That is just poison in terms of ourwhole posture in these markets and our credibility as an institution,and I am very much disturbed by it. The fact is that we are not goingto make changes but we were intending at least to point out that thereserve figures in November were affected by the changes in thatreserve game. Perhaps it would have been unusual, but maybe we shouldhave made an announcement [earlier] to market people, who haveinquired, that that did have an impact on the reserve figures duringNovember. That itself could have gotten confused with the moneysupply figures earlier. But as for the rumor suddenly appearing abouta decline in the money supply this week, which hasn't been announcedyet, I don't know where it came from. It may have come from no place,but on top of these other developments it looks like a coincidencethat I would be happier not to see. I don't know what else I can say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern and frustration about rumors and leaks affecting the market and the credibility of the institution. They also question the source and validity of the rumor about a decline in the money supply figure.


Passage number 443.
MR. PARTEE. The rumor was heard in the foreign exchangemarket that the decline would be on the order on $10 to $15 billion.It's a wild rumor; it's not necessarily something with any substance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing doubt or skepticism about the rumor, but it is not engaged in a dispute or disagreement with any other viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 444.
MR. BLACK. What is the magnitude of the decline the marketsseem to be expecting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage indicates that there is a decline in the markets, which may imply disagreement or contention among market participants regarding the expected magnitude of this decline.


Passage number 445.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the money supply this week. I don'tknow exactly, but I heard something this morning about a couplebillion dollars. I don't remember whether it's quite that closelyidentified, but it is a decline of some significance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and lack of specific knowledge about the money supply.


Passage number 446.
MR. STERNLIGHT. If I could add one point on that: The rallyof the last couple of days is based on a rumor about the money supplyand also on reports from the incoming Reagan Administration to theeffect of some [likelihood] of a national emergency program, which themarkets seem to be interpreting, for whatever reason, rather bullishlyfor the bond markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents information and observations about the market rally based on rumors and reports.


Passage number 447.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can we have a motion to approve thesetransactions before we forget it.SPEAKER(.). So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker requests a motion to approve the transactions and someone moves to approve them, indicating agreement.


Passage number 448.
-68-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they are approved. AndI would propose, unless the sentiment is the other way, that we have aquick lunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The first sentence states that something is approved "without objection," indicating that there is unanimous agreement. The second sentence proposes having lunch, but specifically mentions that it will only be done if there is no disagreement or if the sentiment is in favor of it.


Passage number 449.
MR. MAYO. Can we try to have it fairly quickly becausechanging airline tickets late in the afternoon is going to be an awfulproblem today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Mayo regarding changing airline tickets.


Passage number 450.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 451.
 So far as I am concerned, we can sit hereif you prefer, but--MR. GUFFEY. I'd just as soon go forward.SPEAKER(.). We'll get finished quicker if we are hungry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply offering the option to sit and eat if the other person prefers, but Mr. Guffey expresses a desire to continue without eating. The speaker acknowledges Mr. Guffey's preference and suggests that they will finish faster if they are hungry.


Passage number 452.
MR. MAYO. That was the Arthur Burns technique.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply mentions "the Arthur Burns technique." There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 453.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER." This is because the passage only mentions the name of a person, without any context or information to suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 454.
 I am perfectly happy to do that if that--MR. MORRIS. Are we going to bring sandwiches in here today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their willingness to do something and then asks a question about bringing sandwiches, which does not suggest disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 455.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we were not going to. We shouldhave, obviously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The use of the word "obviously" suggests that there is a difference of opinion or disagreement about whether they should have done something.


Passage number 456.
MR. MAYO. Well, let's decide quickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that a decision should be made quickly, without any opposing viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 457.
MR. CORRIGAN. Let's keep going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, simply suggests to continue or proceed with an activity.


Passage number 458.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's try to keep going and see whathappens. Let's distribute [this draft]. I looked at it and thelanguage is not perfect. I don't know whether people will even agreewith the concept, but let me go over it and tell you what I am tryingto convey because the language may not be adequate to convey what I amtrying to communicate. The whole thing indicates some sense ofuncertainty about what the figures will mean in the short run, but thefirst sentence is simply designed to say that we are tentativelyproceeding for this first-quarter period in accordance with our[preliminary long-run] plans [announced] before. As I noted, I don'tthink that raises all the issues as to whether the long-term plan isreally the one we want to follow for the year as a whole because ofthis expectation that the money supply may be a little softer in thenear term. The second sentence identifies just what that is. Thereis a practical problem. These [figures] are cited as the midpoint ofthose long-term ranges and M2 is probably going to be higher thanthat. So there is a question of whether we want to leave that as themechanical midpoints of the ranges. The next sentence says that weare not going to give a precise figure for M-1A and M-1B right nowbecause we don't know what the NOW and ATS accounts are going to be.And it says that's the way we will try to conduct ourselves in termsof the specific job of setting forth the reserve path. Then animportant sentence is the next one, which says that we want [ourshort-term targets] to be consistent [with our longer-term targetsfor] next year, but we are not going to be disturbed by a shortfall.That has perhaps some implication that we'd be just as happy if[monetary growth did] fall short of these figures. The reservation isthat we are not going to [push] for a shortfall by tightening themoney market further, but rather that if the shortfall arises in anatmosphere of some relaxation of money market pressures it would be-69-12/18-19/80accepted. It's an acceptance rather than a seeking through aggressivetightening action. The last sentence is more or less standard, butthe numbers are important. I would like a phrase in there indicating"over a period of time" or something like that so it doesn't sound asif these ranges are applied rigidly on a day-to-day basis. That hasalways been the understanding. So, that is the sense of it; otherpeople may have quite different ideas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply one person expressing their thoughts and concerns about a draft document.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 459.
 I'd avoid the term "weeklyaverage;" it sounds rather rigid and we have been over--MR. MAYO. I think it's a good statement, Paul, except forthe next-to-last sentence where it tips our hand that we are expectingsome shortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo disagrees with the next-to-last sentence, suggesting that it reveals too much information about their expectations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 460.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the wording of that sentence isdifficult. This is a little different than the way I had it written,but that proved incomprehensible to Mr. Axilrod. I think my way had alittle less sense that we were expecting [a shortfall]. It was mainlythat [a shortfall would be acceptable] if it proved consistent orsomething like that, though I recognize that's obscure. Just howthat's written is a point of difficulty, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the wording of the sentence is difficult and different from how they initially had it written. They mention that Mr. Axilrod found their version incomprehensible. The speaker expresses their belief that their original version made less sense but still conveyed the idea that a shortfall would be acceptable if consistent. However, they also acknowledge that the way the sentence is currently written is a point of difficulty, indicating potential disagreement or contention regarding the wording.


Passage number 461.
MR. MAYO. I'm sure we need that sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 462.
MR. BALLES. I don't think it tips our hand. It just says ifit happens, it happens and we won't resist it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that a certain action would not reveal any information about their intentions or plans.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 463.
MR. ROOS. I think the last sentence, with the expression ofa narrower fed funds range, could be terribly disturbing to some whomight view it as a signal that indeed we are moving toward greateremphasis even in the short run on targeting on interest rates. If wenarrow the range and set the upper limit at 20 percent--and we areover that now--with a lower limit of 16 percent, I think, that willwave a red flag to those who are suspicious of a possible tendency tomove back to our old procedures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, expresses his concern or disagreement with the idea of narrowing the range of fed funds and setting the upper limit at 20 percent. He believes that this will signal a move towards greater emphasis on targeting interest rates, which he and others may find problematic.


Passage number 464.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you obviously raise an importantpoint. It's a substantive point as to whether we do want to avoidfurther increases in interest rates and also a presentational pointthat even if we do, do we want to say it this way. I don't know whichyou have in mind. As I said, I would put in a softening kind ofphrase such as "are inconsistent with fluctuations in the federalfunds rate in a general range of 16 to 20 percent"--if that's what itis--"taken over a period of time" or something like that to avoid anyimplication that we're going to sit on it on a day-by-day basis,whether it's above or below. But I don't know whether that helps youvery much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there are different considerations being discussed, there is no clear disagreement or contention present in this passage. The speaker is offering their perspective and suggesting a possible alternative approach, but there is no overt disagreement or argument.


Passage number 465.
MR. ROOS. I just don't think the range should be narrowed.I would disagree on the wisdom of narrowing it. From a presentationalpoint of view, I think narrowing it to 4 percentage points from thebroader range that we've come to live with over the past year would beviewed by some as a reversion to the old [procedures].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage states that Mr. Roos disagrees with narrowing the range, but it does not mention any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions. Therefore, there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 466.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, as a point of information, theCommittee at its last meeting established a range of 13 to 17 percent.It was subsequently widened in a special meeting to 13 to 18 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is contention or disagreement. This can be inferred from the phrases "at its last meeting established a range of 13 to 17 percent" and "subsequently widened in a special meeting to 13 to 18 percent." The widening of the range suggests a change or divergence of opinions within the Committee.


Passage number 467.
-70-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we have a recent precedent, in factfrom the last meeting, of 13 to 17 percent. This is a substantiveissue where the Committee has to express its view. I was trying toreflect here what I thought were views on both sides: The view thatwe didn't want to put any more pressure on the market and the view onthe other side that we didn't want the rate to get down too far. So,that's what I ended up with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents different perspectives on the issue of interest rates but does not indicate any disagreement or argument between those perspectives.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 468.
MR. MORRIS. I have a problem with this, Paul, because Ithink we have been in a corn-hog type cycle in monetary policy. Ithas produced the volatility of rates in monetary growth that we haveseen and that we're all disturbed about. Now, some of it isinevitable from the fact that we are trying to impose a strictmonetary guideline on an economy with a very high inflation rate. So,I don't think we can eliminate these cycles, but I think we can dampenthem. But to dampen them we need to act before we get clear evidencethat the economy is accelerating or decelerating. It seems to me theproblems of 1980 were: 1) that we clung to a very tight policy toolong; and 2) that we waited this summer and fall until it was veryclear that the economy was accelerating before we started moving veryvigorously against it. It seems to me we are in a situation now wherewe're beginning to get some evidence that the economy is about to noseover [into recession]. It's showing up in the money supply, in a jumpin initial claims and unemployment compensation, and in projected cut-backs in auto production. We know housing is going down now, eventhough it hasn't shown up yet in starts. If we want to get out ofthis severe corn-hog cycle, we've got to act on the basis of what thedata tell us right now. I would buy this if the fed funds range were14 to 18 percent. In other words, I think we have to move now onrates. If we don't, we will be back in the corn-hog cycle we were induring 1980, it seems to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, believes that the Federal Reserve should act immediately to raise interest rates based on the current data indicating an economic slowdown. However, it is unclear whether other individuals in the conversation share the same view.


Passage number 469.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was wondering where you were going tocome out because your initial comments about the corn-hog cycle seemedto me consistent with the way I view most of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply describes the speaker wondering about the other person's perspective on a topic but does not mention any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 470.
 But you're justsaying--MR. MORRIS. No, because this will mean that the Manager willstay with a 20 percent funds rate until we have had a very long periodof weak monetary growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person speaking is providing an explanation and clarifying their previous statement.


Passage number 471.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't read it quite that way. Itsays the Manager will stay on some reserve path, which is probably--it's a matter of judgment--now very close to being inconsistent withthe present funds rate. I think the funds rate is being held up alittle by psychological [considerations] right now, perhaps by banksfeeling that they don't have such easy access to the discount windowafter some months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing the speaker's own interpretation and analysis of the situation, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement with another point of view.


Passage number 472.
MR. MORRIS. But we're telling the Manager that shortfallsfrom the ranges are acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Morris indicates that the shortfalls from the ranges are acceptable to be communicated to the manager.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 473.
 I don't know how long it would takePeter to move on this, but it could well be a month or two if we havethe--MR. SCHULTZ. What would you want the Manager to do. Youwant him to get that funds rate down to 18 percent now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker and Mr. Schultz seem to have different opinions on how quickly the Manager should lower the funds rate. One suggests it may take a month or two, while the other wants it done immediately.


Passage number 474.
MR. MORRIS. Down to 18 percent, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Down to 18 percent, yes." This statement is just confirming that something has been reduced to 18 percent, without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 475.
-71-12/18-19/80MR. SCHULTZ. Now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage appears to be a mathematical equation and does not contain any statements or arguments that would imply contention or disagreement. It is simply an equation that can be solved.


Passage number 476.
MR. MORRIS. If we want to avoid another cycle like the onewe had in 1980, I think we have to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion about avoiding a certain situation.


Passage number 477.
MR. SCHULTZ. My heavens, I think the effects of that wouldbe terribly dangerous and disruptive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, expresses concern about a potential negative outcome, indicating his personal opinion rather than engaging in a debate or conflicting with others.


Passage number 478.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 479.
 I think the market is anticipating--MR. SCHULTZ. We're going to publish a drop [in the moneysupply this week] and next week we'll publish what looks like anequally big increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 480.
 If we get that rate down to 18 percent now andpublish that increase next week, God only knows what is going to--MR. MORRIS. No, I disagree. The action in the marketplace[suggests that] the market is anticipating that we are going to dosomething like this because they apparently think it's sensible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by Mr. Morris's response of "No, I disagree" to the statement made about the market's anticipation and perception of sensibility.


Passage number 481.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'd go slowly. I don't know whatthey're thinking. There are a lot of misleading rumors in the marketat the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their caution and uncertainty about the current market situation due to misleading rumors.


Passage number 482.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, what is it that is going to tellthe Manager that he is supposed to keep the funds rate closer to theupper end of this 16 to 20 percent range or the lower end. I haveproblems similar to the ones that Frank has on the corn-hog cycle.And if I can be assured as to what is going to lead the Manager tolean toward the lower end--. But this language is so general that Ihave no idea what it is that's going to prompt a movement of the fundsrate toward the lower end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing his uncertainty and lack of understanding about what factors will prompt a movement of the funds rate towards the lower end of the range.


Passage number 483.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, first of all, I don't conceive ofthis language as saying he should be guided by the federal funds ratein the short run. We're going to sit here and establish some moneysupply and reserve paths as we did before. A larger element ofjudgment will be involved, if we really think we can't interpret theseM-1A and M-1B figures very well. But Mr. Axilrod will struggle asbest he can to see whether we're coming in at or below the numberscited [in the draft sentence] above, just the way he does now. And ifthose numbers are coming in lower, then presumably the borrowing totalwill be lowered and the money market [will react].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining how they do not see the language as saying that the person should be guided by the federal funds rate in the short run. They mention that judgment will be involved and that Mr. Axilrod will work to interpret the figures. The passage does not depict any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 484.
MR. WINN. Are these numbers internally consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question asked is simply requesting information about the consistency of the numbers.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 485.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, as I said, that M2 number may notbe. There's a presentational problem. If we put in a higher M2number in the short run, which is consistent with the projection forwhatever that's worth, it also raises a question to the reader of thisa month from now--the way it's constructed--about what we're doingwith the annual ranges. So I don't know what to do with that number;it's a bit of a problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is unsure about what to do with the M2 number and considers it to be a bit of a problem.


Passage number 486.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, because of the expectationaleffects, when will these minutes be published. Will they come out amonth from now irrespective of whether we have a meeting [in January]or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a question from Mr. Balles regarding the publication of minutes. There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 487.
-72-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have we ever faced that problem before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a mathematical expression that can be calculated to find a numerical value. The question at the end is asking if the problem has been encountered before, but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 488.
MR. MAYO. Wouldn't they come out on February 6th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply asks a question without opposing or contradicting any previous statement.


Passage number 489.
MR. ALTMANN. February 6th would be the day, as of now, if wehave our regularly scheduled meeting. If we call a meeting inbetween, it's not a regularly scheduled one, and I suppose we can holdthis until February 6th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Altmann is simply stating the date for a meeting and suggesting that they can wait until February 6th for the meeting to take place.


Passage number 490.
MR. MAYO. That's all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 491.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But if we hold to that schedule, I supposethe expectational effect won't mean much because we will be coming outvery shortly and explaining our targets for the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It presents a statement or opinion regarding the expectational effect of a schedule.


Passage number 492.
MR. BALLES. That's an important consideration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only presents a statement by Mr. Balles without any additional context or reaction from other individuals.


Passage number 493.
MR. ALTMANN. I have reason to believe that we couldn't have[the policy record] prepared in three weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is simply expressing a belief or suspicion held by the speaker, Mr. Altmann.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 494.
MR. MORRIS. Could we ask the Manager, Mr. Chairman, how hewould interpret this directive. Maybe that would help Lyle and Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Maybe that would help Lyle and Larry" suggests that Lyle and Larry have different interpretations or understanding of the directive, which implies a disagreement or lack of clarity in their understanding.


Passage number 495.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, let me ask my question more concretely.You're going to make up a reserve path which is consistent with thislanguage. Will this reserve path be basically the numbers that appearunder alternative B on page 11. I presume it would be. If that's thecase, my question is: Why is it that we are considering changing thefederal funds range from 13 to 19 percent to 16 to 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 496.
MR. AXILROD. I think the easiest way to see it is on page12, Governor Gramley. Just throw away that December 2-1/2 percentrate of growth; we now estimate it at 1-1/4 percent. Look at thepanel that has December '80 to March '81 under alternative B for M-1A;that's constructed right on the midpoint of the tentative range, whichis 4-1/4 percent. As of now we think NOW accounts will subtract 5.6percentage points over the quarter, so the M-1A number in parenthesiswould be -1.4 percent. For M-1B under alternative B, it would be 4.7percent--that's the 4-3/4 percent--and we think NOW accounts would add2-3/4 points. We would try to monitor this as these data come in tosee if we're anywhere near right on that. And we'd construct the pathon that -1-1/4 percent, which is something like -2 percent for Januaryand -1.9 percent for February. That's the path we would construct thereserves on, which is what we'd guess now; and then we'd adjust it asthe data come in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 497.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not a coincidence that this is thesame as alternative B because alternative B assumed a path that is thesame as our tentative annual ranges, which is what this is saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is explaining that there is no coincidence between the two alternatives because they are based on the same assumptions and tentative annual ranges. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 498.
What it adds up to is that we are not disturbed about a shortfall fromthe specified--MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I would be quite disturbed about ashortfall, if the shortfall were not coming from a shift in the amountof funds going out of demand deposits into ATS but a slowdown in theeconomy and if the funds rate were staying up at 20 percent. Giventhe degree of uncertainty about what may be happening, I don't knowhow this Committee can make a decision without giving the Manager a-73-12/18-19/80lot more instructions about what he's to do with the federal fundsrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two different perspectives on the issue without any direct contradiction.


Passage number 499.
 When the numbers we're looking for--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This does not say a shortfall will beaccepted at a 20 percent funds rate. It says a shortfall will beaccepted if money market pressures are easing. It says that quiteexplicitly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply explains what the statement says without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 500.
MR. GRAMLEY. It could back off from 20 to 19-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply presents a possible range of percentages without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 501.
MR. PARTEE. It's a little tough, I know, Paul. It says a"modest reduction." A modest reduction could very well be 16 percenton the funds rate. It seems to me that it has to be a little morestraightforward than you have it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing his thoughts and seeking clarification from Paul.


Passage number 502.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think this is a lot more straightforwardthan I would suggest in the ordinary directive. It is a little moreoperational in that sense. But if you want to give the Managerinstructions that the federal funds rate should be 19 percent nextweek and 18 percent the following week and 16 percent the followingweek, that's a quite different kind of instruction. It's not the waywe have been operating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that giving specific instructions for the federal funds rate is different from their usual operational approach.


Passage number 503.
MR. FORD. Compared to the fed funds ranges in the threealternatives the staff developed, this is narrower than any of them.Why narrow it. I'd be inclined to give more leeway rather than less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is simply expressing a preference for giving more leeway, but it does not indicate any disagreement or argument with the previous statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 504.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the question you have to decide.This is simply designed to reflect the feeling--which I share to asubstantial degree--that we wouldn't like to see the funds rate go upa lot more in view of this hog-corn cycle. But I'm also reflectingthe feeling that a lot of people wouldn't like to see it plunge tooprecipitously if things get a little weak for a while. I don't knowhow to express that in the directive other than here, if it is thefeeling that we want it in the directive. We can presentationally sayone thing in the directive and have an understanding that it's alittle different than that in practice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges their own opinion that they wouldn't like to see the funds rate go up a lot more, but also recognizes that others may not want to see it decrease too quickly. Their struggle to express this in the directive suggests differing opinions and potential conflicts within the group.


Passage number 505.
 That's another way of doingit, but I--MR. FORD. Yes, but we're setting this presumably for threemonths, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging an alternative approach and seeking clarification on the time frame.


Passage number 506.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, it's until the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that something will occur until the next meeting without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 507.
MR. FORD. Oh, just the one month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement by Mr. Ford.


Passage number 508.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's subject to review at the nextmeeting.SPEAKER(.). That's in February.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the subject will be reviewed at the next meeting, which will take place in February.


Passage number 509.
MR. MORRIS. That's a month and a half we are talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact or time frame without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 510.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" simply states the name of a person and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 511.
 Well, if we don't have a January meetingit would be until--MR. ALTMANN. February 3rd.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a potential outcome if there is no January meeting and another person interrupts with the date of the next meeting.


Passage number 512.
-74-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. February 3rd.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply consists of a mathematical expression (equation) and a date. There is no opinion or conflicting information provided.


Passage number 513.
MR. FORD. Yes, but still we're talking about a target thatgoes for at least a quarter or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about a target that lasts for a certain duration.


Passage number 514.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 515.
 The target tentatively goes for a quarter,but the operational--MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unclear


Passage number 516.
 I'd hate to think that within the next quarterwe'd be upset to see the fed funds rate come down to something closeto what any of these--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh no, I think the federal funds rangequite clearly only applies until the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing an opinion about the fed funds rate and the writer's concern about it potentially decreasing in the next quarter.


Passage number 517.
MR. FORD. The lower part of the range I mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Ford indicating that he is referring to the lower part of the range.


Passage number 518.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The history of these federal funds ranges,I will repeat, is that without exception every time we have hit thelimits, they have been changed. Every time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 519.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage regarding "MR. FORD."


Passage number 520.
 So make it a little wider as these alternativessuggest and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that depends upon whether theCommittee wants to take another look at them. That's what we have totell the Desk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing a suggestion and stating that whether or not the committee decides to consider it is up to them.


Passage number 521.
MR. PARTEE. I could accept 15 to 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his willingness to accept a certain range of percentages without any disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 522.
MR. MAYO. I'd say 15 to 21 percent; we are there now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Mayo simply states a percentage without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 523.
MR. PARTEE. No, 21 percent is too high for me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement made by MR. PARTEE expresses his personal opinion or preference that 21 percent is too high for him. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention in the passage as there are no conflicting views or arguments presented.


Passage number 524.
MR. MORRIS. Me, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement agreeing with the speaker's previous statement.


Passage number 525.
MR. CORRIGAN. Steve, this is an unfair question, I suppose,but what is your view as to the level of borrowings that might becompatible with this, say, over the next four weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply asking for Steve's view on the level of borrowings that might be compatible over the next four weeks.


Passage number 526.
MR. AXILROD. Well, for lack of anything else, PresidentCorrigan, I would tend to start out about where we are. And where wehave been is that last week the average was around $1.5 billion andyesterday it was $1.7 billion. So, somewhere around $1.5 or $1.6billion strikes me as a reasonable place to start, lacking any otherindications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating the speaker's point of view and there is no disagreement or contention.


Passage number 527.
MR. CORRIGAN. If there's anything to this view that once weget below $1-1/2 billion or whatever the thought is about thefrictional level of borrowings, the implication then might be that thefunds rate could indeed come down fairly fast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 528.
MR. AXILROD. Well, on that there is a divergence of opinionon the staff. My view, which has proved wrong this week, is that alevel of $1-1/2 billion of borrowing is probably consistent over timewith a lower level of the funds rate than we have had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the phrase "a divergence of opinion on the staff." It suggests that different members of the staff have differing views on the topic being discussed. Additionally, the speaker acknowledges that their view has been proven wrong, indicating disagreement or contradiction in the overall discussion.


Passage number 529.
 Once we getthrough this period---75-12/18-19/80MR. CORRIGAN. Well, that's not inconsistent with what I'msaying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints. It appears to be a continuation of a conversation or discussion where the speaker acknowledges agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 530.
MR. AXILROD. But that isn't certain. And I'm not sure Petershares that view exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod expresses uncertainty about Peters' agreement with his view, suggesting a lack of clarity or alignment rather than direct disagreement.


Passage number 531.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it could well be [the case] in time.Right now I would tend to associate $1-1/2 billion of borrowing withsomething more like the 20 percent upper end of this funds range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 532.
MR. CORRIGAN. Why, Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is addressing someone named Peter, but there are no contradictory or conflicting statements being made.


Passage number 533.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Just because that has been the recentbehavior of banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states the recent behavior of banks without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 534.
 There seems to have been a considerable--whetherit's regional differences--MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but isn't that very recent experience acombination of some banks getting a little discipline at the windowplus this expectational effect that may well be built into the fundsrate right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention. It simply presents an observation and a response without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 535.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It could well be. And I share Steve's viewthat in time we ought to associate $1-1/2 billion of borrowing withsomething a little lower in the funds rate, 17 or 18 percent maybe.But I'm not sure how long this psychologically higher funds rate maylast. I'm not sure we are about to depart from it quite yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there are different perspectives mentioned (Mr. Sternlight's and Steve's), there does not appear to be any explicit contention or disagreement in the passage. Both individuals express uncertainty and acknowledge the possibility of different borrowing and funds rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 536.
MR. CORRIGAN. I can live with a 16 to 20 percent range, butthe real question then becomes under what conditions you would feelcompelled to adjust the nonborrowed path if things worked in thedirection that we are talking about now and the edge came off thefunds rate for whatever reasons--borrowing got at or below thisfrictional level--even in the framework of six weeks. The realquestion is: What would be the attitude toward adjusting that path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker (Mr. Corrigan) is expressing a willingness to accept a range of 16 to 20 percent, but is questioning the conditions under which adjustments to the nonborrowed path would be necessary. This suggests a disagreement or difference of opinion regarding when and how adjustments should be made.


Passage number 537.
MR. ROOS. I think this spotlights a very serious weakness inour present process whereby this Committee very carefully choosesaggregate growth targets and fed funds ranges and then the staff withsome verbal guidance but no official guidance from this Committeemakes the borrowing assumptions. Sometimes the borrowing assumptionsare not consistent with the [monetary aggregates and fed funds]decisions we have made. Now, this may be something we ought todiscuss when we talk about our future operating procedures, but Isense an awful lot of emphasis being placed on the definition ofcertain borrowing assumptions and shifts in those assumptions, whichhave an impact on the fed funds rate and on growth in the aggregates.I don't think the Federal Open Market Committee necessarily makes apolicy judgment in connection with these borrowing assumptions. Iknow we talk about them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing a concern and suggesting that the borrowing assumptions made by the staff may not always be consistent with the decisions made by the committee. The speaker is questioning whether this is something that should be discussed and suggesting that the committee does not necessarily make a policy judgment in connection with these borrowing assumptions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 538.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I tried to bring that to yourattention recently. And that's precisely [the reason for] myrestiveness about sitting there and putting down some money supplyfigure that we have no control over in the short run. It's not a verysatisfactory policy decision. The question comes to: What do we doabout it. And I think the question that this conversation is posingright now--and there may be differences of views and one way ofputting it is that it's related to the borrowing decision--is this:-76-12/18-19/80Are you willing to see the federal funds rate stay around or movehigher than 20 percent on the one end and are you willing to see itstay around or go lower than 16 percent on the other end. We have toget some consensus on that point, and people's views may differ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there may be differences of views and the question being discussed relates to the borrowing decision and the desired federal funds rate. This suggests that there is disagreement among the participants in the conversation about what the appropriate federal funds rate should be.


Passage number 539.
MR. WALLICH. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the directivehas to take account of two contingencies. One is that the economy maycontinue strong; the other is that it may weaken. If it continuesstrong then it needs restraint, and that means a higher funds rate--higher than it is now. If it weakens, it doesn't need much of anincrease in the money supply because interest rates will go downanyhow. Our main concern will be to slow that decline. So I would gofor a higher range on the funds rate than we have here, maybe 17 to 22percent. And I'd go for a low rate of increase in the money supply.I think that meets both contingencies--if the economy weakens or if itremains strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply presenting two potential scenarios and suggesting a course of action for each scenario.


Passage number 540.
MR. PARTEE. In your first case, Henry, if the economyremains strong, the money supply will be above these numbers that arementioned. And, therefore, it will immediately bring to the fore atelephone conference meeting to raise the funds rate. So you needn'tput the limit up to 22 percent. You can just depend on that occurringif the economy is strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is simply stating his opinion and suggesting that there is no need to raise the funds rate to 22 percent if the economy remains strong.


Passage number 541.
MR. WALLICH. Well, we didn't follow a practice like thatthis last time. I'd rather have the number there so that weunderstand what we mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is simply stating his preference for having a number included for clarity.


Passage number 542.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, could I ask the Manager to definehis understanding of this clause "some shortfall from the targetranges would be acceptable in the near term" as consistent with amodest reduction in pressures on money markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris simply asks for clarification or a definition of a specific clause.


Passage number 543.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee has given you what isprobably a more elegant expression of that thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that Governor Partee has provided an eloquent expression of a certain thought.


Passage number 544.
MR. MORRIS. But Peter is going to be running [theoperations].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 545.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Peter hasn't seen this languagebefore, so let me give him the exact language: "Some shortfall fromthe target ranges would be acceptable in the near term if that shoulddevelop in the context of reduced pressures on money markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information and clarifying a point for Peter.


Passage number 546.
"MR. MAYO. That's simpler and more straightforward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Mayo is expressing his opinion and stating that the alternative is simpler and more straightforward.


Passage number 547.
MS. TEETERS. But no shortfall would be permitted in thetarget range in the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is simply stating a fact about the target range in the federal funds rate.


Passage number 548.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, not without a meeting. It dependsupon what we put in. I remind you that every time we've hit one ofthese [constraints], we have removed it, rightly or wrongly. But if Imay say so, I don't think it's up to the Manager to interpret thisnow; it's up to us to tell him what the interpretation should be. Wecould discuss a little more whether [we agree with] Steve's view thatthe federal funds rate would probably come down if with $1.5 billionin borrowing the money supply came in a little weak and the judgmentwas that it was running below this target. But my interpretation of-77-12/18-19/80this is that the Desk would move a little more slowly in reducing theborrowing target under those conditions than if we didn't have thisreservation that says if interest rates are declining. So there wouldbe a reflection in declining interest rates, but that would bemoderated in the rate of speed with which the borrowing level wasreduced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different interpretations and viewpoints, but there isn't any conflict or argument taking place.


Passage number 549.
MR. WALLICH. I think in principle it's a good formulationbecause it says there has to be some compromise when we're not meetingthe target on the aggregates and having a movement in interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing his opinion and acknowledging the need for compromise in certain situations.


Passage number 550.
MR. GRAMLEY. The problem, though, is the numbers that aregoing to be used to make up the reserve aggregates and what thereserve aggregates are going to look like. The M-1A number, dependingon whether or not one takes into account the staff's estimate of NOWaccounts in January, is from -2.1 to 4.0 percent. The number for M-1Bis 4.6 to 7.5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different numerical ranges for the M-1A and M-1B reserve aggregates.


Passage number 551.
 And I think this--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those problems clearly exist, but I'm notsure what your operational point is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges the existence of problems but expresses uncertainty about the other person's specific point or perspective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 552.
MR. GRAMLEY. But that's my whole point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is implying that there is a different point or argument being made.


Passage number 553.
 My whole point is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to give the staff a guidelineon the federal funds rate and say aim at a 19 percent federal fundsrate this week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 554.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would be prepared to do that, although Idon't think the Committee would. But the essence of the argumentsthat were going around the table was that we have to give more weightto broader aggregates. And I think we have to start now. If we don'tstart now, we'll be working with this element of uncertainty--which isgoing to prevail all year long--until such time as we make our longer-run decision. And one way to deal with this operationally would be tosay that particular emphasis will be given to M2 in light of theuncertainty in M-1A and M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the arguments and perspective of Mr. Gramley regarding the weight given to broader aggregates in decision-making.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 555.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't disagree with you [but] weought to discuss what we are talking about for the annual range. Ifyou want to say that this time, we've got to put in a higher numberfor M2, I suspect, if we give any weight at all to the staff forecast.It's on page 13, Lyle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the phrase "I suspect, if we give any weight at all to the staff forecast," which suggests that the speaker has doubts or reservations about increasing the number for M2. The use of the phrase "I don't disagree with you" also implies a difference in opinion.


Passage number 556.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think we ought to face that today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their opinion without any opposition or conflict from others.


Passage number 557.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I implicitly said:Let's not face that today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is just acknowledging that the topic will not be discussed or dealt with on that particular day.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 558.
MR. PARTEE. This says reserves along a path consistent withgrowth of 4-1/4 percent in M-1A and 4-3/4 percent in M-1B. I thinkthat does allow some room for the kind of thing you are talking about;that is a bigger M-1B number because the M-1A number will be smaller.As far as reserves are concerned, it allows us some room. I justdon't think we are prepared to decide what these numbers ought to befor the range of aggregates today. We've just had a long, longdiscussion of it and we are all over the lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I just don't think we are prepared to decide what these numbers ought to be for the range of aggregates today" indicates that there is disagreement among the individuals involved about the appropriate numbers for the aggregates.


Passage number 559.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to be clear, if we accepted thesekinds of numbers with a 20 percent [upper constraint on the funds-78-12/18-19/80rate]--though Henry doesn't want that--I interpret this to mean thatthe borrowing number initially is going to be set, with all theuncertainties that exist, at something that is not thought to beinconsistent with a 20 percent federal funds rate or lower. It is notgoing to be set with the idea that the federal funds rate is going togo above 20 percent. In making the decision today, we are saying thatwe are broadly concerned about 20 percent. Obviously the operationalpeople should reflect that decision in their target. Now, if we wantto change that next week or whenever, we can do it. But talking aboutit right now, this week, that's what we're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of one person's interpretation and understanding of the decision being made.


Passage number 560.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, maybe in view of the time andhunger, I would say I like what you have proposed. The onlyreservation I have about it is the 16 percent on the low side. Ithink we must maintain at least a 4 percent range but I would hate tosee us get to 16 percent in the next two or three weeks or even byFebruary 5th, or whatever the date of the next meeting is, withoutsome consultation and a better view of what is happening in theeconomy. With money growth and what is evident now, I would reallyprefer a consultation, say, at 17 percent, which is consistent withwhat the staff is projecting under the B alternative in the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses a reservation and preference for a higher percentage.


Passage number 561.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't put 16 percent in therewith any thought that it would actually reach that, but who knows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and acknowledging that they did not expect a certain outcome.


Passage number 562.
MR. GUFFEY. What I'm really suggesting is that we adopt thiswith Chuck Partee's amendment to the language in that one sentence. Ithink we should at least consider some consultation if the funds rateis above 20 percent and stays there for any long period of time or ifit drops to 17 percent and looks as if it's going to pass through 17percent to that 16 percent level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a suggestion made by Mr. Guffey regarding a potential amendment to the language in a sentence. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or disagreement among the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 563.
MR. ROOS. I'm as hungry or hungrier than Roger;nevertheless, I would be able to support this only if we don't have anarrow specific numerical range. I would urge instead that we broadenthat fed funds range. If the Chairman at any time feels uncomfortableand wants to set up an interim telephone conference, that's thechair's prerogative. But the tenor of this discussion has implied anawful lot of sentiment to get back on a federal funds rate constraint,and that just ruins my Christmas Eve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing the speaker's hunger and preference for a broad range for fed funds, as well as their concern about the discussion's focus on a specific rate constraint. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage.


Passage number 564.
MR. SCHULTZ. You're celebrating early, Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Larry is celebrating early.


Passage number 565.
MR. PARTEE. I should say on this word change, Larry, thatI'd change the 16 to 15 percent if the Chairman agreed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating that he would change the 16 to 15 percent if the Chairman agreed.


Passage number 566.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you had some other suggested wordchanges anyway. This language could use a little tuning up just inthe sense of smooth reading. It has "consistent" in the firstparagraph twice and Governor Partee suggests making the first one"associated." He puts in a sense of a longer path before the secondconsistent, so it reads: "In the short run the Committee seeksbehavior of reserve aggregates associated with growth...over the firstquarter along a path consistent with" those targets. I had begunchanging it to start the sentence with "Abstracting from the effectsof deposit shifts..." I was looking for whatever language we used inearlier directives when we actually cited the [numbers] here. Thatshould be 1981, of course, in the next sentence. "Beginning in 1981-79-12/18-19/80the discrepancy between growth in M-1A and M-1B is likely to widen toan extent that cannot [be determined]." That, I think, is animprovement in the language. And for the last sentence on the federalfunds rate he put "averaging generally between 15 and 20 percent."Apart from the numbers, "averaging" sounds like averaging over thewhole period. I think that goes a little too far, Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing suggested word changes and providing their own suggestions for improvement.


Passage number 567.
MR. PARTEE. It's a very difficult thing to deal with. Aweekly average is what we have referred to in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a statement without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 568.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That sounds somehow as if it has a littletoo much rigidity. Weekly average is all right with me, but I wouldsay is consistent with a federal funds rate of whatever range we putin "taken over a period of time" or something like that. That conveysthe notion that we are not talking about one or two days but aboutsomething that seems to be persisting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the idea of using a weekly average, but also suggesting a slight modification to convey the idea that the data should be taken over a period of time rather than just a few days. The language used indicates a cooperative tone rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 569.
MR. GUFFEY. Isn't this consistent with what we publish [now]--"generally in the range of" and then we cite the range--for thefederal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey is stating that the current publication is consistent with citing a range for the federal funds rate.


Passage number 570.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that language is somewhat differentthan what we've published before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply acknowledges that the language is different from what has been published before.


Passage number 571.
 It sounded a little more rigidbefore, and that's what I--MR. SCHULTZ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 572.
 Remains within a range of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's in two sentences. It's stuck in as aproviso or understanding "provided that in the period before the nextmeeting the federal funds rate remains within a range...." That, juston the face of it, sounds as if it's a daily thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a condition or provision related to the federal funds rate remaining within a certain range.


Passage number 573.
MR. ALTMANN. It says weekly average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. ALTMANN. It says weekly average" simply points out a fact without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 574.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, it says weekly average. That's how weused weekly average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges the presence of a weekly average and speculates on how it is used.


Passage number 575.
 We can go back to the weekly average, but thatalways sounded a little peculiar to me, in terms of a weekly averagecoming in precisely above or below--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm willing to live with thesubstance of this--the 16 to 20 percent and accepting the shortfall.I am a little concerned that the first sentence, by setting up thefirst-quarter targets as consistent with a kind of annual target, maybe read by the markets as indicating that we are probably going to goahead with the same annual targets that we set tentatively. We wemight correct that impression, which I think is a distinct danger, ifwe simply add to the end of the first sentence "consistent with thetentative annual targets set at its meeting of July 1980, which willbe reviewed...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and concerns about the first-quarter targets and how they may be perceived by the markets. They suggest adding a clarification to avoid any misunderstanding.


Passage number 576.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Will be reviewed." I think that's fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion that the phrase "Will be reviewed" is acceptable.


Passage number 577.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, that helps a lot. Your point is very good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The phrase "Yes, that helps a lot. Your point is very good" indicates agreement and acknowledgment rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 578.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context or information. The passage only provides the name "MR. ROOS" without any accompanying details or statements.


Passage number 579.
 That means we are locking ourselves in in view ofthe---80-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If in fact we don't publish this untilFebruary, there isn't much locking in; but I think what you are sayingis fine. I have no problem with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement and states that they have no problem with the content mentioned.


Passage number 580.
MR. ALTMANN. There's about a 3-week lag between when thiswill be published and your testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 581.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You testify when--February 20th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement simply provides a date without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 582.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without seeing the passage, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 583.
MR. MAYO. There are still two weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage presents a statement without any conflicting opinions or disagreement. It simply states that there are still two weeks remaining without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 584.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 585.
 Yes, there is still some [lag]; this will be outin the market for--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the substantive issues--and they aresubstantive--revolve around the borrowing assumption and theimplications of that for the federal funds rate. And that's what wecan't duck. Before we get to that, I don't know what people thinkabout these [monetary growth] numbers. Somebody may think thesenumbers are too high and we should in fact aim for a significantlylower level--not just accept a shortfall but express it as anobjective. If we do that, it substantially increases the probability,or the possibility anyway, of having to force a higher federal fundsrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in phrases such as "substantive issues," "we can't duck," "what people think," "somebody may think," and "force a higher federal funds rate." These phrases suggest that there are differing opinions on the borrowing assumption and monetary growth numbers, which could lead to disagreement on the appropriate course of action and the need for a higher federal funds rate.


Passage number 586.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me note what my market contactsin New York say. I went out of my way to hear [the views of] a verywide group of people during the last two or three weeks. Even thosewho I might say are the strongest hawks in the tradition of the NewYork market sense are saying: "Don't tighten any further; keep thefunds rate where it is." I don't see that our credibility requires usto do any further tightening. There may be periods of time in whichthe operations will work out so that the funds rate has to be somewhatover 20 percent, in the 20 to 21 percent range, but I gather it'spossible that the rate will subside a little. The language "overtime" is loose enough that if we have to spend a large part of oneweek at 20-1/4 or 20-1/2 percent, that's permissible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing the views of their market contacts in New York and stating that even the strongest proponents of tightening monetary policy are now suggesting that the funds rate should not be tightened further. The speaker also mentions that there may be periods where the funds rate needs to be higher, but overall, there is no disagreement or contention present in this passage.


Passage number 587.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is right. But consistentwith this language and those numbers, which can be changed, we willset a borrowing total that we don't think is inconsistent with what weare saying here. Now, we don't know; so, something else could happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing a potential borrowing total and acknowledges that there is uncertainty in what might actually happen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 588.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "We don't know" implies that there is uncertainty or lack of consensus on a particular topic.


Passage number 589.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we are talking, I would say, about a$1-1/2 billion borrowing level, or maybe a trifle lower, particularlyif next week's money supply comes in low. That probably is consistentwith a federal funds rate of 20 percent or less. It may take a fewdays for that to develop, but that is the implication. Now, if thenext money supply figure or the next two money supply figures came inhigh, there may be some doubt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing potential borrowing levels and the implications of different money supply figures.


Passage number 590.
 At some point we may run into aninconsistency, but that's--MR. FORD. And we'll be calling each other up during theChristmas holidays. To me, Mr. Chairman, your proposal to soften the-81-12/18-19/80language so as to signal the money market watcher that we're notwatching every day for every little glitch of fed funds rate--theaveraging idea or however you want to express it--is a good one.Between that and Governor Partee's idea of making the range 15 to 20percent it may provide enough [flexibility] so that we won't have tobe on the phone with each other all over the country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 591.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me take it up in order and seewhether we have a consensus. The first thing is the numbers wemention. Forgetting about the special problem with M2 for the moment,is citing something like the midpoint of these tentative ranges toohigh, too low, or on the mark in terms of recognizing that presumablywe will have a clause in here that says shortfalls will be accepted.SPEAKER(.). Just right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply discussing the topic and seeking consensus from others.


Passage number 592.
MR. BALLES. Just right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states "Just right" without any opposing viewpoint or conflicting statement.


Passage number 593.
MR. MORRIS. Fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 594.
MR. WALLICH. It's too high to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It's too high to me" suggests that Mr. Wallich disagrees with something, likely a price or value that has been mentioned before.


Passage number 595.
MR. PARTEE. We need to have a show of hands or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the need for a show of hands.


Passage number 596.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.SPEAKER(.). These are the figures for the aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the figures.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 597.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I'll ask another question [later]about the M2 figure. I'm talking about citing a figure which as apoint of departure is the midpoint of these tentative ranges andimplies that that is an acceptable number but shortfalls will beaccepted. We won't be happy about overshoots. How many members ofthe Committee find that a desirable way to go about it. That's not somany.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning the idea of using a midpoint figure as an acceptable number, suggesting that shortfalls will be accepted but overshoots will not be favored. The speaker then asks how many members of the Committee agree with this approach. This implies that there may be differing opinions or debates within the Committee regarding the desirable way to proceed.


Passage number 598.
MR. ALTMANN. It's eight, not counting you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Altman simply states a numerical fact.


Passage number 599.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just linger over what ispartly a presentational problem on M2. The staff tells us this M2figure is too low. Let me make Henry happy. It looks a little funnyif we say "broadly consistent with the tentative ranges" and then citea number that doesn't seem consistent. So, we have a bit of asubstance versus presentation problem here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges a presentational problem regarding the M2 figure and suggests a solution to make it consistent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 600.
MR. PARTEE. We either have to depart from that base or giveup M2 and not state [a number for] it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is presenting two options and implying that the listener must choose one of them. This suggests a conflict or disagreement between the two options.


Passage number 601.
MR. ROOS. What about adding a sentence, if we do have ahigher M2 figure, qualifying it or explaining why that is higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The suggestion to add a sentence is simply a proposal to provide further clarification or explanation.


Passage number 602.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could do that. We could use the basicform of the sentence which says that these are the midpoints that weare aiming for but add a clause at the end of the sentence saying"although it is recognized that M2 for a time may run somewhat higher"or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply suggesting the possibility of using a basic form of the sentence with an added clause.


Passage number 603.
-82-12/18-19/80MR. GUFFEY. It doesn't seem to me that this is something weneed to deal with in this intermeeting period. Your testimony isgoing to come within 10 days [of the publication of this directive].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing an opinion.


Passage number 604.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we can just barely get bywith it this way, even recognizing in substance that it's only one ofthree numbers and so forth. But it is something of a problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker explicitly states that they think they can "just barely get by with it this way," indicating a general agreement or acceptance of the situation. However, they also acknowledge that it is "something of a problem," indicating that there may be some minor concerns or issues. Overall, there is no clear disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 605.
MR. ALTMANN. That thought could be in the policy recordwithout being in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that a thought could be recorded in the policy without being included in the directive.


Passage number 606.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without seeing the actual passage, it is difficult to determine if there is contention or disagreement present. Please provide the passage in question for a more accurate assessment.


Passage number 607.
MR. FORD. You would explain it in any event in yourtestimony, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 
Explanation: The passage does not mention anything related to contention or disagreement. It only states that Mr. Ford would explain something in his testimony.


Passage number 608.
MR. GRAMLEY. Can we instruct the Manager to read 10 percentwhere the 7 percent is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a change or correction to the instructions without any opposition or argumentative tone.


Passage number 609.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Murray is pointing out, which Ithink is fair, that we can mention this point in the policy record.We can say that while it's generally consistent, we recognize that M2for a time may run above [the midpoint]. That's one way to handle it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging what Murray is pointing out and agreeing with their point.


Passage number 610.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that would be better. Wedon't really want to open up this discussion until we talk about it inthe context of the longer run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and suggesting that they should wait to discuss a topic until they consider it within a broader context.


Passage number 611.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That strikes me as a reasonablecompromise, to make sure it's in the policy record but just as ageneral practice to use the midpoint of the ranges here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion on what they perceive as a reasonable compromise.


Passage number 612.
MR. AXILROD. We would construct the path assuming somethinglike 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 613.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is [your estimate] that high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is simply asking for an estimate without expressing any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 614.
MR. PARTEE. [M2] doesn't make much difference in the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that does not involve conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 615.
MR. AXILROD. That's what we have as consistent underalternative B. We have 10 percent for the December-to-March period,which translates to roughly that for January and February. That maybe wrong, but most of those [components] don't have reserves attachedto them anymore, of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's understanding and acknowledgment that the given information may be incorrect.


Passage number 616.
MR. PARTEE. Then your reserve path wouldn't change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 617.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wonder whether it's really going to bethat high. I was looking at this 8-3/4 percent figure you have;that's because you're projecting a low December, I take it. Well,okay. We're saying [the Manager] is not going to be too disturbed ifit's 10 percent in the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity and seeking clarification about the projected percentage and its potential impact on the Manager.


Passage number 618.
 I wonder if it will be that low inDecember; we are talking about the period until the next meeting and--MR. MORRIS. That paragraph on page 5 really is critical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing wonder and suggesting that the paragraph on page 5 is critical.


Passage number 619.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure you are talking about 10percent between now and the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the topic being discussed.


Passage number 620.
-83-12/18-19/80MR. AXILROD. No, that's right. But in constructing a path,January is what we would be putting in there. And I would tend to putin around 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the initial calculation is correct and suggests an additional factor to be considered.


Passage number 621.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What makes you think January is suddenlygoing to jump up if December is very low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 622.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage mentioned.


Passage number 623.
 Well, it may or may not; we have had this--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just have a gut feeling that if Decemberis that low, there isn't a strong basis to think growth is suddenlygoing to jump up to 10 percent in January, even if you're right forthe quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 624.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the only operational question is whatnumber to put in. It's not going to have any real effect on theoperations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and providing an explanation.


Passage number 625.
MR. CORRIGAN. 8-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a number, which does not involve any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 626.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no information or indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage merely mentions "MR. AXILROD" without further details or context, so it cannot be determined if there is any contention or disagreement related to Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 627.
 Whatever number we put in there, because wetend to ignore M2 in the very short run,--MR. FORD. Why argue about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact or stating a question without expressing any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 628.
MR. BALLES. Even for the long run, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or arguments that show contention or disagreement.


Passage number 629.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess what we are implicitly saying isthat we are not going to get too disturbed about something in the 8 to10 percent area, and that will be reflected in the policy record.Otherwise we have to use the exact number. I take it the shortfallidea is incorporated in here. Is that generally acceptable.SEVERAL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining a concept and asking if it is generally acceptable.


Passage number 630.
MR. MORRIS. With the revised language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "revised language" without any indication of differing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 631.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Then we're down to the federal fundsrate range; varying views have been expressed. I listened to bothsides of this and I don't have a better suggestion for you than 16 to20 percent, but let's look at it differently. Let me ask questions.What about the upper end of the range. How much consensus is there on20 percent with language that says "over a period of time" or "weeklyaverage," whichever you prefer. Understand that as before--we havehad two recent examples--we have never let these things be binding,for better or for worse. I'm not saying that's right, but again Icite the historical experience. We have discussed this at frequentintervals recently and we can continue to discuss it if it becomes aproblem. So with all those understandings, to how many is 20 percentacceptable. That does influence where the borrowing figure is put atthe moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different views and asking questions for clarification.


Passage number 632.
MR. GRAMLEY. Does that mean you are going to set theborrowing figure to achieve 20 percent or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement of someone asking for clarification about setting a borrowing figure.


Passage number 633.
MR. MAYO. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 634.
-84-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are thinking of the kind of borrowingfigure that Steve is talking about as consistent with that.SPEAKER(.). Initially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with Steve's idea of borrowing a specific figure.


Passage number 635.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Initially, right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "Initially, right now" does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply implies a transition or a shift in the timeframe being discussed.


Passage number 636.
MR. PARTEE. But if the aggregates are weak, the borrowingfigure will drift down from that and eventually the funds rate wouldcome down.SPEAKER(.). You are going to starve me to death if you keep[talking].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 637.
MR. GRAMLEY. What was his borrowing number again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on a specific number.


Passage number 638.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was $1-1/2 billion, I believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 639.
MR. PARTEE. Probably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a possibility or likelihood.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 640.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would go down if the incoming moneysupply figures are below the present estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be a disagreement or contention regarding the expected moneysupply figures. The use of the phrase "below the present estimates" implies that there may be varying predictions or expectations for the moneysupply figures, which could lead to disagreement.


Passage number 641.
MR. ROOS. I'd like to raise one question along this line.I'd invite the Committee's attention to page 18, which has language wehave used in the past in the last paragraph. It says: "If it appearsduring the period before the next meeting that the constraint on thefederal funds rate is inconsistent with the objective for theexpansion of reserves,..." We are changing the words. In this draftthe wording is: "If it appears likely that the monetary and relatedreserve paths are inconsistent with fluctuations in the fed fundsrate,..." It seems to me that the latest wording places the fed fundsrate as the anchor that will control aggregates behavior, and that'sexactly the opposite, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and suggesting a change in wording.


Passage number 642.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I assure you that you've picked up a pointto which no substance was attached by the author. He has probablywritten it that way without knowing it. But I take it you wouldprefer it to be written as: "If it appears likely during the periodbefore the next meeting that fluctuations in the federal funds rateover the general range of 16 to 20 percent, taken over a period oftime, are inconsistent with the monetary and related reserve paths,the Manager will....
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 643.
"MR. ROOS. I'd feel much more comfortable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own personal feeling, indicating their comfort level.


Passage number 644.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

"Okay" is a simple response that does not express any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 645.
 If you can detect a difference inthat language, I--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Some Fed watchers might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The text simply presents a hypothetical situation ("If you can detect a difference in that language") and mentions that "Some Fed watchers might" have a different perspective or opinion on the matter. However, this statement does not indicate any actual disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 646.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the word "Okay." It is a simple acknowledgment or agreement.


Passage number 647.
MR. ROOS. That's the only thing I've ever discovered on myown, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Roos is expressing a personal opinion or experience rather than engaging in a contention or disagreement with someone else.


Passage number 648.
-85-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me assume the reversal of the languageis made. Do we have we a consensus on 20 percent for the number toput in.SPEAKER(.). It's a majority.SPEAKER(.). It's 7.SPEAKER(.). Can we do it again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are having a discussion about a mathematical calculation and trying to reach a consensus on the number to put in. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 649.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We went through that one. Let me try the16 percent on the bottom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have already gone through a topic or issue and are now moving on to another one.


Passage number 650.
MR. SCHULTZ. You want hands raised on 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Schultz.


Passage number 651.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 1,2,3,4,5,6. Is there a greater numberfor any other number on the bottom, like 15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a sequence of numbers.


Passage number 652.
MR. GRAMLEY. I could vote for 15 percent just as easily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a personal opinion and does not contradict any other viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 653.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're about tied, I guess. Is anybody for15-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that they are tied or equal in some way, and then asking if anyone agrees with a specific percentage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 654.
MR. SCHULTZ. I can accept 15 but I prefer 16 because I'dlike to see us talk about it if the rate gets down to 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz prefers a 16 percent rate while someone else may prefer a 15 percent rate.


Passage number 655.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, we'll talk about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees to discuss a certain topic.


Passage number 656.
MR. SCHULTZ. We have never had a problem on the up side. Iwould see no particular problem on the down side but it would be worthtalking about. There are a lot of things going on. And 16 percentseems to me [a big move]; we have talked about the volatility problem.I think we ought to do some talking at 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their opinion and suggests having a conversation about the topic.


Passage number 657.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, Paul, maybe those of us whoprefer 16 percent would go along with 15 to 20 percent to get a largerconsensus if there were an understanding that when it got down near 16percent we would have a consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 658.
MR. GUFFEY. I would go for consultation at 17 percent. ThenI would join you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the statement. Mr. Guffey is stating his agreement with joining the other party after consulting at a specific percentage.


Passage number 659.
MR. PARTEE. I do believe that the aggregates would have tobe pretty weak for the funds rate to get down in the low end of therange we are talking about. And we would probably want to have atelephone conference call to talk about what is creating the weakaggregates in any event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief and suggesting a telephone conference call to discuss potential factors causing weak aggregates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 660.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can obviously go either way, but itseems to me that 16 percent has some advantage. Well, it's not goingto be published for a long time anyway, so maybe it doesn't make muchdifference. But there is some disadvantage in saying that theCommittee in the middle of December, when everything was still on thehigh side, was rather anxiously looking for a great big decline ininterest rates. I think there is some credibility problem in thatdirection, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The author suggests that there is a disadvantage in saying that the Committee was anxiously looking for a decline in interest rates, and also mentions a credibility problem. This indicates that there is contention or disagreement on whether the Committee's actions were appropriate or valid.


Passage number 661.
 But--MR. SCHULTZ. That's our lower end now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 662.
-86-12/18-19/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, does it look as if we havewidened the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The expression given is a mathematical calculation, and there is no indication of any disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 663.
 The last range the public has--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "the last range the public has" simply indicates the extent of what the public has or is aware of. There is no indication of any dispute or differing opinions.


Passage number 664.
 The last range was apparently--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But when do we publish the 13 to 18percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is not offering any disagreement or contention. It appears to be asking a question about when to publish a specific range.


Passage number 665.
MR. ALTMANN. On this Monday we will publish the directive,which had a range of 13 to 17 percent, along with the subsequentactions which raised the upper end to 18 percent and then allowed ineffect for it to be exceeded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states the publication of a directive and subsequent actions related to a percentage range.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 666.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The pattern is very clear if anybody--people who are so suspicious of us all the time--ever looked at it.This range has never bound that hard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses frustration and suspicion towards "people who are so suspicious of us all the time." This indicates a disagreement or conflict between the speaker and these individuals.


Passage number 667.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, it certainly hasn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 668.
MS. TEETERS. It has bound at the bottom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states a statement made by Ms. Teeters, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 669.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we stayed with it for a couple ofweeks; it never [presented] a hard conflict.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that the subject stayed with something for a couple of weeks and never encountered a difficult conflict.


Passage number 670.
 We thought we were goingto--MR. PARTEE. I agree with Nancy. I think we've had moredifficulty getting it reduced than getting it raised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers are in agreement with each other, with the second speaker expressing agreement with the first speaker's statement.


Passage number 671.
MS. TEETERS. [Unintelligible] down than up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any evidence of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 672.
MR. FORD. Mr. Chairman, on the point you just made about howit would be read if we made it 16 percent, am I not right that ourcurrent range, [which went into effect after we consulted] on thetelephone, has a bottom of 13 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement providing information without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 673.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "Yes" indicates that there is disagreement or contention between the speaker (Mr. Partee) and someone else in the conversation.


Passage number 674.
MR. FORD. So if we raise the bottom by 300 basis points,we're going to be read as tightening now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Mr. Ford is making a statement about the potential consequences of raising the bottom by 300 basis points. There is no contention or disagreement implied in this statement.


Passage number 675.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But they know where the rate has been allthis time; the funds rate is now up to 21 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement in the passage is providing information about the current percentage of the funds rate (21 percent). There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage.


Passage number 676.
MR. FORD. But that is a big jump, going from a bottom of 13percent to 16 percent, when we're really anticipating moving the otherway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. MR. FORD simply states a fact or observation without any contradictory statements or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 677.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think this is a vitalmatter, myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker clearly states their opinion but does not indicate any disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 678.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: N/A


Passage number 679.
 I don't think we're going to beoperating in the bottom part of the range and, therefore, I don'tthink we're stretching out the--MR. ROOS. 15 to 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It merely expresses a personal opinion about not operating in the bottom part of a range.


Passage number 680.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try something. Everythingremains the same, with some changes in language which I don't think-87-12/18-19/80are substantive at all, apart from the ones we've discussed. Let mejust ask: Is your preference to say "taken over a period of time" or"weekly average".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a potential change in language but does not show any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 681.
MR. SCHULTZ. Taken over a period of time.SPEAKER(.). That's okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz makes a statement and the speaker responds with an affirmative response indicating acceptance or agreement.


Passage number 682.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's assume the language says "taken overa period of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "taken over a period of time" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests the timeframe in which something is taken.


Passage number 683.
"MR. PARTEE. [Maybe it should say] "days"--taken over aperiod of days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is only a suggestion or clarification made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 684.
MR. MAYO. No, no.SPEAKER(.). It is a period of days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The dialogue between Mr. Mayo and the Speaker is short and does not indicate any disagreement or conflict between the two characters.


Passage number 685.
MR. PARTEE. Over a period of time could mean a year.SPEAKER(.). Right, the whole [intermeeting] period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 686.
MR. SCHULTZ. Let's stay as loose as we can here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Schultz suggesting that they should remain relaxed or informal.


Passage number 687.
MR. GRAMLEY. I like Chuck's "days." I'd like to be a bitmore specific on what we mean. I'd hate to give instructions to theManager that are so general that no one has the foggiest notion ofwhat anybody means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley simply expresses his preference for Chuck's "days" and suggests being more specific in giving instructions to the Manager to avoid confusion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 688.
MR. PARTEE. We don't say how many days. It could be 30days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the response "We don't say how many days," which suggests that the speaker disagrees with or challenges the assumption of specifying the exact number of days.


Passage number 689.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have three choices: a period of time,a period of days, or weekly average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply presents three options without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 690.
MR. ALTMANN. That's seven days in the weekly average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing views. It is a simple statement of fact - the number of days in the weekly average. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 691.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'm for a period of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz is expressing his support for a specific period of time.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 692.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's say "a period of time"--I willinterpret that as a series of days--and change the 16 percent to 15percent. We are reversing the language to conform with the way it wasbefore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The disagreement arises from interpreting "a period of time" differently and changing the percentage from 16 to 15 percent.


Passage number 693.
MR. SCHULTZ. Are we going to talk when it gets to 16percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about whether they will discuss something when it reaches 16 percent.


Passage number 694.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless somebody has a suggestion that hethinks will command [wider] support, I would propose that we vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks if anyone has a suggestion that could potentially gather more support, and then suggests holding a vote if no such suggestion is brought forward.


Passage number 695.
MR. WINN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide a proper answer without the passage or context. Could you please provide the relevant text or passage?


Passage number 696.
 You're going to specify the borrowing at--MR. PARTEE. A billion and a half dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints. It simply states that the borrowing is going to be specified at a certain amount ($1.5 billion).


Passage number 697.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hear no appeals that we have anotherplan that is going to command wider support. I will, therefore, callfor a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 698.
MR. BALLES. I'll mention that I'd go back to 25 years agoand add in tone and feel of the market and operate in bills only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their perspective or preference about going back to a specific time and operating in a certain manner.


Passage number 699.
-88-12/18-19/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Gee, we didn't have any inflation in thosedays.SPEAKER(.). It was pretty good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there was no inflation during the mentioned time period and expressing a positive sentiment about it.


Passage number 700.
MR. GRAMLEY. Which way did the cause and effect run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking about the direction of cause and effect.


Passage number 701.
MR. PARTEE. I wish we knew.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Partee expressing a desire for knowledge. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 702.
MR. GUFFEY. May I ask what the vote is on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 703.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the whole directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments. It simply refers to a directive in a general manner.


Passage number 704.
MR. GUFFEY. No, I mean the range of the federal funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The excerpt only presents a statement from Mr. Guffey, without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 705.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 15 to 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage states a specific percentage range without presenting any opposing viewpoints or contradictory information. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 706.
MR. GUFFEY. With any idea of consultation at a higher level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provides a statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 707.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have observed the remarks aboutconsultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 708.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 709.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters NoGovernor Wallich NoPresident Winn YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you. We can go eat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. All individuals mentioned have agreed or said yes to the unspecified topic of discussion.


Passage number 710.
MR. SCHULTZ. If Henry and Nancy dissent, you know you're inthe right area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that if Henry and Nancy express a different opinion, then you know that you are in the right area to make a judgment or decision.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 711.
MR. ALTMANN. Hold a minute. Let's see whether we have anyobjections to [publishing the 1975 Memoranda of Discussion].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the phrase "Let's see whether we have any objections" indicates that there is potential for disagreement or contention.


Passage number 712.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You received a memorandum about theminutes for 1975.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the recipient received a memorandum about the minutes for 1975, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 713.
MS. TEETERS. I move that we accept the proposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is simply making a motion for the proposal to be accepted.


Passage number 714.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I have a second.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation or agreement from the audience.


Passage number 715.
MR. PARTEE. It's all right with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention.


