Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 17–18, 2013 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 17, 2013, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, September 18, 2013, at 8:30 a.m.  Those present were the following: Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman James Bullard Charles L. Evans Esther L. George Jerome H. Powell Eric Rosengren Jeremy C. Stein Daniel K. Tarullo Janet L. Yellen Christine Cumming, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Sandra Pianalto, and Charles I. Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C. Williams, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist Thomas A. Connors, Troy Davig, Michael P. Leahy, Stephen A. Meyer, Geoffrey Tootell, Christopher J. Waller, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors James A. Clouse and William Nelson, Deputy Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors   _______________________   Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Eric M. Engen, Michael T. Kiley, Thomas Laubach, David E. Lebow, and Michael G. Palumbo, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Jeremy B. Rudd, Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Christopher J. Gust and Elizabeth Klee, Section Chiefs, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Gordon Werkema, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago David Altig, Loretta J. Mester, and Harvey Rosenblum,1 Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Philadelphia, and Dallas, respectively Joyce Hansen, Evan F. Koenig, Spencer Krane, Lorie K. Logan, Mark E. Schweitzer, John A. Weinberg, and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Dallas, Chicago, New York, Cleveland, Richmond, and Minneapolis, respectively Chris Burke and Jonathan P. McCarthy, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Eric T. Swanson, Senior Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 1 Attended introductory remarks at Tuesday’s session only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a list of the people present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
   Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on September 17–18, 2013 September 17 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everybody.  Today is Harvey Rosenblum’s last FOMC meeting before he retires from the Dallas Fed.  Harvey started his Fed career at the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank in 1970, when I was a senior in high school.  [Laughter]  He will have attended—get this—189 regular FOMC meetings, including this one, starting with the meeting in November 1985 when he first became the research director at Dallas. Harvey has advised three presidents of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, including Mr. Boykin; Mr. McTeer, “the Lonesome Dove” [laughter]; and President Richard Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a tribute to Harvey Rosenblum's career and accomplishments at the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 3.
 MR. FISHER.  “The Lonesome Hawk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. The phrase "The Lonesome Hawk" does not imply any conflicting viewpoints or opposing positions.


Passage number 4.
” [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Harvey, congratulations on a distinguished career.  All of your colleagues and friends here at the Federal Reserve System, I’m sure, wish you the very, very best.  Thank you for your service.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage is a straightforward expression of congratulations and appreciation, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 5.
 [Applause] MR. ROSENBLUM.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  If I could just add, it really has been a privilege serving this Committee for 27 years and the Federal Reserve System for 43 years. It has been fun and exciting to watch all the things going on and participate in them.  I’m going to miss this place, and I’m going to miss your leadership.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses gratitude and appreciation for their time serving on the Committee and working with the Chairman.


Passage number 6.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Let’s go to the agenda, item 1, “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations.” Let me turn the floor over to Simon Potter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a polite and straightforward statement.


Passage number 7.
 MR. BURKE.2  Thank you, Simon.  The Committee received two memos, which follow up on aspects of a potential overnight fixed-rate reverse repo facility discussed at the July FOMC meeting.  The first memo summarizes our initial market outreach to nine firms active in money markets on the possible effects of such a facility.  The second memo proposes an additional step in evaluating overnight RRPs through an extended operational exercise.  Under this proposal, the Desk would conduct a series of daily overnight RRP operations, within tight limits established by the FOMC, but likely larger than previous exercises. The field research, conducted after the release of the July FOMC minutes, focused primarily on understanding market participants’ views on how a facility based on fixed-rate, full-allotment overnight RRPs might impact money market interest rates 2 The materials used by Mr. Burke are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).and intermediation flows, what the relationship might be between the facility rate and other money market rates, and how different types of firms might view such a facility. All participants suggested that this type of facility would likely be an effective policy tool to help establish a floor for money market rates.  And while participants noted that effectiveness would depend, in part, on whether the facility was accessible to a sufficiently wide set of money market lenders, most noted that the current set of RRP counterparties included many of the lenders whose activity is a meaningful determinant of money market rates. They also expect that an increase in the facility rate would shift the whole constellation of money market rates, and that those changes would likely cause some shifts in money market intermediation.  None noted any particular concern with these potential shifts or felt that this would be particularly disruptive, yet several did note the potential impact such operations might have on the federal funds market.  They noted that an overnight RRP facility would likely draw activity out of the fed funds market, which could reduce the usefulness of the fed funds effective rate as a proxy for other overnight money market rates.  Participants also noted that this was a risk that already exists outside the prospects of an overnight RRP facility. Contacts did note some uncertainty regarding both the goal and timing of the introduction of the proposed facility.  They all saw a natural link between the facility rate and the rate paid on IOER, and the use of the facility later on during the policy normalization period.  Many also inferred that the facility could address market functioning issues in securities financing markets by placing a floor near or at the zero bound, potentially in the near term.  Some participants also suggested that the Fed may want to implement a facility sooner to demonstrate control over rates before tightening policy, and, in such a case, the rate might be set close to current repo market rates. In addition to this outreach, the Desk has continued to develop the operational infrastructure needed to support overnight RRPs. In the most recent small-value exercises, staff operationally confirmed the Desk’s ability to conduct RRPs with same-day settlement, at least in limited size.  Now, the staff proposes that the Committee consider temporarily authorizing the Desk to conduct overnight RRP operations within tight limits established by the FOMC for up to a four-month period beginning later this month. This exercise will enable staff to gain insight into overnight RRP usage at various spreads to other market rates, which would help highlight individual participant behavior as well as patterns in behavior by counterparty type.  This exercise will also generate useful information on operational aspects of a potential facility, offering the Desk and the triparty clearing banks experience with larger, regular operational flows.  At the same time, these operations are likely to be viewed as a logical extension of the small-value exercises the Desk has been conducting since 2009, and, given the limited size of the operations and the low fixed rate, these operations should continue to look and feel to market participants like a technical exercise.  As such, they would not be expected to have a material effect on money market rates or volumes,  including the federal funds market, which in turn should minimize the extent to which this exercise poses significant communications challenges.  And finally, the experience gained through this exercise will provide useful guidance to staff as we continue our field research, in particular as we do more work on possible effects on patterns of intermediation. The key constraints in the proposal are on the counterparty allocation and on the rate.  The per-counterparty allocation could be set at up to $1 billion per counterparty per day, and the rate could be set up to 5 basis points.  The Desk would initially establish a daily overnight RRP with a low rate of 1 basis point, a level that is below current market rates, and establish a per-counterparty allocation limit of $500 million. This would support a gradual introduction of the exercise operationally and limit any impact from the operation on the current general level of money market interest rates. If these parameters did not encourage enough participation to allow staff to make some observations about individual interest relative to other rates, the SOMA manager could make modest adjustments to the rate and allocation limits within the FOMC’s constraints.  The FOMC would be given advanced notice of any change in these or other important parameters of the operation. To enable this exercise, the FOMC would need to adopt a resolution along the lines of that shown in the second handout, which would authorize overnight RRPs with a maximum of $1 billion per counterparty each day and a fixed rate up to 5 basis points, through the January FOMC meeting.  If the Committee wished to pursue this proposal, the Desk is ready to start as soon as Monday, September 23.  The exercise could run through the January 2014 FOMC meeting, which would allow an assessment of the facility under a variety of trading conditions.  Public communications regarding the exercise would emphasize its operational nature, and note, as in previous cases, that no inference should be drawn about the timing of any change in the stance of monetary policy in the future.  However, if market conditions are volatile in the wake of the FOMC announcement, it may be preferable to delay the start of the exercise, perhaps until the public release of this meeting’s minutes on October 9.  The proposed resolution delegates to the Chairman the decision about whether and when to begin the proposed exercise. At this time, Simon and I would be happy to take any comments or questions on the overnight RRP facility or recent market developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is providing information and updates on the potential overnight fixed-rate reverse repo facility discussed at the July FOMC meeting.


Passage number 8.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  We have the Desk report, and we’ll have to vote to ratify domestic open market operations, and we also have a proposal to approve the next stage of testing of this facility.  So both motions are on the table, and the floor is open for questions.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing updates on the agenda and inviting questions.


Passage number 9.
   MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I find this proposal unobjectionable, but I have some questions, and one was hidden in a footnote of the memo, footnote 7.  In referring to call participants, the footnote said, “They also noted some particular concern about potential impacts on the overnight indexed swap (OIS) market, which is based on the daily federal funds effective rate. . . .  Although not discussed, the same concern would likely exist for outstanding federal funds futures contracts.” Here’s my question:  Do you think the full implementation of what I’ll call the “ON RRP,” overnight RRP, would cause the fed funds market to eventually disappear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they find the proposal unobjectionable but have some questions about potential impacts on certain markets. They are seeking clarification and do not express any disagreement or contention with the proposal itself.


Passage number 10.
 MR. BURKE.  It seems likely that it would cause the market to shrink, potentially significantly, and that footnote was referring to the potential fallout of that shrinkage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Burke's opinion and speculation about the potential consequences of a market shrinkage.


Passage number 11.
 MR. FISHER.  But you made a very important point.  Again, in my simple mind, the governance of this facility is under the FOMC, through fed funds.  The IOER is under the Board.  So in a way we have a dual governance structure and the governance of the ON RRP facility would depend on where each rate stands, in terms of tightening or loosening.  Do I understand that correctly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Fisher to seek clarification and understanding on the governance structure of the facility.


Passage number 12.
 MR. POTTER. So one thing to think about is that the full implementation would affect flows.  So the fed funds market might change from one where basically the FHLBs are selling funds into the market, and become an interbank market again.  We don’t really know how big the effects of the full implementation of the facility would be, but it’s quite possible, as Chris pointed out, that you would see the fed funds market just be idiosyncratic trades and not be representative of overall money market conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a potential scenario (the full implementation of the facility affecting the fed funds market) and acknowledging that the full effects are uncertain. The mention of Chris's point further supports this idea without any disagreement.


Passage number 13.
 MR. FISHER.  I think the important thing to me is that it’s under the governance of the FOMC.  So I just wanted to underscore that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is expressing his agreement and support for the idea that the subject being discussed should be under the governance of the FOMC.


Passage number 14.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Even though, technically, the IOER is under the Board’s discretion, as you know, we’ve been working on a gentlemen’s and ladies’ agreement to take these decisions collectively.  I think this moves things in the right direction because it puts the key rate under the governance of the FOMC, and I think that’s a small advantage of this proposal.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea of collectively making decisions regarding the IOER, and sees it as a small advantage for the proposal.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 15.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I share the sense of intrigue with an overnight RRP as sort of an operating instrument for monetary policy operations, and I’ve actually proposed that idea before. At the July meeting we had some discussion of this, and I suggested some research would be warranted before we go further down this path.  The Manager was kind enough to be in communication with me about that research.  The staff has done a good job of asking counterparties about their thoughts about the likely effects of this, but the research I had in mind was really something else.  What I think we’re lacking here is a sense of where we’re going down this path and why.  Let me give you an example. The staff has suggested that we’re aiming to provide a hard floor under the RP rate.  Well, before 2008 we targeted the fed funds rate, and we operated with a substantial spread to the RP rate—10, 15, 20 basis points, at times larger, and fairly volatile.  There wasn’t a hard floor under the overnight RP rate, and we didn’t seem to think it was a problem then.  The staff hasn’t provided any reason why it’s a problem now or likely to be more of a problem going forward. I’ll raise a couple of other concerns about this path that I think deserve some really careful consideration.  One is this expands us into doing a fair amount of business with money market mutual funds.  So the traditional thinking is that this is an industry whose business model is based on the bypass of bank regulations, and if we’re to get them to voluntarily hold overnight   RRP investments with us, kind of by definition, that makes them better off in the sense that they can offer a higher and safer rate of return than they otherwise would if we weren’t in that market. It’s not obvious to me that this is a good thing for the structure of money markets, for us to enhance the competitiveness of money market mutual funds.  At a bare minimum, we need some thought before we go down that road.  It’s not obvious that there’s some inefficiency that this would cure regarding the margin between bank and nonbank intermediation, or—I guess you could think of it as shadow and nonshadow banking.  I thought we didn’t think that was an industry that was very well structured in the broader sense. I’d also point out that, because of their status as primary dealers, the dealers are thought to enjoy sort of an imprimatur of the New York Fed, that they’re accepted into a club.  Presumably, the same thing will hold for money market mutual funds who have been “blessed” by being anointed as counterparties to the Desk. Another broad concern has to do with the triparty RP market.  This market is, in my view, deeply flawed.  I think it’s a consensus in the System.  The New York Fed has been doing yeoman’s work going down the path toward triparty RP market reform.  That work is not complete.  It’s not clear how successful it’s going to be without some more-fundamental changes.  You know, I point out the flaw there.  Two banks have a lock on clearing and settlement in the triparty RP market.  The participants who clear and settle with them are highly dependent on intraday overdrafts from those banks, which gives either bank the power to refuse an unwind and force us into an untenable situation like we saw in March 2008.  Although we are involved in the triparty RP market—to the tune of $5, $10, $15 billion a day—and it’s the way we’ve always done our open market operations, this is a fundamental-enough flaw that it deserves some thought before we go extending and broadening our involvement in that market.  Governor Stein made an excellent point last time, which is that we’re not going to know what the implications of doing this at scale are until we do this at scale.  And the corollary is, I don’t think we want to do this at scale until we’re ready to do it at scale.  So I don’t see a real huge value in pursuing more of this.  Now, this has to do with monetary policy operations, the configuration of precisely what money market we intervene in, and how and under what conditions.  Our system has evolved over the years.  We took a run at this before the crisis.  We did a fairly substantial amount of study.  Some people around this table were involved in looking at different operational regimes. For me, we need that again if we’re going to go down the road of some completely different operating scheme.  I’d rather see us do that analysis so we know where we’re headed and why, and we have a little more confidence about what effect it’s going to have.  Until then, these operations may be harmful.  In a time of austerity, it’s not clear to me that further operational exercises of this type are really a good use of our resources before we’ve done the kind of analysis we’ve done several times in our past to study the operational regime we’re under and figure out whether this is what we want, or if there is some way we can improve on it. So, Mr. Chairman, I do not support this resolution. I think we should table it, and I think you should commission some study from the experts we have here to further explore where we’re headed in terms of our operational regime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

The speaker expresses disagreement and raises several concerns about the proposal to use overnight RRP as an operating instrument for monetary policy operations. They argue that more research is needed, question the need for a hard floor under the RP rate, raise concerns about expanding business with money market mutual funds, criticize the structure of the triparty RP market, and suggest that further analysis is needed before implementing the proposal. Additionally, they state that they do not support the resolution and suggest tabling it for further study.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think there are two ways to think about this.  One way is to think about the ultimate operating regime, which is what we studied before the crisis.  But another way would be to think about it as another pair of suspenders to help ensure a smooth exit from the large balance sheet that we currently have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting two different ways of thinking about a subject, without expressing preference or disagreement between them.


Passage number 17.
 MR. POTTER.  Can I say just say a couple of things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is simply asking for permission to speak and make a few statements.


Passage number 18.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the passage itself.


Passage number 19.
 MR. POTTER. Reserves are quite large, as you might have noticed.  We don’t really have experience in money markets with reserves of that size. The fact that these are all in the banking system is a property of the way we’ve been operating.  There’s some interest in allowing the rest of the system to have some access to those reserves.  So I don’t think that pre-2007 is really going to tell us that much. The correlation between the repo and fed funds rates has dropped.  So it’s true there could be a gap, if there was a strong correlation between repo and other money market rates. On dealing with the money market funds, I think we’d all agree with what you said about reform being important for that industry, but they are a very large presence in money markets right now, and we can’t act as though they’re not there.  With respect to putting a stamp on any of these 139 counterparties, I doubt if anyone knows the names of them.  The 21 primary dealers are out there on our website.  But these 139 counterparties have a very different relationship.  It doesn’t involve the Treasury auctions or the kind of trust you’d expect to see with the primary dealers because the money is coming to us, not the other way around. And we really have to use a triparty system right now.  It’s not something over the long run we’d necessarily have to use.  We could build out our own way of handling the transactions, but the triparty system is quite convenient and one of the reasons it’s used a lot is it’s a very efficient way of engaging the repo market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and expressing their opinion on various topics related to money markets and banking systems.


Passage number 20.
 MR. LACKER.  Can I follow up, Mr. Chairman. So in the exercises you have done in this intermeeting period, you have learned about the operational logistics and mechanics of us operating our system and interacting with counterparties.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for clarification and further information.


Passage number 21.
 MR. POTTER.  At low volumes, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter simply agrees that at low volumes, something is true.


Passage number 22.
 MR. LACKER.  At low volumes.  So you will learn about another digit on the numbers going forward. I mean, the broader point here is that, operationally, I think you would have a fair amount of confidence that you know how to push the right buttons to get the trade made.  As far as market effect, I’m not sure that even if this gets up to $80 or $100 billion you’re going to learn much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their opinion and uncertainty about the market effect of the trade reaching a certain value.


Passage number 23.
 MR. POTTER.  So our intention is to do more research based on that.  We view this as a scale where we might learn more. If we do start to learn, it tells us something about how money markets are functioning in the United States.  If we don’t learn, we are going to have to think about how to learn some more. Introducing at full scale without trying to learn seems a risky thing to do, as you point out.  This is a potentially quite large facility, and we don’t want to do any harm in the actual full introduction of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing their intention to do more research and learn about how money markets are functioning in the United States before introducing a potentially large facility. They acknowledge the risks of introducing it without sufficient knowledge.


Passage number 24.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have President Evans next.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given phrase simply states the speaker's next appointment is with President Evans without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 25.
 MR. EVANS.  I have a different concern about this particular issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 26.
  I would be happy to pass to Governor Stein, who seems a little more— MR. STEIN.  No, I’m fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that Governor Stein seems fine, indicating that there is no disagreement or contention between them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 27.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I was a little more nervous about your last comment where you pointed out that this is going to help us out with the exit from our large balance sheet.  And we are going to need some help, so I favor that.  But I wonder if this is the right time to engage in this type of testing. There were a lot of comments about how, of course, no one should make any inferences about what this testing means for our next policy course, and I have some other questions about that related to forward guidance and whatnot.  I’m not sure how much confidence I can have in that.  Everyone in the marketplace knows about these tests, right.  This is not a secret.  So I guess my questions are:  How much time do we really think we need to prove this system. Is it measured in four months or six months. Is it critical that we do it now.  If we were to delay this for perhaps a year, would that leave enough time.  And perhaps that, by itself, would also send a signal, since it is ultimately a tool for exit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses doubt and raises questions about the timing and effectiveness of engaging in the type of testing mentioned. They also question the confidence and effectiveness of forward guidance. This indicates a disagreement or contention with the idea of implementing the testing at the present time.


Passage number 28.
 MR. POTTER. The easiest way to have tested this would have been in 2007, before we had the large balance sheet.  We are always going to have the fact that people might confuse this with actual exit.  The coverage that we got from the July minutes suggests, because of the collateral shortage stories and other things that are out there, people think there is a reason that we might be introducing this, separate from just getting ready to exit. I would say that the concern that you are expressing is definitely one that the staff has faced.  That’s why you see the various options here.  But I don’t see necessarily that there is another window out there that allows us to learn.  And it’s a tradeoff for you to decide how much you want to learn now rather than learn closer to the exit period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is addressing a concern and explaining the various options and tradeoffs involved in making a decision.


Passage number 29.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You have a two-hander, Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that someone holds a position of Vice Chairman.


Passage number 30.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. My own view of your observation, President Evans, is that if we were to decide to taper at this meeting, introducing this facility would be pretty dangerous because it might be taken the wrong way. But if we decide not to taper at this meeting, that actually creates a window for introducing this facility, so that it won’t be misconstrued as part of the exit story.  So, to me, if we end up in the place that we’re not tapering at this meeting, there is this opportunity to put this in place and separate the potential that this is part of the exit story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 31.
  It allows us to firm up the story that this is about monetary policy control, damping volatility in money market rates, reducing net interest expense potential— MR. FISHER.  So, Mr. Vice Chairman, should we defer this decision until after the discussion of what we’re going to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 32.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 33.
  That’s the logical— MR. FISHER.  We haven’t decided what we’re going to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only mentions that a decision has not been made yet.


Passage number 34.
  So why— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, assuming you think that argument is germane.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a rhetorical question and expressing an assumption.


Passage number 35.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, you’re making the point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It only mentions Mr. Fisher making a point, but without any conflicting or opposing views being presented.


Passage number 36.
 MR. EVANS. It had more weight with that argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is simply stating that the argument had more weight.


Passage number 37.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We could make it conditional on the monetary policy decision, I suppose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely considering a suggestion or alternative course of action.


Passage number 38.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage involving Governor Stein.


Passage number 39.
 MR. STEIN.  I just wanted to clarify, with regard to what President Lacker said, that I agree, absolutely, that we are not going to really know how this thing works at scale until we do it at scale.  To me, that is an argument for trying to get to scale as soon as we reasonably can.  If it wasn’t for the issues that President Evans and others raised, if we could somehow clearly separate that we are just doing this because it is sort of a smart way to run your balance sheet for any given size of the balance sheet, I would be saying, “Simon, tell me, when we have cleared the first operational hurdle, how do we move to the next and to the next.” I think until we have really done a trillion dollars’ worth of this stuff, we are not going to know the answer, and it is really important for us to know the answer sooner rather than later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is agreeing with President Lacker and expressing their own perspective on the matter.


Passage number 40.
 MR. POTTER.  Trillions seems quite large for overnight, but maybe we can change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing surprise at the large amount mentioned, but suggests that it could be adjusted.


Passage number 41.
 [Laughter] MR. STEIN.  It has to be a meaningful fraction of our balance sheet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is made without any opposing or contradictory viewpoints.


Passage number 42.
 MR. POTTER. That is possible.  Or the fact that the facility is there each day, and you know early in the morning that you can always go to the Fed, will affect market rates.  So one of the conceptual things that we know is true is that it should put a floor on market rates, just by  itself, without any use.  What we know from practice with the interest on excess reserves is, that doesn’t work perfectly.  So how much do we have to absorb before that starts to work, is the question.  It could be a trillion dollars.  And that would tell us a lot about how money markets function in the United States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing the potential impact of the facility and questioning how much money would need to be absorbed for it to start working effectively. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 43.
 MR. STEIN.  I think we would have to be willing to go into that neighborhood to fully answer the sorts of questions that we would want to answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting that in order to answer certain questions, they would need to explore a particular neighborhood.


Passage number 44.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 45.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m just wondering where this leaves us.  We’re not going to learn a whole lot until we do it with scale, and, I hadn’t thought about what Vice Chairman Dudley mentioned, but it is signaling something that we have yet to decide upon, or at least would impact some signaling.  So I would suggest we defer this discussion until after we decide the course of policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion and suggesting that the discussion be deferred until a decision on policy has been made.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I don’t want to defer the discussion because we have very tight time constraints tomorrow morning.  So we should just continue the discussion now, and we can discuss how to proceed at that point.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 47.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. I will start with an initial statement, which is that I am quite interested in further study of this facility.  I did have a question for Simon or Chris related to some of the conversations you heard, which is, what do you think that we are going to learn about operations of this scale.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The speaker expresses their interest in further studying the facility and asks a question for clarification.


Passage number 48.
 MR. BURKE.  Without getting into too much detail about the settlement methodology, the entire back office processing is completely different for overnight than what we have been working on for the last several years to support the term facility.  And there is some real value for us and for the clearing banks to be able to put that in place and then really exercise it withsome volume regularly, so that we can work through the kinks.  Also, with triparty reform, there have been a lot of new innovations—things that probably should have been there from the beginning, like matching and other things that we want to take advantage of.  And we can’t do that until we have the baseline experience with the relatively new processes that reform has created in triparty repo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the differences in back office processing for overnight transactions compared to term facility transactions. They also mention the value of implementing these new processes and the need to gain experience before taking advantage of new innovations.


Passage number 49.
 MR. POTTER.  There are two other things.  I think it is about $300 billion that our counterparties have overnight right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the amount of money that the counterparties have overnight.


Passage number 50.
 MR. BURKE. About $380 billion in triparty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is providing a factual statement about the amount of money in triparty. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 51.
 MR. POTTER. Yes, about $380 billion.  This is a pretty significant share of overnight Treasury repo, so we’ll learn a little bit about how they respond to the existence of the facility. The other thing that we are hoping to learn is at the end of quarter, end of year, and other days where there are big fluctuations in the repo rate, what does the usage look like.  How does our facility affect market rates on the days when the usage goes up a lot. So we think we can learn; it’s possible that we might not learn.  So, as Chris stated, if you feel you could learn a lot, you should be quite gradual when you introduce a facility like this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential learning outcomes and considerations related to introducing a facility.


Passage number 52.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. You can correct me if I’m wrong on this, but I guess the vision I have in my head is that ultimately this will be a tool that will give us potentially tighter control over market rates than using the interest rate on excess reserves. Is that a fair characterization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 53.
 MR. POTTER.  For overnight rates, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Potter agrees with the statement about overnight rates. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 54.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Vice Chairman" does not indicate any contention or disagreement by itself. It is a neutral term that simply identifies a specific position or role within an organization.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 55.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  From my perspective, the testing actually will reveal something on two dimensions.  One, how sensitive is demand for changes from 1 basis point to basis points.  And we just don’t know the answer to that.  And, two, how sensitive is demand to the external factors that affect money market conditions, like quarter-end, year-end, financial market stresses, worries about Europe.  All of those things are going to also affect the demand curve for safe assets, and we just don’t know how sensitive that is.  And the testing, I think, will reveal it. I also think this facility, earlier rather than later, gives us potentially down the road an additional degree of freedom in monetary policy.  You can imagine if the testing goes well and we learn something, we could get more comfortable using this.  Let’s say the economic news were to disappoint, but we didn’t feel like we wanted to increase asset purchases or we felt that that channel was exhausted.  Well, we could then potentially reduce the interest rate on excess reserves from 25 basis points to some lower rate.  That’s not really feasible, I don’t think, in the current environment because we don’t really know what that would do to the whole constellation of rates.  If you put a solid floor in place, then you have a little bit more flexibility in terms of what you do with the ceiling.  So I think it also has that potential benefit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they believe the testing will reveal the sensitivity of demand for changes in money market conditions, but acknowledges that they do not know the answer to that. Additionally, they suggest that reducing the interest rate on excess reserves could be a feasible option in the future, but also express uncertainty about the potential effects of that action. These conflicting statements demonstrate a disagreement or lack of certainty about the potential outcomes.


Passage number 56.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The provided passage only states the name "President Lacker" without any additional context or information. It does not provide any indication of either contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 57.
 MR. LACKER.  I was just going to say about tighter control of rates, that it’s not obvious that argument stops at RPs. I mean, if we are interested in controlling rates, where does that argument stop. We’d intervene in anything if we wanted to control it more closely.  It is not clear why you want to control RP rates more closely.  That’s the thing. And the other thing I would point out is that this experiment will give us some data in an envelope of the current environment, which could be very different after we raise rates. It could be very different if we are setting a rate closer to the IOER or if we are targeting the fed funds  rate. It’s not clear how that is going to affect this.  So it’s part of the package, and I’m not sure how well we are going to be able to extrapolate from what we learn here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing disagreement and questioning the need for tighter control of RP rates. They raise concerns about the potential consequences and uncertainty surrounding the decision to control rates more closely.


Passage number 58.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "President Kocherlakota" without providing any information or context that could indicate contention or disagreement. Therefore, it is not possible to determine whether there is disagreement based on the given information.


Passage number 59.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  To address the concern that was raised by President Evans, it seems like the terms of this resolution are such that you would have the authority to defer the announcement of this until after the meeting.  Is that a correct reading of this resolution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 60.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, it will be in the minutes if we approve it.  We could defer any announcement or any testing until after the minutes or indefinitely if for some reason you wanted to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a potential course of action regarding the timing of an announcement or testing, based on the availability of the minutes.


Passage number 61.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I guess I feel comfortable with this resolution on those terms regarding the concerns raised by President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, expresses comfort and agreement with the resolution in question.


Passage number 62.
 MR. FISHER.  May I ask.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker politely asks for permission to ask a question.


Passage number 63.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The phrase "two-hander" does not contain any elements that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply refers to something that requires two people to handle or perform.


Passage number 64.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman.  I just want to ask for clarification on that.  So, just make the assumption that we decide to cut back on our purchases.  We would defer the announcement of this thing. Just on the odd chance that we do reduce our purchases, there’s a signaling aspect that Vice Chairman Dudley talked about.  Does this conflict at all in your mind, Simon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is just seeking clarification and asking a question about the potential consequences of reducing purchases.


Passage number 65.
 MR. POTTER.  I think that the way we framed it is it depends on how markets react, and adding volatility to the markets is not something that we would want to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Potter, expresses a personal opinion about not wanting to add volatility to the markets, but there is no opposing view or argument presented.


Passage number 66.
 MR. FISHER.  Okay.  So we would be judicious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 67.
 MR. POTTER. Yes, as always.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the given passage.


Passage number 68.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement asking for any additional questions from President Lacker.


Passage number 69.
 MR. LACKER.  Just one more comment.  If we do this, presumably it’s going to raise RP rates above where they would be if we weren’t in the market.  Would that be a fair characterization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is making a comment and seeking clarification.


Passage number 70.
 MR. POTTER. It’s not the full implementation, but the proposed testing, with restrictions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It only describes the proposed testing with restrictions.


Passage number 71.
 MR. LACKER. So, $100 billion, $200 billion, that scale.  Presumably, in some states of the world, the RP rate will be higher than it otherwise would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is not expressing any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that in certain situations, the RP rate may be higher than it would otherwise be.


Passage number 72.
 MR. POTTER.  Under the counterfactual that we have here, on certain days the facility could affect those rates.  On other days, with close to zero usage, you wouldn’t expect it to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Potter is making a statement about the behavior of the facility under two different scenarios - certain days with high usage and other days with close to zero usage. He is not expressing disagreement or contention with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 73.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  So then, if we stop doing this, rates would go back down to where they otherwise would have been, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a question that seeks confirmation or agreement from the other party.


Passage number 74.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Not quite.  I mean, quarter-end is a very special event.  The demand goes up for safe assets at quarter-end, and the next day it goes down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining how the demand for safe assets fluctuates during quarter-end events.


Passage number 75.
 MR. LACKER. The point I want to make is that if we do this and then we want to use this as a tool to ease policy, we will have already tightened policy first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is making a point regarding the potential consequences of using a certain tool for easing policy.


Passage number 76.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  So that’s one of the reasons we would start in a very gradual way, and if we learn, even with the small amounts and the 1 basis point, that we can have some effect, then that’s very important information for us to learn and to give you about how sensitive the repo rate would be to this facility.  In some sense it’s very good news, because for a smaller size of operation, we’ll be able to affect rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the reasons for starting in a gradual way and the importance of learning about the sensitivity of the repo rate to this facility.


Passage number 77.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m just saying this is a degree of freedom for monetary policy.  You have to first take the degree of freedom away in order to use this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is simply stating a statement of fact or observation.


Passage number 78.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 79.
 MR. EVANS.  Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to raise this issue to make sure that we were informed of this in our discussion.  I’m perfectly prepared to support this resolution, especially after President Kocherlakota mentioned that it gives you wide scope to adjust this however you see fit. I do have another question for the Desk, if that’s okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. Evans is bringing up an issue and expressing his willingness to support a resolution. He also mentions a question he has for the Desk, but there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 80.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sure.  We’re still open for questions to either of our colleagues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is an opportunity for questions to be asked.


Passage number 81.
 MR. EVANS.  Simon, on exhibit 1, you went through a fascinating discussion about the implied funds rate in the dealers’ survey, and about our purchases and how that likely interacts with dealers’ assessments of the probability that the unemployment rate will be above 6½ percent when the first funds rate increase takes place. Looking at the path of the funds rate, I might have thought that a good chunk of that was an assessment that the economy was doing better and they were thinking about it that way.  Just to make sure I understood what you said, you made a comment that the people who thought that the unemployment rate might be above 6½ percent when we do the first funds rate hike are tightly linked to people who had a change in views on asset purchases; is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward clarification question.


Passage number 82.
 MR. POTTER.  There was a 70 percent correlation between the answer to question 4, the change in views on asset purchases, and higher numbers for the unemployment rate at liftoff.  For me, that reflected how independent some of the tools are.  In May and June, we clearly saw that some market participants do not think the tools are independent—the forward guidance and the balance sheet actions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply describing the correlation between different factors and expressing their own interpretation of the independence of certain tools in relation to each other.


Passage number 83.
 MR. EVANS.  Right, that was my concern.  That was very interesting.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite and appreciative response.


Passage number 84.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the position of "Vice Chairman" without providing any additional information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 85.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Can I just make an interjection. The people I’ve talked to have said that one reason why the tools might not be independent is that if financial stability concerns are motivating us to reduce our asset purchases, those same financial stability concerns could influence our willingness to be lower for longer.  And, in fact, if you look at what has actually happened over the last few months, we have seen both.  So we’ve actually seen a backup in interest rates in the 2014 period, which might be informed by a market judgment that somehow we’re concerned about financial stability and that’s going to lead to an earlier liftoff.  So I think there is a potential reason why those two questions get linked.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a potential reason for the connection between financial stability concerns and the willingness to be lower for longer.


Passage number 86.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Another possibility is that the expectations are still where we want them to be, but other factors like term premiums and so on obscure that.  Any other questions.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting another possibility without contradicting or challenging any previous statements or ideas.


Passage number 87.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m looking at exhibit 3, panel 13.  Why is this picture jagged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because there is no statement or opinion expressed that could generate disagreement or contention among speakers. The passage only consists of a speaker asking a question about a picture.


Passage number 88.
 MR. POTTER.  Why is it jagged.  Because of the way that we drew it, I guess.  I understand exactly what you are saying, that there are press conferences that we could have singled out here, and what you would tend to see is that if we went back and drew it with just dates, the changes would be associated with press conference meetings. The way we’ve done it here, you can’t see that as much.  A lot of the market participants do think that it would take two to three months of data to make the next change.  So some people do think that the FOMC would start at a non-press-conference meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the way the data has been presented and acknowledging that some people believe the FOMC would make changes at non-press-conference meetings.


Passage number 89.
 MR. BULLARD.  But this suggests that, if you did start at a meeting for which there wasn’t a press conference, that all subsequent moves would be made at meetings for which there weren’t press conferences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement about a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 90.
 MR. POTTER. No.  Remember, this is the median at each point.  It’s not a path of the median person.  So that is a different concept, and I guess we could give everyone’s path and try to show that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains that the concept being discussed is the median at each point, not a path of the median person.


Passage number 91.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  The other thing I’d like to understand about this is, suppose we delay.  Would the slope of this line be the same if we delay or would they expect a steeper slope.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 92.
 MR. POTTER.  I think we would all like the answer to that question.  I didn’t feel comfortable asking people that question on the dealer survey.  There was a little bit of evidence that dealers who expected the reductions to start later had bigger changes, but we did not ask about what would happen to their expectations for the size of the increments if there was a decision not to reduce asset purchases at this meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's desire for an answer and their discomfort in asking the question on the dealer survey. The mention of evidence and not asking about size of increments if there was a decision not to reduce asset purchases does not imply contention.


Passage number 93.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you" simply expresses gratitude and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 94.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the title or role of President Kocherlakota without providing any further information or context.


Passage number 95.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a quick comment about term premiums, which I think relates to exhibit 1, panel 2.  A lot of factors influence term premiums, and Governor Stein gave a speech at the end of June, which emphasized how little we still know about what influences the term premium.  But I think one possible factor is, in fact, monetary policy itself.  What I have in mind is that the aggressiveness with which monetary policy responds to weak economic conditions will build into a covariance between interest rates and economic conditions.  For example, if people think we are going to be very aggressive about keeping rates low or buying lots of assets in response to weak economic conditions, then the prices of those bonds will be high, and that will drive down the term premium.  If, in fact, they think that we’re not going to be as aggressive, that will, in fact, have the opposite effect of driving up the term premium.  So the covariation of our responses and economic conditions   actually influences the term premium. I think this matters for considerations of policy because the game plan last September was sort of to build this automatic stabilizer effect into monetary policy.  That shows up.  One way it shows up is in driving down term premiums.  As several have emphasized, there’s a lot of things influencing term premiums, but one of the influences is us and people’s beliefs about our reaction function. Then I had a question about exhibit 3, panel 14.  I guess this is year-end 2013 unemployment.  I guess I would have been interested in knowing, if things went something like mid-2014 economic conditions, what would the year-end 2014 SOMA portfolio look like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 96.
 MR. POTTER.  So what we do is we look at the most recent SEP.  We take the central tendency and either side of the central tendency to make this question for the dealer survey.  We feel that that’s not giving information to the dealers that they don’t already have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply explains a process of deriving a question for the dealer survey.


Passage number 97.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I see. I see the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of understanding between two people. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 98.
 MR. POTTER.  And what I would say is that the tails have shrunk.  So the percent of dealers putting the SOMA portfolio over $4.5 trillion is definitely starting to shrink.  And these are not big differences, above and below $4 trillion.  You don’t see that much difference across these scenarios. We could ask a scenario with a much higher unemployment rate, but I think we’d probably craft it in a slightly different way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating facts and observations about the size of the portfolio and potential scenarios.


Passage number 99.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple thank you statement.


Passage number 100.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  First, let’s approve domestic market operations just so I don’t forget.  If there are no objections—thank you.  On the proposal to approve testing, this is an FOMC decision, but I think given the ongoing nature of this, it would be interesting, at least for the record, to know if there are any participants other than President Lacker who would oppose testing at this time. Is there anyone who opposes at this time.  All right.  Seeing none then, may I take the FOMC as approving this resolution.  Okay.  Thank you.  Let’s turn now to the “Economic and Financial Situation,” and I’ll call on David Wilcox to introduce.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 101.
 MR. KILEY.5  Thanks, Steve.  My briefing summarizes our recent Quantitative Surveillance (or QS) report and refers to the handout labeled “Material for Briefing on Financial Stability.” The most notable development since our previous report in May has been the rise in yields and volatility on longer-term fixed-income securities, highlighted in the upper-left panel.  The increase in yields eased valuation pressures in some fixed-income markets and slowed the momentum toward duration risk-taking, as suggested by the substantial outflows from long-term bond funds.  At the same time, there may be more adjustments to come, and investors did not pull back from credit risk. Levered investors in fixed income securities reportedly incurred sizable losses during the selloff and appeared to sell securities to limit their exposures, thus reinforcing the increase in yields and volatility. A prime example is agency REITs, where assets contracted in the second quarter, as shown in the top-right panel. I’ll note that that second-quarter information is the most recent comprehensive information we have from quarterly reports.  Asset sales by REITs were partially motivated to limit an increase in leverage, and aggregate leverage for the sector (the 5 The materials used by Mr. Kiley are appended to this transcript (appendix 5).black line) was little changed. Conversations with dealers indicate firms maintained access to repo funding, though responses by dealers to the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms (or SCOOS, which includes developments since the end of the second quarter) indicated some tightening in terms on lending and a decline in the use of leverage. Respondents to the SCOOS also reported that liquidity deteriorated during the selloff period across a broad range of fixed-income assets, including Treasury securities, corporate bonds, and agency MBS.  Dealer behavior appears to have been a contributor to the decline in liquidity, as they seemed willing to deploy only limited balance sheet capacity to make markets.  One rough gauge of the reduction in liquidity over the period is the increase in the price-impact coefficient for Treasury securities, reported at the middle-left, where price impact is the change in prices associated with a change in net order flow.  Starting in May and going through June, the price-impact coefficient jumped notably from the very low levels seen late last year and early this year. The rise in longer-term yields brought about sizable losses on the securities in banks’ available-for-sale (AFS) portfolios (the middle-right panel), notably at the largest banks.  These losses wiped out the gains accrued in recent years, but were small compared with firms’ capital. Also, the book value of banks’ holdings of Treasury and agency securities, not shown, has declined modestly since May, reportedly, in part, as banks have sought to reduce their duration exposure.  The jump in Treasury yields flowed through to yields on corporate debt, and changes in spreads (shown in the bottom-left panel) since May do not convey a notable shift in investors’ appetite for credit risk.  As shown to the right, issuance of riskier corporate credits declined in July and August.  Issuance of speculative-grade nonfinancial corporate bonds (the red bars) was a bit below its pace in the first half of the year.  Issuance of leveraged loans (the blue bars) slowed notably, albeit only to the relatively robust levels of last year.  Looking forward, the calendar for corporate bonds and loans has expanded significantly, in part to fund M&A and LBOs.  Market participants attribute some of the crowded fall calendar to efforts to get ahead of FOMC decisions. Your next exhibit steps back from recent developments to look at the level of vulnerabilities within the financial system.  Turning first to asset valuations, we continue to see only pockets of stretched valuations; indeed, the re-pricing in the Treasury market has greatly reduced valuation pressures there.  As reported in the top left, price-to-rent ratios in the housing market have edged up a bit but appear reasonable on the whole, despite the substantial rise in house prices over the past year.  Digging down further into the assets examined in the QS report, perhaps the most notable area where domestic valuation pressures may be significant is farmland, although readings on farmland debt, despite recent increases, suggest the financial system has quite limited exposure.  The next three panels focus on leverage and short-term funding in the nonfinancial and financial sectors.  As highlighted in the top-right panel, private nonfinancial credit relative to GDP has moved sideways, on net, at a below-trend level, with the caveat that trends are hard to gauge.  This factor and the more general improvement in household and business balance sheets point to somewhat limited risk from private nonfinancial leverage.  Indeed, tight underwriting in recent years, with only relatively safe households having access to credit, implies that the financial system’s exposure to household credit risk is probably even lower than the simple deviation from trend would imply. Banks have also reduced leverage in recent years, as can be seen by the increase in loss-absorbing capital (relative to risk-weighted assets) shown in the middle-left panel.  More generally, leverage within the financial system relative to pre-crisis levels appears moderate, and the SCOOS indicates that some of those actors that had shown increased willingness to deploy leverage earlier this year, such as hedge funds, stepped back a bit over summer. In addition to reduced leverage, the financial system appears to be less reliant on short-term wholesale funding, as can be seen in the middle-right panel, which shows that such funding across the entire financial sector has fallen substantially.  At banks, this shift is importantly related to the increase in deposit funding, which historically has been “stickier” than wholesale funding.  The sharp drop in money market fund liabilities and a decline in dealer-intermediated finance, which relies heavily on short-term wholesale funding, are also important factors.  Decreased reliance on short-term wholesale funding suggests that cyclical risks from liquidity pressures are reduced.  Nonetheless, structural vulnerabilities, including those associated with the run-prone structure of money market funds, remain significant.  The comment period on the money market reform options proposed by the SEC on June 5 closes today. On balance, and as noted in the bottom panel, the vulnerability of the financial system, at least from a cyclical perspective, appears moderate, as loss-absorbing capital has increased and the reliance on short-term funding and the exposure of financial institutions to nonfinancial credit risk have decreased.  Nonetheless, there are a number of potential shocks on the horizon that could prove challenging to markets and institutions, including a failure to raise the debt ceiling, financial instability in emerging markets, and geopolitical risks in the Middle East.  On the policy development front, staff continue to pursue initiatives related to those pockets of concern we have identified.  The staff are looking to further evaluate risk management at agency REITs and, in addition to discussions with dealers, have broached the possibility of collecting data with the Office of Financial Research at the Treasury Department.  In addition, banking agencies’ staffs are working to ensure compliance of banks with the guidance for leveraged loan issuance released earlier this year and will be following up with banks based on the results of this year’s review of Shared National Credits.  Finally, the staff throughout the System are continuing to scrutinize interest rate risks at banks, and are working to evaluate exposures to potential problems in emerging market economies.  Chris Gust will continue our presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and summarizing recent developments.


Passage number 102.
MR. GUST.6 I will be referring to the packet labeled “Material for Briefing on the Summary of Economic Projections.” Exhibit 1 shows the trajectories of your forecasts for key economic variables. The top panel shows a pickup in GDP growth over the next couple of years.  Subsequently, in 2016, it appears to start to converge toward its longer-run rate.  Your projections for the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, decline gradually over the forecast period, reaching levels by the fourth quarter of 2016 that the majority of you view as still somewhat above your individual judgments of the longer-run rate of unemployment.  The bottom two panels show inflation rising over the next few years; almost all of you see it remaining at or below the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Exhibit 2 compares your current projections with those in the June SEP and with the Tealbook.  The top panel contains what is probably the most notable change in your projections since June, which is the reduction in the central tendency for real GDP growth in 2013 and, to a lesser extent, in 2014.  While a number of you now estimate that growth in the first half of 2013 was a bit lower than you expected in June, your projections for H2 growth are, on average, a substantial 0.4 percentage point lower than in June.  Many of you noted that weaker-than-expected incoming data contributed to the downward revisions, while some pointed to higher interest rates or tighter financial conditions as key factors.  The central tendencies for the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, and for inflation, shown in the two lower panels, are relatively unchanged from June.  The Tealbook forecast for real GDP growth is near the upper end of the central tendencies over the projection period, with the unemployment rate in the Tealbook forecast moving just below the central tendencies in 2015 and 2016.  For inflation, the Tealbook projections are near the lower ends of the central tendencies throughout the projection period. Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, three participants believe that the federal funds rate should increase next year, but the rest of you judge it will not be appropriate to begin to increase the funds rate until 2015 or later.  The middle panel of the exhibit provides your current assessments of the appropriate target for the federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over the longer run.  Those three participants who see the first tightening occurring next year also judge that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate in 2016 will be at their individual assessment of its longer-run level.  In contrast, all of the participants who see the first tightening in either 2015 or 2016 believe that the federal funds rate at the end of 2016 should still be below its longer-run level. With regard to securities purchases, most of you indicated that your assessment of appropriate policy is about in line with the assumption in the Tealbook baseline forecast, in which the pace of asset purchases begins to slow this year and ends by the middle of 2014, bringing the cumulative amount to about $1.2 trillion.  Two of you, 6 The materials used by Mr. Gust are appended to this transcript (appendix 6).however, prefer a larger purchase program, while one additional participant does not see any reductions in the pace as warranted until next year. In contrast, two others judge that the pace of asset purchases should be slowed or stopped sooner than assumed in the Tealbook baseline, implying a smaller cumulative amount of purchases, and another believes that the size of the balance sheet should be shrunk more quickly than the Tealbook anticipates. Exhibit 4 depicts the economic conditions that you anticipate at the end of the year in which you judge that it will become appropriate to raise the federal funds rate above its current target range.  Recognizing that the departure date from the effective lower bound may occur before year-end, the series shown are only illustrative of the conditions around that date.  Your projections for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year of liftoff range from 5.2 to 6.4 percent, with a median of 6 percent, while your inflation projections are clustered between 1.6 and 2.0 percent, with a median of 1.8 percent. All of you project that the unemployment rate will be below the Committee’s 6½ percent threshold at the end of the year in which you view the initial increase in the federal funds rate to be appropriate, and all but one of you judge that inflation will still be at or below the Committee’s longer-run objective. The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the uncertainty and risks surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the top two panels in the column on the left, most of you judge the current level of uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment to be broadly similar to the average level over the past 20 years, although four of you continue to see it as higher.  Most of you also judge the level of uncertainty about inflation, shown in the lower two panels in the column on the left, to be broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years.  Turning to the top panel in the column on the right, more of you now, compared to June, see the risks to GDP growth as weighted to the downside.  Further down the column on the right, most of you see the risks to the unemployment rate and inflation as broadly balanced.  In assessing the uncertainty and risks to the outlook for real activity and prices, participants noted a range of issues surrounding U.S. fiscal and monetary policy as well as the tightening in financial conditions in recent months. Thank you.  That concludes the staff presentations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply summarizing the projections and assessments of the participants without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 103.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there questions for the staff. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite statement expressing gratitude and requesting if there are any questions for the staff.


Passage number 104.
 MR. FISHER.  I will defer to Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply stating that he will defer to Governor Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 105.
  MS. YELLEN.  I would like to offer an observation on our current SEP submissions and specifically on the projections for 2016.  Most participants project that by late 2016 the economy will be very close to maximum employment.  The median projected unemployment gap, calculated as the unemployment rate less that participant’s estimate of the longer-run normal rate, is one-tenth of a percentage point.  Also, most participants expect that inflation will be very close to 2 percent.  But the median funds rate projection stands at 2 percent; that’s 2 percentage points below the median estimate of its longer-run normal value. The SEP funds rate projections for 2016 will receive a good deal of attention when they are released tomorrow, and the public may find this feature of our projections surprising and even puzzling.  For example, suppose the public uses the Taylor (1999) rule without inertia as a benchmark.  If they plug in the unemployment and core inflation gaps implied by the midpoint of the central tendencies for these variables, and if they further use our median long-run normal value for the funds rate of 4 percent, they will discover that this rule prescribes a funds rate at the end of 2016 of 3¾ percent, compared with the median SEP projection of only 2 percent. Now, of course, each one of us presumably knows exactly how and why he or she arrived at their individual funds rate projection, but the public could infer different rationales, so I think it’s worth discussing and trying to be clear among ourselves about why our funds rate projections are so low. One possible rationale is that these funds rate settings reflect a commitment policy in the spirit of Woodford and the optimal control policies reported in the Tealbook.  Such a policy post-2016 would lead to sustained overshooting of inflation and undershooting of the unemployment rate. But looking at the individual projections, it appears that, with very few exceptions, they are more in line with monotonic convergence of the unemployment rate back to its longer-run normal value and inflation to 2 percent as in the Tealbook baseline.  Speaking for myself, I didn’t actually incorporate sustained overshooting in my own SEP projection.  Rather, my policy projection reflects the view that the headwinds afflicting the economy will continue to restrain economic growth even in 2016, so that a return to full employment and 2 percentinflation at that time is only attainable with the real funds rate remaining below its long-run equilibrium value. I think that for the effectiveness of our forward guidance, it likely matters which of these two interpretations is the one that the public infers. If we are writing down projections that incorporate an important element of commitment to time-inconsistent policies, the public might question whether it is plausible that future committees will deliver on these promises, especially with the period of changeover in the Committee’s composition ahead of us. In contrast, if most of us are writing down low funds rate projections for 2016 primarily because we anticipate that the headwinds will abate only gradually, it makes sense for us to communicate that our policy projections are driven by this feature of the economic outlook and, therefore, are approximately time consistent.  Provided the public broadly shares our economic outlook, it should conclude that future Committees will be likely to follow this path, and this anticipation should strengthen our forward guidance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage discusses a disagreement among participants about the projected funds rate for 2016. Some participants believe that the low funds rate projections reflect a commitment policy, while others believe it is due to the ongoing headwinds affecting the economy.


Passage number 106.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor, which headwinds would you emphasize, if I was asked.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a neutral question asking the governor to highlight certain challenges.


Passage number 107.
 MS. YELLEN.  I will return to this in the economic go-round.  I will just say, for the moment:  housing, financial conditions, and fiscal policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions different topics that will be discussed later.


Passage number 108.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 109.
 MR. FISHER.  I want to come back to Steve Kamin, and make sure I clearly understood what you said.  I believe what you said is that financial conditions have not tightened in recent months in the advanced countries or emerging Asia.  But there has been financial stress in Brazil, India, Indonesia, and, to a lesser extent, elsewhere.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage does not depict any contention or disagreement. The speaker is merely seeking clarification on a statement made by Steve Kamin.


Passage number 110.
  MR. KAMIN.  Well, let me nuance that a little bit. I was actually not referring to financial conditions in advanced foreign economies at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing additional information or clarifying their previous statement without contradicting it.


Passage number 111.
 MR. FISHER.  You used the word “tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentioned that the word "tightening" was used.


Passage number 112.
” MR. KAMIN. If I did, with respect to financial conditions for those countries, I may have misspoken.  But what I did note is that for the advanced foreign industrial economies, the economic news has been on the good side and has kind of strengthened our conviction that these economies seem to be on a recovery path. I didn’t mean to refer specifically to financial conditions in those economies, although, as a matter of fact, it looks like financial conditions in Europe have continued to improve a bit on net.  And that has been part of what has supported the recovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker clarifies their statement and acknowledges that they may have misspoken about financial conditions for certain countries. However, they do note that the economic news for advanced foreign industrial economies has been positive and supports the idea that these economies are on a recovery path. They also mention that financial conditions in Europe have continued to improve. Overall, there is a clarification of statements rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 113.
 MR. FISHER.  And that would be true for Japan as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or opinion about Japan.


Passage number 114.
 MR. KAMIN.  And that would be true for Japan as well—not necessarily over the intermeeting period per se, but just over the past few months—just looking at the yen continuing to be weak, which is supportive of growth, stock prices up, and yields staying low. Now, for the emerging market economies, broadly speaking, if you look at conditions since May, before the recent run-up, almost all of them have experienced some depreciation of currencies, some increase in yields and borrowing costs, and some capital outflows as measured by flows into and out of emerging market bond funds.  That said, different economies have been affected to different degrees.  And certainly Brazil, India, Turkey, Indonesia, and maybe South Africa, have been among the ones that have been hardest hit by this over the past few months, with other economies like Korea hit less by it.  And in fact, over the intermeeting period, a couple of those currencies actually experienced some strengthening. I hope that answers your question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting facts and observations without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 115.
 MR. FISHER.  It was very helpful in terms of understanding when we say “tightening of financial conditions” what we are referring to. I appreciate that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses appreciation for the information provided.


Passage number 116.
 MR. KAMIN.  And it’s very important to understand that it has not affected all countries to the same degree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is stating a fact about the impact of something on different countries.


Passage number 117.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, MR. FISHER is expressing gratitude, showing agreement or consensus.


Passage number 118.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions President Lockhart without providing any additional information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 119.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question for Michael Kiley.  Your chart on corporate bond spreads generally shows a kind of comforting decline.  A couple of my directors reacted with surprise to the Verizon deal this past week and the spreads that were in that deal.  Can you explain if there is any significance to that particular deal and the epic spreads that were written into that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply asks for an explanation of the Verizon deal and the spreads associated with it.


Passage number 120.
 MR. KILEY.  There may be others who know a little bit more about that particular aspect of the deal.  My understanding is that the spreads were a little bit high at the initial offering, and that there was a lot of price action on the initial day. The anecdotes are that they really wanted to get the deal done and for it to be well received. I personally was surprised to see so much price action on the first day—the spreads really narrowed in the secondary market.  And I don’t know if there is more to say about it than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing their understanding and personal observations, without contradicting or opposing any previous statement.


Passage number 121.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The term "Vice Chairman" is a title or position and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 122.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think that’s exactly right.  My understanding was that the size of the deal was so large that they priced it at an attractive level to make sure the deal got done.  And then, of course, when the deal did get done and bonds were absorbed—people didn’t know whether the bonds would be absorbed easily—then the market rallied subsequent to that. I think it was really the size of the deal that drove initial pricing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation of their understanding that the size of the deal influenced the pricing and subsequent market rally.


Passage number 123.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, just a comment, may I. Originally, they went for $20 billion.  They received over $100 billion in bids.  They took down $43 billion.  Four months ago, Apple did $15 or $14 billion, and that was spectacular.  I think the reading of Vice Chairman Dudley is correct.  The size was enormous, and the question was how it would be absorbed.  But in the aftermarket, again, the spreads narrowed, as you’ve pointed out. I don’t know what your directors’ concerns were.  It indicated a voracious appetite.  Verizon is a BBB-rated creditor or BAA-plus.  So it’s not totally pristine in terms of its balance sheet.  And it also wanted to pay $130 billion for 40 percent control; previously they had offered a fourth of that and been turned down.  It shows you how conditions are in certain areas of the market.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is mostly a comment and observation on the size and success of Verizon's bond offering.


Passage number 124.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 125.
 MR. EVANS.  These are the financial-stability questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "these are the financial-stability questions" without indicating any conflict or opposing views.


Passage number 126.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any question to the staff that you would like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply mentions the opportunity to ask a question to the staff without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 127.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In March, we had a discussion about the importance of macroprudential actions and supervisory actions for addressing potential financial instabilities, especially in an environment with low interest rates. I didn’t read the paper, so I can only take note, but apparently former Board Vice Chairman Don Kohn made some interesting comments the other day at Brookings.  If the headlines were right, he mentioned that, if monetary policy is set incorrectly, it can generate imbalances that would be so strong that even regulatory or supervisory actions can’t really mitigate them.  I will have to go dig that up because I thought that was sobering, to the extent that that’s true. Do we feel comfortable that the additional supervisory actions that we have taken since March have been addressing the financial instability concerns that we pointed to last March. I think the answer is “yes,” because I am aware of a number of actions that have been taken, but maybe if somebody could opine about that, that would be helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and asking for someone to opine on whether the supervisory actions taken since March have addressed financial instability concerns.


Passage number 128.
 MR. KILEY.  There may be a range of views. I think in general we are comfortable that things are moving in the right direction, that when pockets are identified, things are done.  I gave the example of leveraged lending.  I would like to bring that up for two reasons.  One, things are being done.  It is being looked at.  That’s good because we do think there is an aggressive demand for credit.  I would also note there that the guidance was in the works for a very long time.  We didn’t identify that in February and say, “Oh, let’s do something by March.” It was actually a multiyear process, and I think that may be indicative of the types of concerns that former Board Vice Chairman Kohn expressed.  There are limits to how different policies work, and you need to take an overall view of how things are going, and use all of the tools you have available.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their comfort with the direction things are moving in and giving an example to support their viewpoint. They also mention the lengthy process involved in implementing certain policies, which may be indicative of concerns raised by former Board Vice Chairman Kohn. Overall, there is no direct disagreement or contention evident in this passage.


Passage number 129.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any mention of disagreement or contention. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 130.
 MR. TARULLO. I don’t know if Mike Gibson wants to speak to anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating that the speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is unsure if Mike Gibson wants to add anything to the conversation.


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  At any point, if a staff member has a comment, please stand and let us know.  We’re at President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement requesting staff members to stand and provide comments if they have any.


Passage number 132.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage or more context. Please provide the passage or more information for a more accurate answer.


Passage number 133.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of questions for Mike Kiley.  Previous QS assessments have noted the risk of spikes in interest rates.  Of course, in those earlier assessments, there was a lot of discussion around the source of the spike being important and spiking rates having important implications for financial stability.  We’ve just had a significant spike in interest rates going back to, say, May, but the analysis from the Board and others is it’s mostly in term premiums, not expected interest rates or other factors.  My first question really is, what did we learn from what’s happened since April–May in terms of the   effect of the spike in interest rates, given the source of the shock.  And, related to that, how has that affected smaller banks and regional banks, not just regarding financial stability but more broadly. And if I can, let me just ask a quick second question, which is around your indicators of vulnerabilities.  I am impressed with your courage to draw trend lines around clearly nonstationary series.  [Laughter]  And I notice they have interesting, colorful shapes.  But what I really am asking is a serious question.  What do you want us to look at, or how do you and your colleagues think about this.  Is the point of having the trend lines to have a point of reference to some previous peak or trough.  Should we be looking at growth rates or levels. I open up that question to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 134.
 MR. KILEY.  Let me take care of your second question first. I’ll introduce a comic element for an econometrician.  The HP filter handles I(2) series, so there’s no concern about nonstationarity there on the trend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward response to a question without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 135.
  [Laughter]  But more seriously— MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s one of the funniest things that has ever been said at an FOMC meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. It includes laughter and a lighthearted comment, indicating a positive and humorous atmosphere rather than any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 136.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  But only a few of us understand it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The laughter in brackets indicates that something humorous or light-hearted has been said, but it does not imply disagreement or contention.


Passage number 137.
 MR. KILEY.  One of the reasons I put the trend on that second chart, the one on the middle right, was to raise exactly that question and to highlight the point I emphasized when looking at the credit-to-GDP ratio.  We don’t know the trends for these series, and we don’t know the sustainable levels.  We could be way off.  What should we look at. We should look at the levels relative to trends.  We should back-test how good those sorts of estimates are, certainly in credit-to-GDP space. That sort of thing has been done by many researchers. I think the conclusions from that kind of back-testing of what kind of signal we get from a measure like this are a little bit mixed. They suggest that we get some information from a signal like this, but also that we should be looking at credit growth and at a broader set of developments.  I suppose I would say the same thing for the other series.  These are not a sufficient set of statistics, but they highlight key things that we look at:  What’s going on with regard to leverage in the nonfinancial sector and hence, the credit risks of the borrowers that, if economic conditions deteriorate, could spill over into losses for financial institutions. How leveraged are the financial institutions. The panel at the middle-left gives a simple measure for banks.  We don’t necessarily have these measures for a wide range of other institutions, but we have other measures and hold conversations with market contacts in order to get a sense there.  Short-term funding, shown on the middle-right, is a measure that we haven’t presented before in a briefing like this. It’s interesting. It has been used in some recent research by academics. It’s fairly comprehensive because it includes banks, broker–dealers, mutual funds, money market funds, insurers, pensions, and you get a sense of what’s going on in the whole sector.  There’s also a disadvantage of this measure because it’s a whole bunch of actors who behave a little bit differently.  So we wouldn’t look only at something like this, but we’ve been trying to show a little bit of mercy in that the QS report might be slightly shorter than it has been at some points in the past, but it does have a lot of stuff in there.  I look at every single one of them.  I might not remember every one, but I’m sure that, across the staff, we do a pretty good job of looking at all those things.  That’s a pretty general look-at-everything answer, but I think that’s really important because these are new areas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing an explanation and discussing different measures and considerations in analyzing credit risks and financial institutions.


Passage number 138.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 139.
 WILLIAMS.  Mike, if we saw a doubling or even more than a doubling of this net short-term wholesale debt over the next six months, that would put it back on trend, but wouldyou also say, “Hey, doubling in six months is worrisome”. That’s what I’m trying to get at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 140.
 Should I be looking at the change or should I be looking— MR. KILEY.  I would be very worried about that. I wouldn’t be able to pinpoint exactly why, and I would have to think a lot harder, but I would be, yes. Let’s move back now to the question on what’s happened since interest rates increased. A memo was sent to the Committee in March saying interest rates can go up.  In fact, they did.  We highlighted that that would lead to losses at banks of a certain size on their available-for-sale portfolios if that kind of thing happened.  Given the size of the increase in interest rates, it was in the ballpark of what we expected. It wasn’t a huge shock.  REITs were adversely affected. There was amplification in the effect on the market through them having to shed assets. I would say that that was as expected directionally, but I think people think that REITs actually weathered this storm a little bit better than what was expected. Now, that leads to the question of whether or not the next 100 basis point move, if there were one, would be the same as the last.  As you eat into capital, you might get closer to a trigger point, and the next 100 basis points could be tougher for some levered investors.  However, this may have been a wake-up call and people may step back from positions, and so the next 100 basis points could be less worrisome for those sorts of actors. I guess another sector that we highlighted was insurers.  To date, we don’t get high frequency financial reporting on insurers.  It’s a slow-moving sector.  Certainly their stock prices have reacted positively to the increase in interest rates, which may reflect an ability over time to invest at higher yields and meet some of the liabilities that they have, and it also may reflect the lack of disintermediation from their products because long rates have gone up.  They haven’t  gone up so much to make the products that they offer unattractive and then to lose the money.  We haven’t seen any deposit-type outflows or heard stories of that. I’d say directionally things are pretty consistent with what we expected in a variety of areas, actually quantitatively as well. Just to highlight, from a financial stability perspective, 100 basis points is a big deal for monetary policy.  We were certainly concerned.  We didn’t write down huge losses for a 100 basis point spike in interest rates, and I guess that’s all I would have to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It primarily consists of the speaker expressing their thoughts and observations on the impact of interest rate increases.


Passage number 141.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to answer this question without the passage or additional context. Please provide the passage or more information for further assistance.


Passage number 142.
 WILLIAMS.  The punchline is that, based on the 100 basis points, we didn’t get any big negative news.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 143.
 MR. KILEY.  We didn’t get any big negative news, and I think there’s some positive news.  Maybe one piece of negative news, and I’ll let Simon jump in, is we certainly had some concerns that there would be some liquidity constraint problems in markets.  Nonetheless, maybe we expected dealers to make markets a little bit better than what we saw.  That made the situation perhaps painful for some actors, but it didn’t rise to a stability concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kiley is sharing his opinion and expressing that there were some concerns about liquidity constraint problems in markets, but it did not rise to a stability concern.


Passage number 144.
 MR. POTTER.  I think the one thing was the global carry trade and how that unwound.  That probably wasn’t featured in the report, which is why we’re looking at other countries right now, but that would be the most surprising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. POTTER simply expresses his belief that the global carry trade and its unwinding is likely not featured in the report, which is why they are currently looking at other countries. He acknowledges that this would be the most surprising aspect.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing gratitude and acknowledging President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 146.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thought this chart “The Evolution of Various Key Activity, Inflation, and Financial Projections” that David presented was very interesting and useful.  I had questions about the evolution of the employment-to-population ratio.  As you noted, the employment-to-population ratio forecast now for the end of 2014 is about 0.2 percentage point higher than it was in the September 2012 meeting.  There was a big jump in the employment-to-population ratio between August and September of last year by about 0.3, in fact, from 58.4 to 58.7 percent.  I wondered if that change between August and September might actually be influencing the bump up in the forecast. Another question that relates about the 2015 employment-to-population ratio—I don’t have any electronic devices so, I was actually forced to try to multiply by hand [laughter], which was painful, painful, painful—but I was getting something on the order of 59.6 percent. That would be a huge increase in the next two years relative to what we’ve seen since the recovery began.  I guess the first question is:  What is the implied employment-to-population ratio in 2015. And, second, why is the behavior of labor force participation and the employment-to-population ratio going to be so different over the next couple of years as opposed to the preceding couple of years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking questions and seeking clarification about the employment-to-population ratio forecast.


Passage number 147.
 MR. WASCHER. The forecast for the end of 2015 for the employment-to-population ratio is 59.5 percent, so you were close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the forecast for the employment-to-population ratio at the end of 2015 was 59.5 percent, and acknowledging that it was close to their previous estimate or prediction.


Passage number 148.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay. I’ll have to go back and do that again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they need to go back and redo something.


Passage number 149.
  [Laughter] MR. WASCHER.  In terms of the participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio, there is a long-run downward trend in the participation rate that we are carrying through the forecast.  Some of that is demographic, some of that is other things that we think are more structural in nature.  And that contributes to the different pattern. The pickup in the employment-to-population ratio is bigger than in recent years.  I think that reflects our view that the economy is going to pick up and employment growth is going to pick up and is going to generate the job gains to push that up.  And it really is more of a cyclical improvement in the employment-to-population ratio than we’ve seen in the past.  And the other part of that is, while we have this long-run downtrend in the participation rate, some of the   increase in employment we think is going to come from entry back into the labor force, and that is also going to contribute to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 150.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: yes

Explanation: The word "see" indicates that the speaker may have a different perspective or opinion than what has been previously discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 151.
  So there is a long-run trend that is being offset by— MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  And so the participation rate moves back toward its declining long-run trend over the forecast period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker's statement that the participation rate moves back toward its declining long-run trend is being interrupted or disagreed with by Mr. Wascher's "yes" response, suggesting that he holds a different view or interpretation of the situation.


Passage number 152.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is simply thanking someone for something.


Passage number 153.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context given to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 154.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My questions are also about this same page here, “Evolution of Various Key Activity, Inflation, and Financial Projections,” which I found fascinating.  I love this summary.  Let me see if I can get this right. The way we have it is, real GDP growth, not changed very much in actual or forecast from last September; 10-year and mortgage rates are not changed much from last September.  But if you look at the stock market, it’s up 10 percent, and projected to go higher.  And housing prices, not shown, are up 15 percent.  So there is a big wealth effect here. But as I understand it, that doesn’t really affect GDP according to this analysis.  Wealth is up a lot.  Rates haven’t changed.  GDP doesn’t change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement between the speaker and the analysis mentioned. The speaker argues that there is a significant wealth effect due to increases in the stock market and housing prices, but the analysis claims that this does not affect GDP.


Passage number 155.
 MR. WILCOX.  Resource utilization is tighter at the moment than what we had projected.  Let me see if I can get this sign right.  We have taken down the level of potential GDP by about ½ percentage point.  So we have the GDP gap a little narrower at the moment. We did some of that in this most recent projection, but the revision relative to a year ago is bigger than what we just did in the most recent projection.  And measured by the unemployment rate, even taking into account the fact that we’ve moved down our natural rate, our unemployment rate gap is narrower.  All of this is a little murky, and we haven’t spent a huge amount of time on it.  I’m going to run up the white flag pretty quickly here.  [Laughter] I think it’s consistent with the hypothesis that we have an economy that currently looks like it is modestly tighter than what we had before, with interest rates that are not higher than before.  I thought, gee, that’s kind of an interesting juxtaposition, since I would have thought in the abstract, if you only told me that the economy was a little tighter, I would have expected long rates to be projected to be higher.  And that’s why I posited the possibility that an easier stance of monetary policy might be part of that, since we hadn’t incorporated that major easing in the stance of monetary policy that you took a year ago into our September 2012 Tealbook projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 156.
 MR. BULLARD.  My question may be simpler.  This is a wealth effect on the order of $10 trillion or so.  So you’re telling me this has no impact on our outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question that seeks clarification or confirmation of a statement.


Passage number 157.
 MR. WILCOX.  No, I’m not saying that.  What I’m saying is, that was probably offset by a bunch of other stuff that I haven’t taken into account and haven’t had the time to delve into.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker explicitly states that they are not saying something specific, but rather speculating about other factors they haven't considered yet. There is no conflict of opinions or opposition here.


Passage number 158.
 MR. RUDD.  Could I make one interjection.  I’m sorry.  The exchange rate being higher offsets about two-thirds of the wealth effect in rough terms.  So we also have a higher exchange rate relative to a year ago. Item 9 on the table there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It contains a statement by Mr. Rudd regarding the exchange rate and its impact on the wealth effect.


Passage number 159.
 MR. BULLARD. I was taking it to be about the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Bullard seems to be in agreement with whatever was being discussed previously.


Passage number 160.
 MR. RUDD.  Item 9 shows the path of the exchange rate is about 3¼ percent on average higher over the projection period.  And by our rules of thumb, that would offset roughly two-thirds of the wealth effect from the higher stock and house price paths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and providing an analysis based on "our rules of thumb."


Passage number 161.
 MR. BULLARD.  Interesting.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing gratitude for something that he found interesting.


Passage number 162.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  [No response]  If not, I understand coffee is ready.  Why don’t we reconvene at 3:20.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply addressing the group and confirming that there are no further questions before suggesting to reconvene at a specific time. The final statement expresses gratitude.


Passage number 163.
 [Coffee break]  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. Before we begin our economic go-round, four times a year we have an opportunity for people to make comments or raise questions about financial stability issues.  And I have President Rosengren on my list first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the format of a meeting.


Passage number 164.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I am just going to make two quick comments.  First, I want to thank Steve for talking so much about emerging markets.  That is actually what I wanted one of my comments to be on.  Being in Boston, I’m the beneficiary of a wide number of central bankers and economists from both Europe and emerging markets who pass through over the course of the summer.  And when they talk about “the emerging markets’ swoon,” it is not as if it’s an exogenous shock for emerging markets, it’s more “The Fed has caused this problem,” that frequently comes up in conversation.  And I think it probably is worth, over time, thinking about how our various policy tools do impact emerging markets and how it reverberates back, because certainly the perception abroad seems to be that quantitative easing and some of our other tools have a disproportionate impact not only on our economy but on their economies as well.  And this is probably an area where we could do some more work that clarifies what is a reasonable expectation.  Certainly, our own assumptions of the effects on our own economy would not be consistent with the magnified effects that they think our policies are having on some emerging markets.  And I think there is some academic research that has been moving in this direction, but it is probably a topic that, if I’m hearing it in Boston, I can imagine the Governors and Vice Chairman Dudley are hearing it a lot in their travels as well.  And it would be nice to be a little bit more armed with data that could highlight how our tools might affect other countries as well as our own.  Just in terms of future work, I think that would be very useful, and it sounds like you are already doing a fair bit in this area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement and a suggestion for further research. The speaker acknowledges the concerns of people from emerging markets regarding the impact of the Fed's policies, and suggests that more research is needed to clarify the effects on both the US and other countries' economies.


Passage number 165.
 MR. KAMIN.  We are indeed, and we will be doing more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "we are indeed" and that "we will be doing more".


Passage number 166.
  MR. ROSENGREN.  Good.  My second comment gets a little bit to David Wilcox’s initial comments where he was talking about fiscal policy. Mine is actually more on state and municipal finances.  Frequently we hear about states like Illinois, but I think it’s worth keeping an eye on Puerto Rico, and I’m sure we are keeping an eye on Puerto Rico.  Puerto Rico has high debt burdens, it has a dependence on market financing, and there are fiscal issues and the risk of downgrade to noninvestment grade status.  Financial stability concerns arise because roughly 80 percent of muni mutual funds hold Puerto Rican debt.  In fact, the recent increases in the yields would indicate that market participants have already become increasingly concerned about the outlook on that debt.  I think on the heels of the Detroit bankruptcy, a Puerto Rican default, or even a near default, particularly at the same time that fiscal policy is going through some travails, as were highlighted in David’s comments, could potentially have an impact on investor confidence and possibly spread more broadly through municipal financial markets.  So it may just be something to keep an eye on.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concern about the fiscal issues and potential downgrade of Puerto Rico's debt, as well as the possible impact on investor confidence and municipal financial markets.


Passage number 167.
 MR. TARULLO.  Can I ask Eric a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Certainly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 169.
 MR. TARULLO.  Eric, do you have a prior on that emerging market issue, or were you just suggesting that we need collectively to think more about it and have better answers than we have had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is merely asking Eric whether he has any prior knowledge or opinion on the emerging market issue, or if he is simply suggesting that there is a need for collective thinking and better solutions.


Passage number 170.
 MR. ROSENGREN. It is primarily focused on quantitative easing. When people come and talk about the impact of our quantitative easing, I talk about roughly what our estimates are in terms of interest rate effects and the broader effects on the economy, which are positive but relatively modest.  They seem to think that, one, our estimates are much lower than their ownestimates, and, two, that the impact on their own economy is much larger than the impact that we are attributing to our economy. Looking at the timing effects, it does seem you could make a consistent argument that the time that the emerging markets started to swoon was around the time that we started talking about our tapering program.  It seems like it is worth getting a better sense of what those connections are, what the magnitudes are.  I know what the magnitudes are from my own staff in terms of what we’re thinking about for the effects on our own economy.  But thinking about how it might reverberate and how that could potentially cause some of the financial problems to actually become more severe in emerging markets and possibly circle back to us—that kind of reverberation effect is something I haven’t spent a lot of time thinking about, but it certainly is something that colleagues from abroad seem to be spending a lot of time thinking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Rosengren about the impact of quantitative easing and the differing views between the Federal Reserve and colleagues from abroad.


Passage number 171.
 MR. TARULLO.  Steve, I assume we have looked at the impacts on the way in—that is, as we were starting LSAPs and the flows into the emerging markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of assumption made by Mr. Tarullo.


Passage number 172.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes.  Well, we’ve been researching the impact of our easing on capital flows to EMEs.  Our sense is that certainly our easing has been one of the factors pushing capital toward EMEs, but not the only factor.  Another is just that they have higher steady-state rates of growth than we do.  More recently, we have been looking at the factors that have been at play as rates have been rising. Basically, we have been looking at the relationship between emerging market asset prices, both on the way down and on the way up.  Our sense is that probably EME asset prices moved up a bit more than might be explained just by our easing in the early period.  And then with the swoon, they have probably moved down a bit more than might be explained by the run-up in U.S. interest rates.  So this is something we are actively researching.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states their research findings and acknowledges the presence of multiple factors influencing capital flows to emerging market economies (EMEs). They mention that their easing policies have contributed to the capital flow, but it is not the sole factor. They also discuss the relationship between EME asset prices and the impact of both easing and rising interest rates. However, there is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 173.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about the content of Mr. Tarullo's statement, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement without further context.


Passage number 174.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "President Kocherlakota" is simply stating a title or position held by someone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 175.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a few comments on financial stability.  I enjoyed Mike’s presentation.  It was very useful. I especially liked some of the discussion at the very end of what staff were doing in terms of following up on initiatives related to pockets of concern.  It’s useful to see the mapping between what’s being generated in the report and actions being taken.  I thought President Evans’s questions were useful along those lines as well. And I also think that the discussion of financial stability that appears before the alternative simulations in the Tealbook is a great starting point for trying to build in financial stability considerations into our thinking about monetary policy.  I’ve mentioned this before. I continue to think that it would be useful to translate the discussion into at least crude quantitative measures of risk to prices and employment.  And by crude, I mean something like, is there a 1-in-1,000 chance of a financial crisis with significant macroeconomic consequences in the next two years, 1-in-100 chance, 1-in-10 chance—orders-of-magnitude kinds of ideas. My next comment is about this issue of using monetary policy to mitigate possible financial instability. We often hear the suggestion that we can mitigate incipient financial instability by tightening monetary policy, but there’s quite a tricky term issue here, right.  If it’s right on us, we are not supposed to tighten.  We’re supposed to ease.  So right away, you see subtleties there.  But I think we’ve seen tightening of monetary policy since early May.  Ten-year Treasury yields have risen by more than 100 basis points.  This increase has been accompanied by at most a slight improvement in the macroeconomic outlook.  So it seems reasonable to interpret the increase in rates as largely attributable to a noticeable tightening of monetary policy. We see this, too, in the inflation breakevens.  The Fed is now expected to keep interest rates  higher for a wider range of macroeconomic outlooks.  So when I think about tightening, I don’t just think about our benchmark outlook.  I think about what we are going to do for a wide range of possible outlooks, and I think we’re expected to follow a tighter policy for a wide range of outlooks, and that’s reflected, as I indicated earlier, in the higher term premium as well. But anyway, how has this tightening of policy affected financial stability.  Now, we have a lot of different tools, so it’s not a suggestion about only one of them, but the effects seem quite mixed.  I would say that measures of risk and risk appetite have actually risen in the past three or four months.  If you look at the equity premium, it’s fallen even though the VIX has risen.  Spreads of risky bonds really haven’t changed very much, so it may be hard to read much into that.  We heard reports that the increase in long rates was actually increasing incentives to reach for yield among financial institutions.  The basic problem here was that income from mortgage duration had fallen sharply because of the increase in mortgage rates, but, at the same time, the financial institutions could not earn that much interest income from medium-term loans because interest rates were still very low for medium-term loans.  So tightening policy at the long end of the curve had really put more pressure on profits, and in that sense exacerbated the reaching-for-yield problem. I’ve highlighted some senses in which we haven’t seen a diminution in financial system vulnerabilities because of the tightening of monetary policy.  There are also ways in which the increase in long rates has reduced financial system risk.  I won’t talk about that.  I’m not taking a stand on whether they, on balance, increase or decrease risks.  My point is a more limited one. We don’t have a clear understanding of how monetary policy is going to affect financial system vulnerability.  This idea that’s out there in the blogosphere—and actually even if you go to the movies there’s this idea out there—that if you tighten monetary policy, you can control financial system risks.  We need a lot more understanding and a lot more study of this before we can reach that simple conclusion.   My own view is, with all of these uncertainties, I wouldn’t want to rely on monetary policy tightening at this point as a way to deal with these risks. The best way the FOMC can ameliorate financial system risks is by eliminating monetary policy uncertainty.  Unfortunately, I feel we’ve moved in the opposite direction on that in the past few months.  We’ve increased uncertainty about monetary policy as opposed to decreased it.  In my view, we can best reduce that policy uncertainty by following a clear strategy that’s focused on achieving our dual mandate objectives over the medium term, but I’ll talk about that more tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, disagrees with the idea that tightening monetary policy can control financial system risks. He argues that there is not enough understanding or study on how monetary policy affects financial system vulnerability, and therefore he would not want to rely on monetary policy tightening to address these risks. He suggests that the best way to ameliorate financial system risks is by eliminating monetary policy uncertainty and following a clear strategy focused on achieving the dual mandate objectives over the medium term.


Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply includes a statement of gratitude towards President George.


Passage number 177.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the interest of time, I’m going to abbreviate my comments. I would say to President Rosengren there were some papers that came out of the Jackson Hole Symposium that I thought were relevant to his issue with the EMEs. The points I wanted to make really are all present in the QS report.  Just a reminder that even as we’ve seen the uptick in rates that took some of the valuation pressure out of the market, there are a couple of areas that I still am focused on, and one has to do with the earnings pressure that comes from low net interest margins in this rate environment. I’m particularly looking at a group of banks that are very prominent in my region, and that is community and regional banks.  We’re continuing to see a growing asset–liability mismatch, which increases the interest rate risk exposure; I’m looking at continuing longer-term loans being booked over this period, in addition to longer-term securities. The other area that I would just elaborate on is farmland prices, and the thing I would note here is that these prices continue to grow despite the fact that expectations for falling farm   incomes are becoming more widespread at this time.  When I look at these land prices now, they’re well above what we saw in the 1980s.  The price-to-rent ratios exceed the long-term averages really by record amounts in many of the Corn Belt states.  Acknowledging that there are probably not, at this stage, broad stability risks because of the lack of leverage, I think the implications of any decline in these valuations at a regional level could be significant. Finally, I would just echo again some of the comments about the risk we see in the leveraged loan market.  I know supervisors are looking at that, but those really are symptomatic of this reach for yield with the covenants and the high debt multiples that we see.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MS. GEORGE is simply providing her comments and observations on various financial issues.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Evans without indicating any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 179.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had mentioned before that I was concerned about monitoring the credibility of our forward-guidance tools for monetary policy.  Based on some of the comments Simon made in his Desk presentation, it looks like the announcement of potential reductions in our flow purchase rate have altered markets’ assessment of how long we’re going to subscribe to our forward-guidance threshold.  I don’t know the size of it, but that’s a little bit of a concern. I think that’s an unintended reaction to the communications that we’ve made in the past three or four months.  But then I’ll note Vice Chairman Dudley’s comment, also during that discussion.  He mentioned anecdotal comments that maybe, because of financial stability issues, we might have to back down on the credibility of our forward-guidance threshold of 6½ percent.  So that’s one reason why I thought it was important to ask about what the status of our regulatory and supervisory behavior has been toward potential financial instability developments in these markets because it has credibility implications for our monetary policy tools.   I think this has been an important discussion.  We’ve benefited greatly from these past several financial stability briefings.  We are monitoring so many things.  Just going back to the March briefing, we had a list of concerns.  What if interest rates go up by 100 basis points.  And we’ve gone through that experience.  It was a little rugged, but there’s no more risk because of that.  Maybe the risk is a little less.  Maybe we’re in a better position because of that. There are supervisory actions that have been taken.  Perhaps they were long intended with the SNC leveraged loan guidance, but there is also interest rate risk guidance.  So I think that’s helped.  We have seen difficulties with agency REITs from the increase in interest rates and, whether that was self-correcting or it just wasn’t as big of an effect as we feared, that was a good thing.  There are market liquidity issues that we’ve been concerned about due to Dodd–Frank, and now the evidence is that it’s actually just that dealers are unwilling to engage in those transactions. If they’re going to be that way, they’re going to be that way. It doesn’t look like there’s an outsized concern now for financial stability.  That’s important.  We’ll have to continue to monitor it but, like President Kocherlakota, I think it ought to be something much larger in terms of financial instability concerns that kicks in before we allow it to degrade our monetary policy tools.  I would also welcome greatly any of the staff’s assessments about what the relative tradeoffs are in order to reduce financial instability by a certain likelihood.  How much would we have to degrade our monetary policy tools. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses concern about the unintended reaction to the communication of potential reductions in flow purchase rate, while Vice Chairman Dudley suggests the need to back down on the credibility of the forward-guidance threshold. This indicates differing opinions on the impact of these actions on market assessment and the credibility of monetary policy tools.


Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Seeing no other contributions to this round, we can start the economic go-round with President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there are no other contributions at the moment and suggests starting the economic go-round with President Lacker.


Passage number 181.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The overall tenor of comments we’ve received from our contacts over the intermeeting period was consistent with the noticeableimprovement I reported at our July meeting.  Compared with earlier in the year, the reports are uniformly more positive. At the July meeting, I noted that our business activity surveys were fairly downbeat.  They’ve snapped back into positive territory since then and are now more consistent with other regional and national surveys.  We’ve heard a lot about the sequestration from our District contacts in recent months.  They now say that the sequestration effects they are seeing in their regions are far smaller than first feared. The projection I submitted for the national economy is nearly identical to the one I submitted in June.  To boil it down to basics, I think the expansion we’ve seen so far is the expansion we’ve got and the expansion we’re going to get, and that means real GDP growth at around 2 to 2¼ percent. The Tealbook continues to forecast a significant increase in real growth over the next few quarters, but I remain skeptical. On the fiscal front, we could see a slight boost to growth as drag diminishes in coming quarters, but I’m not that optimistic.  The spending restraint due to sequestration seems to be having a much less significant effect on activity than we expected. It shows up in the data as well as in the anecdotal reports I mentioned earlier. Spending is expected to fall over the next two years. The other component of waning fiscal drag is the passage of time since the tax increases at the beginning of the year. I would note that the Tealbook is looking for consumer spending to accelerate in advance of any acceleration in disposable income.  Despite recent gains in home prices and equity values, this strikes me as unlikely without a broad-based revision in households’ assessments of the downside risks to labor income.  Even with growth in the low 2s,  however, I believe that the unemployment rate will continue to decline by about ¾ percentage point per year, in other words, at about the same pace as in recent years. For a given GDP growth rate, productivitygrowth pins down employment growth, and as I’ve discussed in previous meetings, I see no reason to expect productivity growth to accelerate. The other factor affecting the rate of decline in unemployment is the labor force participation rate.  This is something we’ve been paying more attention to in recent meetings. Some economists have argued that labor force participation is far below trend right now, and that as a result, there’s an additional measure of underutilization of resources to which we ought to be paying attention.  Recent research by Richmond Fed economists has made me quite skeptical of this argument, however.  We know that labor force participation varies across age and gender groups.  We also know that people born at different times have displayed very different participation rates. It turns out that once you control for the effects of age, gender, and year of birth in a conventional way, there’s very little remaining discrepancy now between actual and predicted labor force participation.  That is, any cyclical effects holding down participation have dissipated.  This isn’t true for every year in the sample period, but it’s true right now, and that suggests to me that the recent behavior of labor force participation is no mystery at all, and it also suggests that the unemployment rate is a reasonably good measure of labor market conditions right now. Looking forward, this framework projects that the labor force participation rate will continue to fall over the next few years, not flatten out as in the Tealbook.  So I expect the unemployment rate to continue to decline by about ¾ percentage point per year for a couple of years.  That means an unemployment rate of 7.0 percent in the first quarter, which is more than a year earlier than the staff or the SEP was forecasting in September 2012.  To me this has obvious implications for our policy decision tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the speaker's personal opinion and analysis of the current economic situation.


Passage number 182.
 MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply states the name of the person speaking (Mr. Tarullo) and acknowledges the chairman.


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions the position of the governor without providing any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 184.
 MR. TARULLO.  What’s your database, Jeff, on the basis of which you can make those very granular assessments of who’s participating in the labor market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asked by Mr. Tarullo to Jeff.


Passage number 185.
 MR. LACKER.  It’s the standard database on this, and they’ve done it with both flows and levels data from the CPS.  You just take out these fixed effects for age, gender groups, and do the same thing for birth year, by cohort.  Just take out those three fixed effects, and what you get is a predicted line and an actual line, and the predicted rate lines up with the actual right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining a method of analysis using standard database and fixed effects to generate predicted and actual lines.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 186.
 MR. WASCHER.  We have a similar model where we do that, and we include some other variables as well.  I think our current participation rate gap is about ½ percentage point in the Tealbook.  So different models can get you some different answers, depending on what you include.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker is stating that different models can produce different results depending on what variables are included, implying that there may be disagreement or inconsistency in the outcomes.


Passage number 187.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 188.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No information is provided in the passage to indicate any contention or disagreement, as it only states "President Plosser" without any further context or details.


Passage number 189.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 190.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the July meeting’s policy round, I said I feared an incoming stream of data through this meeting and possibly beyond that could be characterized as producing persistent ambiguity. We have seen two more labor reports and lots of other data since our previous meeting, and I would say that the economic signals do not yield a clear picture.  A number of incoming prints have been disappointing relative to expectations, and the data taken on their own, without reference to expectations, strike me as quite mixed, with some points of strength balancing some signs of weakness around what have mostly been middling indicators. My team engaged our directors and contacts in the Sixth District this cycle with questions designed to get at their sense of the outlook on which they are making their own business decisions.  Specifically, we asked if they buy the widespread assumption of forecasters, and that includes ourselves, that the second half will see a pickup in activity versus the first half.  We asked if our assumptions of higher consumer and business spending, somewhat greater export  activity, and a diminishing drag from the government sector, felt right to them.  To summarize quickly what we heard, our contacts can be described as apprehensively optimistic.  This represents a slight pullback from sentiment before the July meeting.  They are seeing business trajectories that are in essence very similar to the first half. As I said as I began, my reading of the key data leaves me ambivalent. I can make the case for believing in a pickup in growth.  Growth seems to have strengthened in Europe and stabilized in China, adding to an encouraging context for export growth.  Business demand for fixed capital appears to be improving.  The drag on GDP growth from combined federal, state, and local government spending has shrunk measurably. Industrial activity is improving along several dimensions.  At the same time, our current tracking estimates, and those of others, for GDP growth in the third quarter suggest a slowing from the revised second-quarter estimate and cast significant doubt on the assumption of a pickup in the second half.  Also, the recent employment report may signal a slowing of hiring.  The glass can be seen as half empty or half full, and I think that is an agonizing circumstance in which to make the policy decision we face at this meeting. In my SEP submission, I modestly downgraded my 2013 growth forecast but held to a basic outlook of a pickup in the pace of growth over the forecast horizon.  My projection of accelerating growth, however, is not as early or as strong as the Tealbook.  My forecast for the unemployment rate is similar to the Tealbook in the near term, crossing 7 percent in the middle of next year.  So in my overall growth and employment outlook, I am sticking to an optimistic narrative but, like many of my District contacts, with some apprehension. For the SEP submission, my inflation forecast has price trends heading back toward target, like the Tealbook, but at a much less attenuated pace.  I have underlying inflation  returning to target by 2015 rather than remaining below 2 percent for longer as in the Tealbook.  I will point out that if the Tealbook forecast proves correct, core PCE inflation will have been below 2 percent for nine consecutive years.  On a headline basis, the Tealbook projection through 2016 implies missing the year-over-year headline objective in eight of the previous nine years. I find this troubling, and I find it as fodder for the half-empty interpretation. To repeat, my outlook shows modest growth relative to the Tealbook, and it is also at the low end of the central tendency of the most recent SEP.  My sense of risk at this juncture is that I see more downside risks than upside.  Given our record of overoptimistic forecasts, I am giving some probability points to the risk that accelerating growth may not just be around the corner.  As to cause, I will point to possible intensification of drags stemming from the sequestration, a more general drawdown of defense spending, and I also see uncertainty around the fiscal situation possibly affecting consumer and business confidence. Our soundings in my District on business input cost and wage pressures suggest that the recent subdued inflation trend may persist for a few more quarters, but do not suggest further disinflation.  That said, I submitted a risk assessment regarding my baseline inflation outlook, which I mentioned a second ago, to the downside.  The Tealbook may be right, and my assumption of earlier convergence to the objective of 2 percent may be optimistic. To summarize, if I could be assured that the growth that I have in my forecast is reasonably on track, and the price trend is stable and not softening, that would make me less apprehensive.  But in my judgment, there are simply a lot of question marks—too many—in the mix of data at this juncture.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker states that there is persistent ambiguity in the data, and that the economic signals do not yield a clear picture. They mention disappointing data, as well as mixed indicators with points of strength and weakness. They also mention that their contacts in the Sixth District are apprehensively optimistic, which represents a slight pullback from sentiment before the July meeting. The speaker mentions that they can make a case for believing in a pickup in growth, but also highlight evidence that suggests a slowing of growth. Overall, the speaker expresses ambivalence and uncertainty, which indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage consists of a courteous expression of gratitude from someone named President Rosengren.


Passage number 192.
   MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As some of you may have noticed, I am carrying a cane.  This is not because I felt I needed to be armed at this meeting. It may yet prove to be the case, we’ll see.  [Laughter]  But, rather, I had a hip replacement three weeks ago. Unfortunately, that means every hour I need to stretch, or at least that’s what my doctor told me, though I violated it in the first two hours of this meeting.  However, if I get up during your comments, please take no offense. I would also like to thank Charlie Plosser and Jeff Lacker, my first and second alternates on the voting rotation, for motivating me to take my physical therapy seriously so I could be sure to vote at this meeting.  [Laughter] I felt it was important to be at this meeting because the economic outlook has changed significantly since June. While I had expected the first half of this year to exhibit growth at 2 percent, I had anticipated that the second half of this year would be much stronger.  Moreover, I had hoped that the pickup in growth would already be apparent in the data by now.  Unfortunately, that has not been the case.  I now expect third-quarter GDP to expand at 2 percent, a little below that anticipated in the Tealbook and a little above that expected by Goldman Sachs and Macroeconomic Advisers.  But none of these estimates are significantly different than what we have averaged over the first half of this year. While I still expect that waning fiscal austerity, both here and abroad, and rising consumption will eventually result in GDP growth above the 2 percent rate that we have been experiencing for most of this recovery, I want to see it in the data as well as in the forecast.  We have had plenty of quarters in which we saw it in the forecast, but to date we have not yet seen it in the data. Since the spring, a major impediment to faster growth has been the significant tightening in financial conditions.  From the beginning of May, as many people have noted, the 10-year rate has risen more than 100 basis points, as has the rate on the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage.  The magnitude of this tightening in long rates was neither expected nor welcomed by me. In the absence of such a significant increase in long rates, I would have expected stronger growth to already be occurring.  Since to date we have only talked about slowing our purchase program, such a dramatic tightening in response to hints about actual policy highlights that we should be particularly humble about our ability to forecast interest-rate reactions to both our actions and language, and that actions only be taken when they are strongly supported by the data. Unfortunately, this inadvertent and outsized reaction to our announcements highlights that we have yet to master the communication challenges inherent in our current policy tools.  Although we have learned that language can be an extremely powerful tool, we have also learned that our control over this instrument is highly uncertain.  Assertions that our tools have limited impact are hard to square with the dramatic rise in long-term rates during a time when the Tealbook and many private forecasters have been lowering their growth forecasts. The significant tightening of long rates has had a particularly large impact on how much support I expect residential investment and other interest-sensitive sectors to provide going forward. While increases in wealth, employment, and household formation are still supportive of the housing sector, the higher mortgage rates have altered affordability for many new home buyers.  Consequently, I have substantially pared my forecast of the strength of residential investment based on the tighter financial conditions. In contrast, auto sales, another interest-sensitive sector, have shown significant improvement.  However, because auto loans are priced at the shorter end of the yield curve and competitive dynamics are quite different, auto loan rates have not seen the outsized reaction experienced in home mortgage rates. While the G.19 series for auto loan rates unfortunately comes out with a substantial lag, fortunately, Bankrate.com data provide daily auto loan rates   based on quotes to customers on their website.  The rates are for borrowers with a 700 FICO score, 10 percent down, and a new car loan with four years to maturity.  The average of the daily rates for August was 2½ percent.  These rates remain quite low relative to earlier this year and do not reflect the substantial tightening seen for mortgage loans.  These quotes are consistent with the complaints I hear from community bankers that indirect auto loans are fiercely competitive. Thus, auto sales have been much less affected by the tightening in interest rates because the pass-through of higher rates has not yet occurred. The recent labor report was also disappointing.  The unemployment rate declined for the wrong reason again, and the three-month average of payroll employment growth is only 148,000 jobs, much less than the 184,000 jobs we have averaged over the past year, and well below the 200,000-plus jobs that I think are needed at this stage of the recovery.  Payroll growth, like the GDP numbers, does not yet reflect the robust, self-sustaining recovery that I had hoped to be apparent at this time. The economy remains fragile.  There are significant downside risks from fiscal political uncertainties, and incoming data have been weaker than expected. We need to be data-driven.  And as I will discuss tomorrow, we have not yet seen the data that warrant taking the risk associated with interest rates rising even higher and further slowing the economy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is giving their own perspective and analysis of the current economic outlook and expressing their concern about the weakness in the data.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to President Bullard.


Passage number 194.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy continues to grow at a moderate pace.  Over the past year, Eighth District nonfarm payroll employment has increased by about 1½ percent, the largest year-to-year increase since June of 2006.  Consistent with this, surveys indicate that employment levels have stayed the same or increased for a   majority of contacts across the District.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage provides factual information about the growth of the Eighth District economy and employment levels. It does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 195.
  Unemployment across District MSAs continues to track the national rate closely, after having run below the national rate for much of 2011 and 2012.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage simply states a fact about the unemployment rates in District MSAs and how they compare to the national rate. There is no mention of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 196.
  There is considerable variation in unemployment rates across MSAs, ranging, for example, from 4.9 percent in Columbia, Missouri, to 9.7 percent in Pine Bluff, Arkansas. Large District retailing firms report that consumer spending has been slower since January of this year.  They attribute the slower pace of spending to the end of the payroll tax holiday.  However, recent readings on customer attitudes suggest that concerns about the payroll tax hike are fading, and so this factor may be less important going forward. Instead, consumers seem to be more worried about job availability. District contacts associated with global businesses suggested that, on balance, international conditions have stabilized in recent weeks.  European sales, in particular, were encouraging.  I saw these anecdotes as consistent with the St. Louis view and the Tealbook view that the global macroeconomy may be poised to improve in coming quarters. Turning to the outlook for the U.S. economy, events have once again forced us to ratchet down our expectations for real GDP growth in 2013 and 2014.  We now expect only 2.2 percent growth for all of 2013 and 3.0 percent growth in 2014.  While this still suggests an accelerating economy next year, our expectations are considerably more subdued than in previous forecasts. On unemployment, we continue to forecast steady improvement to 7.1 percent by the end of 2013 and 6.3 percent by the end of 2014.  We think that the steady-state value of unemployment is about 6 percent.  The median value of U.S. unemployment over the post-war era is 5.8 percent, and the steady-state value is probably somewhat higher than that due to labor market damage associated with the financial crisis and its aftermath.  Inflation has been running well below the Committee’s 2 percent target.  In addition, the two-year breakeven inflation rate calculated from the TIPS market has been as low as 1.35 percent in recent weeks, seemingly suggesting that markets see little prospect of higher inflation before the second half of 2015.  They nevertheless project that inflation will move back toward target as the economy continues to improve.  Importantly, I think improvements in the global macroeconomic outlook, combined with a continuation of our aggressively easing monetary policy, will drive inflation expectations and actual inflation higher in the quarters ahead.  However, I prefer to see more tangible evidence that this is happening before committing to policy action based on this scenario.  For this reason, I will be counseling patience during the policy round at this meeting.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a report of various observations and forecasts.


Passage number 197.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply consists of a polite expression of gratitude from the unnamed speaker to President Pianalto.


Passage number 198.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In keeping with the patterns of this recovery, much of the recent news on the economy has been mixed.  As a result, the broad contours of my forecast are little changed since our July meeting, and little changed since the previous SEP submission.  I continue to expect GDP growth to pick up over time, which will bring the unemployment rate down toward its natural rate and pull inflation up toward our 2 percent objective, broadly similar to the Tealbook outlook. Recent inflation data appear to be firming.  Today’s CPI release was about as I had expected, and it increasingly looks like third-quarter inflation measures will rebound, whether we look at CPI, PCE, headline, or core inflation.  Notably, my Bank’s median CPI inflation measure came in at 2 percent, where it has been for the past two years.  The recent declines in the unemployment rate have been slightly faster than I had anticipated, causing me to edge down my unemployment forecast once again.As to the balance of risks, I believe the risks to the outlook for growth, unemployment, and inflation remain broadly balanced.  I have often found myself saying that changes I’ve made to my outlook have been small relative to my previous forecast. But since we launched the current asset purchase program in September of 2012, these small adjustments have accumulated.  Compared with the situation a year ago, both labor market conditions and the outlook for the labor market have improved considerably, as David pointed out in his presentation. Over the past 12 months, the economy has added more than 2 million jobs, as the pace of payroll gains has risen from a six-month average of 97,000 at the time of our September 2012 meeting to about 160,000 today.  Unemployment has declined by more than 1 million people or 0.8 percentage point, as measured by the unemployment rate.  And while we remain concerned about the labor force participation rate, the labor force has grown by more than 800,000 people since last fall.  In response to these improvements, I have lowered my forecast for the unemployment rate for the fourth quarter of this year from 7.9 percent in my September 2012 projection to 7.2 percent as of this meeting.  The Tealbook’s forecast of unemployment has shifted by a similar amount since September of last year, and its forecast of payroll employment at the end of this year has risen by more than 1 million jobs. Now, it is true that recent payroll gains have slowed, but I am expecting this slowing to be temporary. My District contacts generally report a sense of cautious optimism, and a variety of indicators about both the outlook in general, and labor markets in particular, support this view.  The auto recovery is continuing at a strong pace and, even with the recent increase in mortgage rates, housing affordability does remain high.  Both the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing ISM surveys have been encouraging the past two months, with the nonmanufacturing survey  clocking in at a post-recession high.  Focusing on the labor market, the nonmanufacturing ISM survey’s employment index is near post-recession highs.  Small businesses in the August NFIB survey reported the strongest percentage of hiring plans since 2007.  And initial claims for unemployment insurance hit a post-recession low even before the recent computer glitch that lowered them even more. I also believe that there is reason to be cautious about allowing the decline in labor force participation to somehow diminish the improvements in employment and unemployment that have occurred.  Eventually, we will see a rise in labor force participation, but such a rise in labor force participation doesn’t imply that the unemployment rate won’t continue to decline.  In fact, a cyclical rise in the labor force participation rate is likely to be associated with a cyclical reduction in the unemployment rate.  My staff have noted that this historical pattern is captured clearly in the FRB/US model.  According to that model, the business cycle components of labor force participation and the unemployment rate have a correlation of about a negative 0.9.  If this pattern holds, the continued economic recovery will consist of both a further reduction in the unemployment rate and a small cyclical rise in the participation rate. While my view of the outlook for the labor market clearly has implications for our monetary policy, I will wait until tomorrow’s go-round to share my views on policy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing their analysis of the current economic conditions and their forecast for the future, but they do not express any disagreement with others or present conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In that respect you’re quite the exception, I would say.  [Laughter] Thank you. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a compliment and a response of gratitude.


Passage number 200.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for that encouragement.  The outlook hasn’t changed a great deal since our July meeting.  The economy is growing, but its forward momentum is not very robust, and we’re still waiting to see what effects the recent financial tightening will have on activity.  The tone of conversations with my directors and business   contacts was somewhat better than the previous round, though only a little bit.  Incoming reports continue to be mixed. The auto sector is doing well.  Sales have continued to grow and are now close to pre-recession levels.  The industry is optimistic about prospects for the rest of this year and for 2014.  Of course, they have their concerns.  One is the fall in the yen and stronger price competition from abroad.  The other concern is rising interest rates.  Low rates have provided strong support to sales, and they are nervous about the effect that tightening financial conditions will have on demand going forward. Outside of autos, manufacturing is mixed.  In general, activity has been heading sideways, and businesses expect this to continue.  No one is talking about either a strong upside or a substantial downside over the rest of the year.  The major temporary employment firms see demand as being flat to up marginally. I also heard some less-than-upbeat news concerning consumer spending, as Discover Financial mentioned that their retail data had softened over the past six weeks. In terms of the national economy, the recent data have also been mixed but on balance somewhat disappointing.  On the upside, the second quarter turned out better than we were expecting, although 2½ percent growth or even an upward revision to near 3 percent, as the Tealbook seems to be expecting, probably overstates the forward momentum.  A softening tone of much of the more recent data is worrisome.  We still appear to be muddling along without signs that a more vigorous recovery is building.  That was the objective, after all.  July and August payroll employment gains were disappointing.  Taken as a whole, these reports are not indicative of a vibrant, sustainable labor market.  Businesses have adequate capacity and staffing to meet current levels of demand, so they see no pressure to hire workers or invest in new capital until more customers actually walk through the door, and that’s not the case at the moment. Consumer expenditures have decelerated noticeably. I think the past few months of spending data are pretty worrisome.  That’s also the situation with the latest consumer confidence data. And while autos and housing have been sources of strength for growth, we shouldn’t assume auto sales, home construction, and housing prices will continue to climb at their recent pace given the tightening in financial conditions.  The increased restrictiveness of financial conditions is a significant downside risk. Regarding our SEP submission, you will again note that I view this exercise as flawed. I couldn’t bring myself to write down a forecast with what I would truly consider appropriate monetary policy.  For me, that would exhibit some overshooting, with inflation going at least a little above 2 percent and unemployment falling below the natural rate.  I certainly cheer those participants who did submit something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and expressing their own opinion, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict with anyone else.


Passage number 201.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.  We accept your applause.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing gratitude for the applause they have received.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 202.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  However, given the Committee’s recent direction on trimming LSAP purchases, the sort of aggressive policy that I would prefer is simply too far outside the consensus, and accurately communicating my policy assumptions within these public projections is beyond what we have figured out how to do effectively.  I did, however, assume that we would hold the funds rate near zero even after we crossed the 6½ percent threshold.  Given the softness in inflation and the headwinds weighing on growth, I think a more appropriate policy dictates zero rates until nearly the end of 2015 and only a gradual tightening in 2016, as mentioned in paragraph 5 of alternative B.  With these policy assumptions, I had just over 2 percent GDP growth this year.  And I will ignore Albert Einstein’s definition of insanity—I persist in writing down growth figures of 3 percent and higher in the out years.  With this growth trajectory, unemployment should fall below 6½ percent in mid-2015, but as I said, I think appropriate policy implies waiting longer to start raising rates. On inflation, I think we will be too low over the entire forecast horizon.  Even in 2016, in my opinion we will be lucky to be near 2 percent.  I have displayed charts on the history of inflation in a lot of different presentations, but the way that I do it sort of ignores the observation from President Lockhart.  It is quite remarkable that we’ve had so many years out of nine with inflation below our 2 percent objective.  That’s quite a record, not something we should try to repeat. The risks to our growth and inflation forecasts are decidedly to the downside.  I’d feel a lot better if we found a way to minimize the increased restrictiveness of financial conditions.  I’m hoping that the movements in long rates we have seen so far are a one-off adjustment as financial markets finally come to grips with the fact that policy will not remain on hold forever. My forecast assumes this realization of our policy intentions.  I think this is plausible especially if recent asset reallocations have primarily been due to a change in heart by the most optimistic investors, the ones who had previously thought our open-ended asset purchases were more like a Draghi–Woodford “whatever it takes” policy.  That’s not what we could bring ourselves to do apparently. But I see the risk of further unintended financial restrictiveness if we do not reemphasize our continuing commitment to providing the economy the monetary accommodation that it needs to achieve escape velocity.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses his preference for a more aggressive policy, but acknowledges that it is outside of the consensus. He also disagrees with the forecasted growth figures and inflation expectations, stating that he believes they will be lower than projected. Additionally, he expresses concern about the potential negative impact of financial conditions and urges for a reemphasis on providing monetary accommodation.


Passage number 203.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude rather than any conflicting or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 204.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not clear and does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 205.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you.  Could I clarify the comment by President Lockhart. It wasn’t that we’ve had nine years of core inflation below 2 percent.  This includes the forecast, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on a comment made by President Lockhart.


Passage number 206.
 MR. LOCKHART.  What I cited is through 2016 from the Tealbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the source and the time period from which the information was cited. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 207.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the passage.


Passage number 208.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes, through 2016.  I just wanted to clarify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward statement that seeks clarification.


Passage number 209.
 MR. LOCKHART. I said it was nine years retrospective.  Of course, we didn’t have the objective that whole period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents a statement made by Mr. Lockhart without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 210.
 MR. BULLARD.  President Lockhart, I’m looking at the data here, and it looks like it is above 2 percent for some of these years.  So I don’t see eight or nine years.  It’s total inflation, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating that he does not see eight or nine years of total inflation based on the data he is looking at.


Passage number 211.
 MR. EVANS.  Oh, it’s the outlook for it.  Oh, I see.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging or understanding something that was previously mentioned.


Passage number 212.
 MR. LACKER.  It’s including the outlook.  It will have been nine years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the length of time in question.


Passage number 213.
 MR. BULLARD.  Nine years if you include five past years and four forward years.  Got it.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging understanding and expressing gratitude.


Passage number 214.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to form a government and pass necessary legislation, President Williams faced significant opposition and criticism from both major political parties.


Passage number 215.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you. President Kocherlakota" simply expresses gratitude towards President Kocherlakota without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 217.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "Thank you. President George." It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President George with no conflicting ideas or opinions expressed.


Passage number 218.
  MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Tenth District economy continues to expand at a moderate pace.  Consumer spending rose moderately, supported by retail and auto sales, and residential and commercial real estate markets have strengthened further. District employment rose modestly in July, and a growing percentage of our contacts reported a rise in wage pressures and labor shortages.  District manufacturing activity expanded, with manufacturers reporting a modest rise in employment and the first increase in the average employee work week since 2011.  District energy activity remains relatively steady, as a slight decline in oil rig counts has been offset by an increase in natural gas rig counts.  Finally, U.S. farm income for 2013 was revised down by 6 percent and is expected to decline an additional 20 percent in 2014.  District farm income was also expected to be lower in the months ahead, but farmland values continue to rise. Irrigated cropland values were 25 percent higher than year-ago levels and non-irrigated cropland was 18 percent higher. My overall assessment of the national economy is largely unchanged from July.  Second-quarter growth came in stronger than I expected because of some transitory factors that are likely to reverse in the current quarter. I continue to expect moderate GDP growth in the second half of this year of about 2 percent and a gradual pick up to 3 percent by 2015, supported by growth in private demand and waning fiscal drag. Looking at key sectors of the economy:  housing activity has moderated, but the recovery in this sector seems on track.  Auto sales are close to pre-recession levels, and the ISM indicators point to solid gains in manufacturing and nonmanufacturing activity in August. Importantly, the labor market and the broader economy have continued to improve in the face of fiscal tightening.  I interpret this resilience as a signal that the economy’s underlying fundamentals have improved substantially.  Stock markets have remained up in the face of higher interest rates since May.   Household balance sheets have been repaired over the past few years as mortgage debt outstanding has steadily declined and home prices have risen. In assessing labor market conditions, I have been tracking a labor market conditions index prepared by my staff.  It consolidates a broad set of data, including the labor force participation rate, and over the past year that index has shown a notable improvement to historically high levels with sustained momentum through August. Finally, I expect inflation will pick up in the second half of this year and next year as labor market conditions continue to improve, private demand strengthens, and inflation expectations remain stable. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. George is providing an assessment of the Tenth District economy and the national economy based on available data and indicators. She expresses her overall assessment and expectations but does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 219.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I view the economic news as somewhat disappointing relative to my expectations.  Unfortunately, there is not much evidence that the U.S. economy is breaking out above the 2 percent growth path that has prevailed since the beginning of the economic recovery.  In other words, an increase in the pace of economic growth consistent with sustainable improvement in the labor market outlook still appears to be lacking.  In terms of the outlook, I continue to believe that the economy will pick up speed next year as the degree of fiscal restraint subsides and the post-crisis healing of the U.S. economy continues.  But this is a forecast, and it’s not a reality yet. Also, it seems to me that there are some notable uncertainties and risks with respect to the growth outlook.  In particular, we don’t have a good idea how much the rise in mortgage rates since May will damp housing activity.  What we have in hand indicates an impact.  We have seen a decline in mortgage originations for purchase and pending home sales, for example, but how large and long-lasting the impact will be isn’t very clear to me.  Also, it strikes me that the   risk from the fiscal side will be unusually high over the near term.  I don’t have any clarity about how the Congress will deal with funding the ongoing operations of the U.S. government at the end of the month, or how the debt limit situation will play out during the late October–early November time frame. But there certainly are risks in that direction. With respect to the inflation outlook, I’m not particularly troubled by the fact that core PCE inflation is somewhat below our objective currently for several reasons.  First, the earlier downtrend appears to have bottomed out because the most recent trend the past few months is above the year-over-year growth rate.  As time passes and the earlier, lower observations drop out, the year-over-year rate is likely to drift upwards.  Second, if we look at a decomposition of the inflation data, it shows that the most recent slowing in inflation has been less widespread across core goods and core services than was the case in 2010.  And, third, inflation expectations remain pretty well anchored above the current core PCE rate, which should exert some upward pull on inflation, although I must admit the five-year, five-year forward has drifted down a little bit recently, and so that deserves watching.  So the fact that inflation is a bit below our 2 percent objective doesn’t really get that much weight from me in my monetary policy views.  When I put it all together, it strikes me that it’s a time to be cautious in jumping to conclusions.  While it’s true that every day the economy shows evidence that it will successfully resist the downward pull from this year’s large dose of fiscal restraint, I have not become more confident about the outlook for the next year.  I am also not yet sufficiently confident to support a reduction in the pace of asset purchases, but more on that tomorrow. Finally, with respect to the issue that Governor Yellen raised about the federal funds rate forecast in 2016, my forecast is 2 percent.  It is very much a headwinds story. It is not really an accommodative monetary policy story.  I think the equilibrium short-term real rate is going to  stay low for a very long time.  Credit availability is going to take a long time to heal. Securitization markets in the mortgage area haven’t really restarted at all to date in any meaningful way outside of the agency market.  This is one reason, of course, that for many meetings I have talked about my hesitancy to embrace the Taylor rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses disappointment with the economic news and believes that the U.S. economy is not growing at the desired pace. They also highlight uncertainties and risks, particularly with regards to housing activity and fiscal policy. Additionally, the speaker mentions that their views on monetary policy differ from those of Governor Yellen.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 222.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is maybe for staff as well.  Where does the risk premium fit into the model.  I mean, where is it appearing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking for clarification about where the risk premium fits into the model. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 223.
 MS. YELLEN.  This is the equity risk premium, and this is also the premium of BBB-rated corporates relative to 10-year Treasuries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact, providing information about the equity risk premium and the premium of BBB-rated corporates relative to 10-year Treasuries. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Those aren’t unusually high, are they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The statement is simply asking for confirmation or verification from the listener.


Passage number 225.
 MS. YELLEN.  They are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only contains a statement, which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 226.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. The equity risk premium is very high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is not subject to contention or disagreement as it is stating a fact or observation. The equity risk premium can be objectively measured and compared across different periods or markets.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Okay. Thank you." shows a simple acknowledgment and gratitude towards Governor Tarullo's statement or action.


Passage number 228.
 MR. POWELL.  Mr. Chairman, there was a two-hander here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "two-hander" suggests that two people were involved in a discussion or presentation, but it does not indicate any conflict or disagreement between them.


Passage number 229.
 MR. BULLARD.  Governor Yellen, usually if we tell a headwinds story, then you would say also that that’s going to slow the pace at which inflation is going to return to target and at which the output gap is going to close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a hypothetical scenario and mentioning the usual response from Governor Yellen.


Passage number 230.
 MS. YELLEN.  And it does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 231.
 MR. BULLARD.  You’re telling a complicated headwinds story in which these variables move all the way back to normal values, but somehow there are still headwinds at work that are keeping the real funds rate at this low level.  And so I’m not sure I’m following your story because of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is questioning and expressing uncertainty about the speaker's explanation.


Passage number 232.
 MS. YELLEN.  I’m telling a story, and I believe I’m simply describing the Tealbook baseline, and David and others can correct me if I’m wrong.  What’s going on in the Tealbook baseline is that there are headwinds, and they are gradually abating.  Now, at the present time, those headwinds are so strong—resulting in an r* of minus 1.6 percent—that we cannot totally offset them because of the zero bound.  So, we are not able to bring this economy to full employment.  But the headwinds will abate over time.  And as they abate over time, we are able to leave the zero bound.  Now, by the end of 2016, by having a low value of the real funds rate— it is exactly what Narayana said—the headwinds are still there, but by keeping the real federal funds rate well below its long-run level of 2 percent, we succeed in combating them and achieving our goals.   Now, once we have achieved our goals, say by the end of 2016 and the years after that, those headwinds continue to abate.  And as they continue to abate, we need to raise the real federal funds rate in order to stay where we want to be.  So over time, from 2016 out through, say, I don’t know when exactly, maybe 2020—by then, they are fully gone in the baseline, and we go back to a 4 percent funds rate with 2 percent inflation.  But in the years before that, the economy is where we want it to be, at full employment with 2 percent inflation.  We are achieving our goals, but the setting of our policy that is required to do so entails a real funds rate that is lower than the long-run 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the Tealbook baseline and the expected actions of the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 233.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay. I appreciate that story.  Maybe this is a question for David Wilcox, but why isn’t this also slowing down the pace at which our other key variables are coming back.  See, you’ve got a system where this thing comes back to steady state.  We’ve still got the policy rate at the low level.  Normally, you would think if those headwinds were in place, everything would go more slowly back to steady state, including policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Bullard regarding the impact of certain factors on the pace at which key variables are returning to steady state.


Passage number 234.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think the simple answer is that monetary policy in the projection is endogenous to the existence of the headwinds.  Were it not for the highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, it would not be the case that the resource utilization gap would have come back to zero, and that inflation would be headed back toward the 2 percent objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a simple answer to a question without opposing or conflicting views.


Passage number 235.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply expressing gratitude for something.


Passage number 236.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, there is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 237.
 MR. EVANS. Isn’t this sort of like, the Taylor rule ought to have a time-varying intercept, which is the real interest rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 238.
 MS. YELLEN.  That would be one way to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a suggestion or proposal made by Ms. Yellen.


Passage number 239.
 MR. WILCOX.  In our projection, it does in effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Wilcox and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 240.
   MR. EVANS.  That’s what it needs. It’s not time-varying the way that John Taylor wrote it down in ’93.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Evans, is expressing his opinion about how something needs to change. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage as no opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions are mentioned.


Passage number 241.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  But that’s saying that, for the properly calibrated Taylor rule, we’d be at the right policy at the time that our variables hit the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is making a statement about the implication of the properly calibrated Taylor rule, without any conflicting views or opposition mentioned.


Passage number 242.
 MR. WILCOX.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 243.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a neutral statement.


Passage number 244.
 MS. YELLEN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only states the name "MS. YELLEN" without providing any further information or context.


Passage number 245.
  Alternatively, your inertial Taylor rule, if it doesn’t have that property, moves the funds rate up only very gradually and so, in effect, achieves what you would have with the time-varying— MR. BULLARD.  But under that story, then, there is nothing to say about the policy rate still being below the right level once our key variables hit target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of agreement.


Passage number 246.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It will be below the rate that would be historically true and what will be true in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating that the rate will be below what has been historically true and what will be true in the future.


Passage number 247.
  MR. BULLARD. But it will be right given the time-varying intercept—absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a response to a previous statement and expresses agreement.


Passage number 248.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Let’s stop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota simply makes a suggestion to stop something without presenting any opposing view.


Passage number 249.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  We have agreement.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is agreement among the individuals involved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 250.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like many others, I found the data that have become available between June and today not clearly establishing the steady improvement contemplated by the baseline projections of the majority of the Committee at the June meeting. But the preliminary SEP suggests that as a group we are sticking with that basic narrative, albeit with the improvement delayed a bit, and less optimism about the upper range of that improvement.  And I’m part of the group, sticking to a projection of modest to moderate increases in GDP and declines in unemployment over the next couple of years. But I suspect  many of us—and I think the staff also, as reflected in the Tealbook—have less certainty around that projection than we had back in June.  So, once again, we find ourselves revisiting the possible explanations for why that may be the case.  And I, at least, tried to ask myself what new evidence there may be for any of these possibilities. One explanation is that the numbers we have been receiving are somewhat misleading, so maybe things aren’t as mixed toward the disappointing end as we think.  There is always the possibility of noisiness in the data, of course, something that is apparently more than usually likely with August employment numbers, as David mentioned in his initial presentation. Quite a different take on the possibility of the numbers being misleading was, as John Williams mentioned a moment ago, put forth in an interesting staff presentation at yesterday’s Board meeting.  It suggested that actual output may have been understated by the GDP numbers of late, and that the higher GDI numbers are, based on past observation, likely better predictors of what future GDP will look like than our current GDP numbers themselves.  There is a little bit of support for that hypothesis in the ISM numbers, which have been a bit of a bright spot in the otherwise very gray data of late. The second explanation is what the Tealbook calls the “Supply-side damage” hypothesis, and we’ve talked about this one a lot over the past few years. My view has been that the longer unemployment stayed elevated, the labor market impaired, and business fixed investment relatively low, the more likely it was that there would be some lasting structural damage to the economy following on from the major dislocations of 2008 and 2009.  But I have also been of the view that, given the amount of slack that still likely remains in the economy, we’re not really able to judge how much damage there has been and won’t be until the recovery has proceeded a fair ways further.  And, thus, there’s been no near-term implication for monetary policy.My bottom line on the structural damage hypothesis hasn’t changed in any basic way, but there is one piece of data that provides some evidence of current, as opposed to inferred or anticipated, structural damage effects.  That is the pattern of exit from long-term unemployment. For quite a while, that was actually something of a rebuttal to structural damage arguments.  Recently, though, the transition rate of the long-term unemployed to employment has dipped down a bit, more so when considered relative to the exit rate of the short-term unemployed, and the transition rate of the long-term unemployed out of the labor force has continued to tick up.  The latter was for a while probably largely attributable to the expiration of extended UI but now may reflect something else.  Neither of these changes in the transition destinations of the long-term unemployed is dramatic, but they probably bear watching over the next couple of quarters. A third explanation has been loosely stated—the headwinds explanation of factors unleashed by or following the crisis, which impede recovery.  Presumably, the difference between headwinds and structural damage is that the latter cannot be counteracted with more fiscal or monetary stimulus, whereas the former can—hence, the implicit metaphor of an airplane throttling up to maintain speed.  I guess you could make the case that, after a while, headwinds cause damage, but I’m not going to go down that road.  The kind of headwind most obviously characteristic of a financial crisis aftermath is that there are high amounts of debt at households, financial firms, and nonfinancial firms, all of which becomes harder to manage in the face of declining asset values and income.  But once balance sheet repair progresses far enough, that headwind should abate.  With nonfinancial firms, at least large ones, sitting on a lot of cash, and financial firms having been strengthened substantially, and household income-to-debt ratios back to about 2003 levels, there is a pretty good case for the proposition that the repair process should be far enough along in enough households and firms to permit renewed purchases, borrowing, and lending. This is probably the main reason why a sustained steeper path of recovery began to seem more plausible to me earlier this year.  I knew Janet’s intervention was coming, so I haven’t had to try to develop all of this myself, but as Janet just reminded us, we are facing a different set of headwinds that continue to provide a different explanation.  Some, such as the extent of fiscal tightening, have blown up since the recession ended.  And others, such as the very slow recovery of the housing industry, continue to blow even after the rain has stopped, like the tail-end of a hurricane.  These headwinds, presumably, can be offset with continued monetary stimulus.  The headwinds hypothesis, of course, presumes a good bit of slack in the economy.  And, as has been the case for some time, this presumption continues to be supported by what I might term a negative piece of evidence—that is, the absence of any indication of wage pressures.  This is true not only in the aggregate, but also in a somewhat more decomposed form, as revealed in a plotting of the distribution of average wage growth, which shows that none of the skewing that one might expect to see toward the upper end, where sectoral pockets of labor shortages lead to significant wage increases, has actually occurred. I suspect there is something to each of these three explanations, and the relative importance of each over time will, thus, obviously be critical to our decisions.  For now, though, I don’t think that the recent run of fairly disappointing data has changed the basic story of an economy still in need of greater aggregate demand.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions different possible explanations for the recent disappointing data and expresses uncertainty about which explanation is most accurate. This suggests that there is disagreement or debate among members of the Committee about the causes of the economic situation.


Passage number 251.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude from someone to President Fisher.


Passage number 252.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to talk about four things:  my region; briefly, my CEO contacts; the economic forecast; and financial conditions, which I want to stress a bit at length.  I’ll dispense with whatever my forecasts are.  I am number nine; I’m in the central tendency. Let me come to my District.  I was actually hoping Janet would continue this path of driving across the country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 253.
 MS. YELLEN.  There is still tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "There is still tomorrow" is a neutral statement that does not express disagreement or contention.


Passage number 254.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it consists of a polite expression of gratitude toward Governor Stein.


Passage number 255.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individual expressing gratitude is thanking the chairman.


Passage number 256.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, I’m sorry.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is apologizing to someone named President Bullard, indicating a polite and respectful tone.


Passage number 257.
 MR. BULLARD.  President Fisher, could it be that 7-Eleven is not replacing their microwaves as swiftly as they used to, and, therefore, the repair rate has gone up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply asking a question and suggesting a possible reason for the increase in repair rate at 7-Eleven.


Passage number 258.
 MR. FISHER:  I’ve actually drilled in on it with the CEO.  [Laughter] I was able to get 10,200 stores out of the 50,000 stores worldwide, and they’re actually measuring this.  It’s an interesting indicator because it’s great for cocktail conversation.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes an interaction where Mr. Fisher discusses the number of stores he was able to obtain from the CEO and how it is being measured. The mention of "cocktail conversation" further suggests a casual and non-controversial tone.


Passage number 259.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You know who would have loved that story.  Alan Greenspan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Alan Greenspan would have loved the story, without any opposing views or debates presented.


Passage number 260.
 MR. FISHER.  In fact, he told me that story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states that someone named Mr. Fisher was told a story by someone else. There is no hint of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 261.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. The presence of "Laughter" suggests a light-hearted or humorous atmosphere.


Passage number 262.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is missing the information needed to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 263.
 Chairman— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only provides the titles of two individuals and does not indicate any contention or disagreement between them.


Passage number 264.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I want to stipulate that I think what you’re saying is completely reasonable, that it’s very possible that productivity growth could stay slow for an extended period of time, and so, with 2 percent GDP in motion, the unemployment rate could keep coming down. What I would say is two things.  One, I think we have to be pretty uncertain about productivity growth partly because of what happened early in the cycle. Productivity growth was unusually high.  So it’s a little hard to say how to interpret this low period. Is this something that’s temporary, or just the flip side of the very high productivity growth we saw during the downturn and the early stages of the recovery. And, two, we’ve had these other episodes during this expansion when we’ve seen the employment numbers pick up, and we’ve gotten very excited about that, and we think the liftoff is at hand because employment is going to generate stronger income, and that’s going to support higher aggregate demand—and then we’ve seen this disappointment.  It’s this chronic disappointment in terms of the response to these seeming accelerations in payroll growth where you haven’t seen the follow-through that makes me feel a little bit more reluctant to buy into employment growth to the degree that maybe you do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is acknowledging the reasonableness of the other person's argument but expressing their own uncertainties and reservations about productivity growth and employment numbers.


Passage number 265.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Powell without providing any information about his actions, statements, or any other context that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 266.
 MR. EVANS.  I wonder if I could ask a question of Governor Stein.  In trying to think through the stronger productivity hypothesis that you laid out, I was trying to think of some of the other markers that I should be paying attention to.  What are the inflation implications if that hypothesis is correct. I would think that unit labor costs would be going down if that’s coming about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is simply asking Governor Stein a question and seeking clarification or information about the potential implications of a hypothesis.


Passage number 267.
 MR. STEIN.  David, you’ll step in and help me if I’m getting in over my head—but it may happen very quickly.  [Laughter] I think if productivity is weak, so GDP is growing slowly, but we’re taking up slack, inflation will come when the slack is taken up, in some sense.  In a very simple limiting case, the unemployment rate would be the right summary statistic.  Did I pass.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Stein where he seeks assistance and provides his perspective on the relationship between productivity, GDP growth, inflation, and unemployment rate.


Passage number 268.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a dialogue between Mr. Evans and another person, and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 269.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there questions.  President Fisher, I saw you first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question and statement.


Passage number 270.
MR. FISHER.  You raised the possibility, Mr. Chairman—and I think you know that this is my bias—I’m curious to hear from the staff or the Desk, what would be, in your opinion, the difference in reaction if we moved only on Treasuries and not on mortgage-backed securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Despite mentioning his bias, there is no direct contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply expressing curiosity and requesting the opinion of the staff or the Desk.


Passage number 271.
 MR. POTTER.  So there are two aspects. The first one is the signaling of making the reduction, and you’ve made one.  The second one is to move just on Treasuries would be a strong indication that you wanted to support housing more, and you thought that the MBS purchases were the best way to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses two aspects related to making a reduction and supporting housing.


Passage number 272.
  But the signal is— MR. FISHER.  I was going to ask about the allocation preference, so that’s the way you would parse it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their intention to ask a question about the allocation preference.


Passage number 273.
 MR. POTTER.  I think the market has some views that that might happen, but they don’t have a really strong view in that direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is stating an observation about the market without expressing any disagreement with it.


Passage number 274.
 MR. FISHER.  Is that option on the table, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question posed by Mr. Fisher is simply asking if a certain option is being considered.


Passage number 275.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  As I said in my remarks, my default is what I heard a meeting or two ago, which was a general sense that, for simplicity’s sake, we ought to reduce asset purchases more or less proportionally. But I am totally sympathetic to that possible approach, and I invite people tomorrow to comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker states their default position, but also indicates sympathy towards an alternative approach and invites others to share their thoughts.


Passage number 276.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about any disagreement or contention. It simply includes a statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 277.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement explicitly expressed in the passage as it only mentions President Kocherlakota without providing any further context or information.


Passage number 278.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I had a couple of quick questions.  First, this time the staff didn’t prepare projections of the evolution of unemployment and inflation under the various alternatives. Which of these three alternatives would return unemployment and inflation to their goals most rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the lack of projections and a question about the alternatives.


Passage number 279.
  MR. LAUBACH.  President Kocherlakota, we did prepare such simulations, but they showed such small differences that we chose not to include them in the briefing charts.  But in alternative A, the inflation floor does provide some additional accommodation, according to the analysis that I think was distributed to the Committee ahead of the previous meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that simulations were prepared but not included in the briefing charts because they showed small differences.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 280.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I have a second quick question, which is on paragraph 4 of alternative B.  This is just a minor wording thing.  We say “until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability.” I think we should say something about since what period of time.  If we just read it like this, it looks like “until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially” from this point in time, as opposed to what we mean, I think, which is since last September when the program was initiated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota suggests that the wording in paragraph 4 of alternative B should include a specific time frame, while the original wording does not specify a time frame.


Passage number 281.
 MR. POTTER. This has been present in the statement for a while.  People are not confused.  I’m just saying that changing it would perhaps be more confusing, unless you have a lengthy explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Potter is simply expressing his opinion and providing a reason for it.


Passage number 282.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I have a lengthy explanation, which is that I prefer to be correct in what I say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their preference for being correct in what they say without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 283.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We’ve had language on cumulative progress before, or extended progress.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that language on cumulative progress or extended progress has been discussed previously.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 284.
 MR. POTTER. I don’t think this part of the statement has been touched since September. And it had the logical problem that President Lacker pointed out in September last year, which no one else has taken on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement or contention in the passage. The mention of President Lacker pointing out a logical problem in the statement suggests a divergence of opinion or disagreement among individuals.


Passage number 285.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I do think that people will understand it.  Thank you for pointing that out.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 286.
 MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman, you know I have been concerned about whether October would be a live meeting if we do nothing at this meeting.  What is your view on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Bullard's concern and asks for the view of the Chairman.


Passage number 287.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m glad you raised that.  Actually, Michelle and I have discussed this a couple of times.  I think it is very likely that I will get the question, “Is October still on the table.” In which case I will answer, “All meetings are on the table.”  And if we take any action, we will arrange an on-the-record phone press conference that will also be broadcast on the Internet, so that we will in fact be able, with short notice, to create a press conference– type event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their plans for addressing a potential question and how they will handle it.


Passage number 288.
 MR. EVANS.  Take what type of action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply mentions Mr. Evans and asks about the type of action to be taken.


Passage number 289.
  I mean, you might get yourself into— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What would I say.  First, I wouldn’t say “October.” I would say, “At any meeting, should there be a need for further explanation,” or something like that, “we would have the ability to arrange a phone press conference on the record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. It is solely discussing a suggestion or recommendation regarding communication methods.


Passage number 290.
” MR. EVANS.  That’s fine.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "That's fine. Yes." It is a simple agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 291.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude to the chairman, which suggests a positive interaction.


Passage number 292.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  [No response]  Seeing none, reception and dinner at the usual place.  No business will be conducted.  Tomorrow we start at 8:30, please note.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that could cause contention or disagreement among the listeners or readers. It consists mostly of straightforward information and instructions.


Passage number 293.
 [Meeting recessed]September 18 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We are ready for our policy go-round, and I have President Rosengren first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 294.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since people’s comments went long yesterday, I want to provide the opportunity that, when I no longer need this cane, I could bequeath it to the Chair.  I do find that the curved part, which I don’t get a lot of use out of, might be more useful to current and future Chairs.  [Laughter] I support alternative B. I’d like to have tied the purchase program to economic outcomes, but there does not seem to be much support on the Committee for moving in that direction, in part because the unemployment rate at this time may not provide a broad enough reflection of labor market conditions.  If our purchase program is to be data driven, it needs to reference a broader set of data so that we can have reasonable confidence that the economy will return to 2 percent inflation and full employment in a two- to three-year time frame.  Such a path would require more economic growth and more rapid expansion in employment than we are currently experiencing. Over the past several months, financial conditions have become much tighter than I would have liked, given the current pace of the recovery.  I believe that we should avoid any action that might further raise long-term rates, as that risks pushing the achievement of either element of our mandate too far into the future for my comfort.  Further tightening of long-term rates risks further slowing the only strong sectors in the economy, those interest-sensitive sectors that have benefited from our policies.  Even though the unemployment rate is much lower than a year ago, much of that decline came from potential workers exiting the labor force and thus does not provide as strong a signal of labor market improvement as I would like to see. I see little cost to waiting until we experience stronger growth in employment and real GDP before beginning what is likely to be a bumpy and unpredictable reduction in the purchase program.  While the direction of rates when we choose to reduce purchases is likely to be up, I have no confidence in my ability to predict the magnitude of the market’s reaction.  I fear that some see tapering as a nonevent that is already priced into markets.  But that view risks underestimating the potential market reaction, which in recent months has magnified small changes in tone into an expectation of a much more rapid tightening than we hope to suggest.  When we do choose to reduce purchases, we should be careful to use clear and forthright forward guidance or any other signal we can employ that avoids the perception that we are sharply tightening policy.  Such communication will be critical to minimizing the risk that markets will overreact to our reductions in purchases. In terms of the distribution of our purchases, I prefer that, when it becomes appropriate, we reduce purchases more from Treasuries than from MBS.  And in terms of the language, while I fully support the intent of the last sentence in paragraph 5, I do think that, as the discussion yesterday highlighted, it’s a pretty complicated concept. It might best be left to the minutes, the press conference, and future speeches to fully explain what the sense of that sentence is before we actually put it in the statement.  Again, while I fully support the intent of the sentence, I do worry about just putting it out there. It may be difficult for people to interpret without a little more guidance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 295.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 296.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it is not specified.


Passage number 297.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As you said yesterday, there are good arguments for both alternative B and the tapering envisioned in alternative C.  I view the choice as a close call. I do see several advantages to a very modest step-down in the pace of asset  purchases, as in alternative C, at this time.  First, it would appropriately acknowledge the sizable improvement in labor markets over the past year.  To my mind, there’s no question that we have made considerable progress toward this goal since the program was started.  Second, we’d demonstrate concretely that we are following through on the plan that the Chairman laid out in his June press conference, and that the Committee endorsed in July.  Overall, the recovery is proceeding more or less as anticipated back in June, which argues for execution on the plan laid out then.  Third, with a small initial move, we would still be adding considerable monetary stimulus going forward, which would position us well in case future improvements in the labor market fall short of our expectations. Now, I see the main argument for alternative B as wanting to collect further information and confidence in the ongoing strength of the expansion.  And of course at one level, it’s hard to argue against gaining information and certainty.  However, inaction carries with it considerable risks, especially regarding our communications.  Here I would have a slightly different perspective on what it means in terms of what our baseline should be.  The June plan, including the knockouts and the whole plan as described, should really be our baseline for thinking about what inaction versus action is.   Uncertainty about future policy could increase if we were perceived as backtracking on the plan laid out in June for reasons that are not at all evident.  And this confusion could undermine the public’s understanding of our commitment to our forward guidance more generally, including forward guidance with the funds rate.  Indeed, in my mind, clear confirmation of our plan is more important than whether we decide to reduce purchases at this meeting or later this year.  The point I want to make here is, the strategy is what matters, not the tactical decisions about which meeting we make what move and exactly how much we adjust the purchases. Even with our best communication efforts, I am worried that delaying action may well confuse markets, add to uncertainty and risk premiums, and, in the end, could be counterproductive with respect to the desire to bring about more-favorable financial conditions.  Therefore, if the Committee chooses to go with alternative B, I think it’s critically important that we make clear that this is not a repudiation of the plan that we have articulated over the past few months.  I view the new language in paragraph 3 of alternative B that was introduced over the weekend as helpful in this regard.  I’m thinking of the first sentence of paragraph 3.  I would also argue that we put in the bracketed phrase in paragraph 4.  I actually like “later this year,” but “at its coming meetings” is good, too.  So I strongly urge that we have that bracketed language in paragraph 4.  Moreover, we must not inadvertently signal a newfound pessimism about the outlook that’s supported neither by the data nor by the forecast. Such a public misperception could be damaging to confidence. Although I do view the policy action in alternative C as being a preferred course, I can support alternative B.  Again, though, I think it’s critically important that the language in the statement and our communications around this indicate that we are continuing on the plan laid out in June. Now, I am concerned about the apparent tightening in expectations regarding the funds rate that we’ve seen over the past few months.  In addition, it’s clear that uncertainty about rates over the next few years has climbed considerably, which has pushed up term premiums more generally. In my view, the proper treatment for this problem, which I do view as a problem, is stronger forward guidance around our funds rate, not more asset purchases.  Therefore, it would  be very useful, sooner rather than later, to strengthen our forward guidance and push against the perception that tapering of asset purchases, now or in the future, implies a more imminent liftoff of the funds rate.  To that end, it would help to clarify what we will do once the unemployment rate reaches 6½ percent.  Now, I favor a small variant of the language in paragraph 5 of alternative A—specifically, in the language that says “Once the unemployment rate reaches 6 percent . . . ,” I would replace “6 percent” with “6½ percent”:  “Once the unemployment rate reaches 6½ percent, and assuming inflation is well contained at that time, the Committee will consider a broad set of indicators in determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy. Relevant factors include additional measures of labor market conditions such as the level and growth of employment”—which, I think, captures this issue around employment-to-population and labor force participation—“indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments.”  The important part of that language is that it does create some space between the 6½ percent threshold and the actual liftoff of the funds rate. Finally, in terms of this issue that President Rosengren mentioned and Governor Yellen highlighted yesterday—about, once we do lift off, the next phase, what the pace of liftoff will be—I agree completely with President Rosengren.  I don’t think one sentence in the statement is the right way to convey that information.  Governor Yellen is absolutely right that we need to convey that information, and we need to explain our thinking here.  The SEP is going to be out there.  We have, I think, a good story for why we expect the funds rate to rise slowly.  But again, I agree with President Rosengren that that’s best done through the minutes, through the Chairman’s press conference, and through our more general communications.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.PARTICIPANTS.  There’s a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply acknowledges and thanks President Plosser and mentions the presence of other participants in a neutral manner.


Passage number 299.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, I’m sorry.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply seems like an apology and an acknowledgment of President Kocherlakota's presence.


Passage number 300.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A quick question for President Williams.  In your remarks, you favored the language in paragraph 5 of alternative A, but proposed replacing “6” with “6½.”  What was your thinking on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 301.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage since "MR" does not provide enough context to determine the presence of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 302.
 WILLIAMS.  Well, we currently have “6½” in the statement.  My view is, we won’t raise the funds rate until the unemployment rate is around 6 percent or something like that.  What I’m trying to do is to explain that even when it gets to 6½, what our thinking will be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Williams is simply providing his view on the situation and explaining his thoughts.


Passage number 303.
  We will no longer have a threshold out there, so the thinking is, we’ll be looking at unemployment, employment— MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s helpful.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and gratitude for the information provided.


Passage number 304.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any statements or arguments that can be considered as contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the name "President Plosser" without providing any additional context or information.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply thanking President Fisher.


Passage number 306.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I’m going to hold you to that Switzerland outside rule, okay.  [Laughter] President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple exchange between two speakers with no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 307.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Although it’s not an easy decision, I’m going to support alternative B.  As I stated in my economy-round statement, I think the current data present an ambiguous picture—in fact, too ambiguous a picture.  The consensus outlook as represented by the SEP central tendency may be overly optimistic, and the most plausible risks to the outlook are to the downside.  That said, I believe that the Committee has set up the decision as between starting to taper now or sustaining purchases a while longer and starting to taper later, but likely very soon.  This is a tight set of decision options.  I do not believe the two other options are realistically on the table—that is, to sustain purchases indefinitely, the open-ended posture that we started with, or to increase purchases.  There may be arguments for these policy stances, but the markets and public have not been prepared for the serious consideration by the Committee of those options.  Indeed, the three policy options on the table today, presented at this meeting, reflect this reality that we have a tight set of options, in my view. So if one accepts that the array of choices today consists, realistically, of tapering now or soon, then I think there are some relevant decision criteria, and I’ll frame those decision criteria as four questions.  First, based on data evidence, is the economy strong enough to move ahead in  a state of declining LSAP stimulus and, relatively shortly, with LSAP stimulus eliminated.  Call this the current economic strength criterion.  Second, how confident is the Committee in the outlook as presented in the central tendency of the SEP.  Call that a confidence criterion, meaning our confidence in the outlook.  Third, what is to be gained from a delay to the October or December meeting in terms of plausibly improved data, accumulated short-term direct effects of purchases on the economy, and greater certainty. I see this as a short-term efficacy criterion.  And, fourth, what does it take to preserve and protect the Committee’s credibility and act consistently with recent communications. For me, that’s a credibility criterion. Here’s how I size up the situation relative to these questions.  There are reasons to have some reservations about the strength of the economy as evidenced by recent data.  If the outlook plays out near what is expected, that’s fine, but there is more chance of underperformance than outperformance. At the same time, little will be gained by waiting until October.  The economy will absorb a modest start of tapering in the amount of $10 billion.  While I see little difference between now and October, by early December, we may have information that gives more confidence in the 2014 outlook, including indications that headwinds are, in fact, dissipating. Credibility should be in the front of our minds at this point.  Deviation from the data-dependent basis for a start to reduction of purchases may undermine credibility and actually do harm to the economy by increasing financial volatility and undermining public confidence.  I do think it’s difficult to accurately predict market and public reaction to either decision, and, in circumstances like that, my instinct is to stay true to the data-driven principle we previously communicated—in effect, walk our talk. So in my judgment, alternative B is the most credible fit for the current reality.  Still, I don’t think the situation I’ve just laid out in terms of my four considerations yields a clear-cut answer.  I actually could go either way—that is, B or C—but the weight of my views tilts to alternative B. I see the merits of including the optional language in alternative B that refers to “at its coming meetings” as the likely time at which the moderation of the pace of purchases begins.  In fact, I think failure to include this language may bring on undesired interpretations of what, in the minds of many in the market, is now thought of as a delay, but may turn into thinking that the Committee is reversing course.  So I support the language “at its coming meetings.” As regards forward rate guidance, since, in my view, a decision to delay until October or December should be explained as precautionary and, obviously, temporary, I would prefer to hold off on any adjustment to or elaboration of the existing forward rate guidance.  I think such a move would be more appropriate at the time of commencing tapering and in circumstances of some continuing ambiguity around the state of the economy. Like Presidents Rosengren and Williams, I would prefer not to include the bracketed language at the end of paragraph 5.  I’m concerned that it might confuse matters by introducing a new moving part in an already complicated communication situation. In the Chairman’s press conference today, I think a decision to begin purchase reductions later this fall should be positioned as very likely the default course of action in the absence of very strong evidence that the economy is off track—that is, materially deviating from the outlook that we presented in the central tendency of the SEP. If conditions develop in which the economy is materially off track, then we will have to reevaluate the appropriate stance of policy and not confine ourselves to the tight set of decision options that we’re currently working under.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the author's support for alternative B and their reasoning behind it.


Passage number 308.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply shows gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 309.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate the arguments being made on all sides of this very close decision today.  I’m going to support alternative B for today. According to the SEP, total year-over-year PCE inflation for 2013 is projected to come in close to 1 percent, nearly 1 full percentage point below our expectations as of September 2012, the date of the launch of the current asset purchase program.  I think that on the basis of our inflation projections, we can afford to be patient in assessing the future of our asset purchase program, possibly allowing it to continue for a somewhat longer period than otherwise would have been feasible.  My expectation is that inflation will begin to pick up as the U.S. and global economies strengthen in coming quarters.  However, I think we can wait until we see more-tangible signs that such a development is occurring before taking action to draw down the pace of purchases. I have several comments on the policy options in front of us.  Let’s begin with alternative B, paragraph 4, the phrase “at its coming meetings.” In my view, this phrase should be included. I associate myself with comments by President Williams and President Lockhart. I see this phrase as marginally helpful to the Committee should we decide that October is an opportune moment to reduce the pace of purchases by a small amount. I advise the Committee not to put all of the weight concerning future directional decisions for monetary policy on a single meeting, such as the December meeting, because macroeconomic events at that particular juncture may or may not be conducive to major policy action. Also in alternative B, in paragraph 5, there’s an optional phrase at the very end.  I think that this phrase should be omitted and that we should simply let the Chairman discuss the 2016 SEP policy rate projections during the press conference.  Governor Yellen made an important pitch for the interpretation of the 2016 SEP policy rate embedded in this sentence. The key idea is that the reason rates are still low at the 2016 juncture is that unspecified persistent headwinds will still be abating at that point. First of all, while this is a good issue for the Committee to discuss, I do not think we have thought through all of the ramifications of including such a phrase in the statement, and, in this sense, I agree with Presidents Rosengren and Williams.  In my own view, including this phrase would significantly increase the risk of sending an unwarranted pessimistic signal about the state of the U.S. economy in 2016, a situation about which we have very little knowledge.  In particular, that 2016 economy may be interpreted as one with low real interest rates, low productivity growth, and slow growth of national income.  Sending a pessimistic signal today would then feed back into macroeconomic decisionmaking today, depressing investment behavior, for example. Much of the “lower for longer” policy discussion that has revolved around this table over the last several years has been based on work by Michael Woodford and his coauthors.  The relatively low policy rate in 2016 projected in the SEP could be viewed as part of an optimal policy strategy consistent with Woodford’s work.  If so, to the extent that markets have not already anticipated the Committee’s policy intentions for 2016, it would induce, according to the theory, more consumption and investment today.  I think we should at least leave this possibility on the table, and therefore, for this reason, I think we should omit the last sentence of paragraph 5 in alternative B. More broadly, the whole purpose of forward guidance might be called into question with the explanation suggested in the last sentence of paragraph 5.  A provocative way to put this is, perhaps we should abandon all attempts at forward guidance if all we are saying is that future economic prospects are bleak.In alternative C, paragraph 4, there are two options.  The one labeled just “4” makes no reference to a 7 percent unemployment rate, and paragraph 4' includes a reference to the 7 percent unemployment rate. I have some comments on this, which would enshrine 7 percent as a threshold for the asset purchase program.  This reference suggests that purchases will be zero at the time that the 7 percent level of unemployment is crossed.  Given the recent behavior of unemployment, I see this as quite reckless for the Committee.  Unemployment could easily cross 7 percent very soon, and we are currently, as a Committee, in no position to be at zero purchases that quickly.  Accordingly, if we went with alternative C, I would suggest 4 over 4'. Let me turn now to alternative A, giving equal time to all options here. In alternative A, paragraph 5, there is some language about how to introduce an inflation floor in the forward guidance.  I’ve supported an inflation floor, so I wanted to comment on this.  I do think that if we move in this direction, inflation thresholds should be symmetrical.  The inflation floor, therefore, should be 1½ percent and should be viewed and worded in a symmetrical way to the 2½ percent threshold on inflation on the high side.  However, I agree with the Chairman’s assessment that this is an inopportune time to try to strengthen our forward guidance, given upcoming changes in Committee composition.  But this is an issue that may be salient going forward, and so I wanted to make my preferences known—that I’d like this to be more symmetrical than what it is here. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 310.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I just would raise for further consideration that we could look at projected inflation, one to two years ahead, or we could look at a current measure of inflation, underlying inflation—something like that.  If you’re looking at a projected level, I think it’s a good question whether or not we should be putting our target in.  Symmetry is not the entire consideration here.  I just raise the question.  But I think the number to put in there is actually a very important question we need to think about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. The speaker is raising questions and suggesting different considerations, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 311.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  In the past, I’ve liked to not put the forecast in there, because any credible central bank should be saying that inflation is going to go back to target relatively soon.  So I think that’s a conundrum for both of our thresholds—on the high side, mostly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is sharing their personal opinion about not including a forecast in the past, without contradicting or challenging any other statements or opinions.


Passage number 312.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 313.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you. President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude toward President Pianalto.


Passage number 314.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I noted yesterday, compared with the situation a year ago, both labor market conditions and the outlook for labor markets have improved considerably.  Since our previous meeting, the decline in the unemployment rate and continued gains in private payroll employment reinforce the picture of ongoing labor market improvement.  In my view, we should acknowledge the progress labor markets have made since last September and slow our asset purchases while remaining open to making adjustments as required.  Therefore, I prefer alternative C today. Given my view of the progress we’ve seen in labor markets, as well as my economic outlook, I see alternative C as being the alternative most consistent with our prior communications.  It delivers on the guidance provided through your June press statement that reductions in asset purchases would cease in the vicinity of a 7 percent unemployment rate. I also think reducing our asset purchases at this meeting would provide markets with a clearer view on the likely timing and structure of remaining asset purchases.  A $10 billion reduction is   likely smaller than some market participants currently anticipate and would be taken as an indication that the FOMC plans to proceed cautiously in removing our accommodation. Furthermore, it’s difficult to see how any real advantage could be achieved by postponing action until our October meeting.  We’re unlikely to learn that much between now and the end of October.  With one month’s additional economic data, it’s unlikely that many of our views about the outlook would change markedly.  And that could leave us waiting until December to act, at which time I expect the unemployment rate to be even closer to 7 percent. In my mind, this would call into question what conditions would likely lead the Committee to make adjustments to, and eventually stop, the purchase program.  So, again, adjusting our asset purchases today, I think, acknowledges progress toward the objective of this program of substantial improvement in the outlook for labor markets.  In terms of our longer-term objectives, my SEP submission has a fed funds rate of 1.75 percent in 2016, while I consider normal to be 4 percent.  This reflects partially the headwinds that are still affecting my outlook, particularly for the inflation rate in 2016, but it also reflects an intentional decision to provide extra accommodation—that is, to keep the fed funds rate below the guidance of most any Taylor rule. In my case, the SEP is providing the forward guidance that I would support in today’s challenging environment. Regarding possible changes to our forward guidance, of the options that are presented, I would prefer clarifying our reaction to below-target inflation rates, which is being described as an inflation floor.  Although I agree with you, Mr. Chairman, that this is not the time to make changes to our forward guidance.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing her own view and preferences, but there is no indication of disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 315.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, may I ask a question of President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a request to ask a question.


Passage number 316.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Certainly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: "Certainly" is a response indicating agreement or confirmation. It does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 317.
   MR. FISHER.  Would you accept tapering back only in Treasuries, or do you want to do it in both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, there is no contention or disagreement evident. The person is simply asking a question about whether tapering should be done only in Treasuries or in both Treasuries and another asset class.


Passage number 318.
 MS. PIANALTO.  I would rather just take a balanced approach—a proportional reduction in both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements. The speaker simply expresses a preference for a balanced approach, without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 319.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of polite expressions and a simple acknowledgment.


Passage number 320.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  You did an excellent job yesterday of summarizing a wide array of factors relevant to a decision now.  Others around the table have done so as well, so I don’t need to repeat a lot of those.  I favor alternative C for a lot of the reasons that have been discussed.  But for me, one is fairly decisive, and that is the value of following through on actions that are implied by our past communications.  When we originally rolled out this program, we very explicitly chose what criterion we would tell the public we were going to use:  the outlook for labor market conditions.  There are a wide array of things we could have chosen.  We could have expressed it more elastically.  We could have talked about things that alluded to growth or labor force participation more broadly, but we chose the outlook for labor market conditions.  In June, we put more substance into that, more content into that, which we explicitly deputized you to convey, Mr. Chairman. We said that if economic conditions evolved as we expected, we’d begin tapering later this year.  But we also tied the end of the program to 7 percent unemployment, and we were very explicit about this—this was Governor Stein’s proposal.  We said that, in the middle of next year when we expect to end purchases, the unemployment rate would likely be in the vicinity of 7 percent.  We decided to make that link very explicitly, and that was a way of communicating the way in which the reduction in the pace of asset purchases was likely to vary with economic conditions and the data as they came in.  And, sure enough, they’ve evolved since June.  The   outlook for the labor market has changed.  It’s improved.  We actually expect to get to 7 percent sooner than we did in June.  It now looks as though we’re going to get there in the first quarter.  We might even get there sooner.  So if we’re going to start to taper in a way that’s consistent with what we authorized the Chairman to say, we need to get started. And then, on top of that, as a result of all that we’ve communicated to markets, we’ve come into this meeting with a broad majority of market participants expecting us to begin tapering at this meeting. We’ve had a lot of trouble communicating this year, and it was a bumpy spring until we got ourselves organized in June and settled on a framework to communicate. I would think we’d want to strive mightily to avoid the appearance of lurching to some new communication framework or some new strategy to govern how we’re going to end our asset purchase program. I sense some ex post regret around the table.  Set aside our past communications.  We’ve been doing this asset purchase program.  And, if you pretend we hadn’t told anyone what was going to govern it, you can picture a lot of criteria that could bear on the decision to start tapering.  You can picture a lot, and a lot of that has come up today.  President Lockhart, President Evans, and others have advanced a lot of considerations.  But we decided to close off a lot of them.  We communicated that we were going to focus on something a little more narrow, which is the outlook for labor market conditions.  Well, that means that there was a chance that in the future, on a day like today, we’d have some considerations that we would have liked to bring to bear on the decision, but that we’ve committed not to bring to bear on it.  The answer to any ex post regret in this situation is a question.  How much faith do you want people to place in what we say in the future about future monetary policy.  So for me, that suggests that today’s   meeting is about following through on what we’ve said in a way that’s clear and doesn’t whipsaw markets.  And for me, that’s alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 321.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. It is simply thanking President George.


Passage number 322.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative C.  We have taken costly steps over the past several months to prepare markets for a modest adjustment to the pace of asset purchases, and markets appear prepared for such an adjustment at this meeting. It is clear that our individual judgments vary, and, certainly, we’ve not developed any collective sense about what constitutes substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market.  My own reading of the language in the statement suggests we may have confused the stopping rule with the conditions needed to begin paring back on the level of monetary easing.  Our statement says we will continue until the outlook for the labor market improves substantially, and I think an action today to modestly reduce the pace of purchases, even if our individual or collective outlook hurdle is not met, clearly continues monetary easing for some time. As I’ve noted in past meetings, I see substantial progress continuing in labor markets.  The Blue Chip survey reported last January that the average monthly employment gain in 2013 was expected to be 158,000.  Their latest survey indicates that the average monthly employment gain next year is expected to be 192,000.  In the September 2012 Tealbook, the projection for employment growth in mid-2014 was around 200,000, and, if you keep that forecast horizon the same, the projection in the current Tealbook for employment growth in mid-2015 is about 250,000. I continue to support the road map for purchases that the Chairman presented at the June press conference and view the data as having been sufficiently positive to continue with this plan.  Consistent with this road map, our previous guidance, and market expectations, my preferred course of action is to begin tapering at this meeting.  Reducing both Treasury and MBS purchases, as proposed in alternative C, is acceptable, although I would suggest that we have the latitude to adjust that mix based on recent research, including that by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen.  That research finds very slight spillover effects of Treasury purchases and suggests that an adjustment of $10 billion in Treasury-only purchases would do little to tighten broader financial conditions. I also support the idea of signaling that increases in the fed funds rate after liftoff are likely to be gradual as we assess the economy’s response.  However, the qualitative guidance along the lines of alternative B would not reduce uncertainty, in my view, given that the current range of estimates in our SEP is from ½ to 4¼ percent.  And so, to provide more clarity, I could support incorporating the median estimate of the funds rate from the SEP into our FOMC statement.  Moving this information from the SEP to the statement would carry a formal endorsement of the Committee regarding the likely path after liftoff, which I could see as a valuable tool as we approach exit. Even as I advocate for this initial modest reduction in purchases, I share the desire to see further progress with this recovery and to be assured that no setbacks lie ahead—even to achieve escape velocity, as some have noted. But it seems to me that waiting for more evidence in the face of continuing economic growth unnecessarily discounts the real progress we have seen and the potential cost of a policy tool with which we have limited experience. I am mindful that we will continue to add to our balance sheet and to promise near-zero rates into the future.  The conditions will remain for risk and imbalances to grow, notwithstanding the shift in rates this summer that may have slowed the momentum in some asset markets. We will have to be   prepared for difficult moves as we apply monetary policy to a growing but not yet fully recovered economy. Moving now and moving slowly will not eliminate volatility but can give markets space to adjust gradually and to resume their role in pricing risk and allocating credit. My concern with delaying action is that it has the potential to threaten our credibility and the predictability of policy actions.  Markets may well be confused by the delay and cause additional volatility.  Awaiting further data suggests that the Committee’s desire to be data dependent involves putting increasing focus on the most recent data points and less on its medium-term view of the economy.  Markets might misconstrue the postponement of action as reflecting our assessment that, in fact, the broader economic outlook is weaker, or as raising the bar for the level of improvement we have to see. Most important, waiting poses risks to our credibility about the strength of thresholds.  Signaling a future policy action, but then failing to follow through, could erode the policy intent.  We signaled a likely tapering in the second half of the year, which markets have taken on board starting this month.  Looking ahead, we are asking markets to trust us that short-term rates will likely remain near zero for as long as two more years.  And, as our forecasts show, we anticipate that in two years, growth will be near or above 3 percent, inflation near 2 percent, and the unemployment rate within 1 percentage point of its long-run level, conditions not historically consistent with near-zero rates.  Asking markets to trust that forward guidance will require a great deal of credibility. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker supports alternative C and offers reasons for her support. She discusses the potential risks of delaying action and emphasizes the importance of maintaining credibility in the markets.


Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 324.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 325.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I admit, though, that I did not find today’s policy decision an easy call.  There has undeniably been a lot of improvement in the labor market since we started the asset purchase program a year ago, and, on that score, I think a first reduction in the pace of our purchases could certainly be justified.  But as I explained yesterday, against that assessment of the extent of progress we’ve achieved stand my lingering doubts about the potential for further improvements going forward.  I still do anticipate that we’ll see steady improvement in the labor market, and that inflation will move up toward our 2 percent objective, a scenario along the general lines of that laid out by the Chairman in his June press conference. But, taking both considerations into account, I judge it wiser not to move today and to await additional evidence that raises our confidence that progress in the labor market will be sustained. The new sentences in paragraph 3 of alternative B, to me, strike the right balance.  They acknowledge the improvement in labor market conditions since we began our program, but they also point out that, in the current circumstances, it’s prudent to await further confirmation that those improvements will be sustained.  The new language in paragraph 4 of alternative B clearly keeps a reduction in the pace of purchases on the table without raising the bar for what we’d need to see in the data. Alternative B signals that we’re willing to be patient in adjusting the pace of our purchases and emphasizes that we remain focused on implementing policies that will achieve our dual mandate objectives.  It gently pushes back against the view that many market participants have that we’re hell-bent on winding down the asset purchase program for reasons we’ve not clearly articulated, perhaps relating to efficacy or costs, including financial stability risks. I agree with President Kocherlakota that the same perception is undermining the credibility of our  forward guidance. It also highlights our concern that the deterioration in financial conditions we’ve seen in recent months could undermine the attainment of our objectives. Of course, a decision not to reduce the pace of our purchases today does entail some risks.  The increases we’ve seen in longer-term yields appear to be due importantly to higher term premiums, in part reflecting heightened uncertainty about monetary policy.  A decision to maintain our current pace of purchases may not alleviate, and could exacerbate, this uncertainty.  Moreover, by the time of our October and even our December meetings, we may conceivably remain just as uncertain about the sustainability of labor market progress as we are now.  For that reason, I think it’s important, as paragraph 3 of alternative B does, not only to stress our uncertainty about future progress but also to point to the cumulative progress we’ve seen since the start of our program. Actual progress matters, and we may well make further progress. Indeed, all else being equal, the greater our cumulative progress, the more confident we can be that we will ultimately reach our mandated maximum employment goal—the main purpose of the asset purchase program since the outset—and the safer it should become to reduce the pace of purchases.  Put differently, it’s a lot more reasonable to worry that we won’t arrive in Manhattan when we’re in Denver or Kansas City than after we’ve passed through Columbus, Ohio, or find ourselves at the Weehawken entrance to the Lincoln Tunnel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. YELLEN expresses her support for alternative B but also states her doubts and concerns about reducing the pace of purchases at this time. She acknowledges the improvements in the labor market but also emphasizes the need for further evidence and progress before making a decision. She also pushes back against the perception that the Federal Reserve is rushing to wind down the asset purchase program. This disagreement and differing perspectives create contention within the passage.


Passage number 326.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Governor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply shows someone expressing gratitude.


Passage number 327.
 MS. YELLEN.  I didn’t want to disappoint you, President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Ms. Yellen simply expresses her desire not to disappoint President Fisher.


Passage number 328.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I’m learning so much about geography.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement about learning geography is not a source of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 329.
 MS. YELLEN.  In case you were wondering, we’re moving along Interstate 70.  [Laughter]  That’s not to say that all else is always equal.  For example, even if the unemployment rate falls yet further, I might not want to reduce the pace of purchases if I thought, for example, that we were on the cusp of some adverse event such as a fiscal or financial crisis.  But the more progress we achieve, the smaller should be the set of circumstances that would justify a decision not to reduce the pace of purchases.  That’s why I think the stance expressed in the second sentence of paragraph 3 of alternative B, that we “decided to await more evidence that progress will be sustained,” does not put us on a treadmill.  Each month that we see further improvement in labor market conditions will raise my confidence that, even with a reduction in the pace of purchases, we will finish that 3,049-mile road trip from 101 Market Street in San Francisco via Denver, Kansas City, and Columbus, and happily emerge on the other side of the Lincoln Tunnel. Since I still expect to see further improvement over coming months, I would be okay with adding the bracketed text “at its coming meetings” in paragraph 4 of alternative B. Let me conclude with a brief comment on our forward guidance pertaining to the path of the funds rate, building on my comments yesterday. I see it as essential to the attainment of our objectives that this guidance remains credible and that it appropriately shapes market expectations.  I worry that the path of forward rates has now risen so much that it may seriously imperil the effectiveness of our policies.  Since early May, one-year forward rates ending in three years have risen by roughly 110 basis points, and those ending in four years by 160 basis points.  In contrast, since the April Tealbook, the staff’s projection of the average funds rate, three to four years ahead, has shifted down by 30 basis points.  As I argued yesterday, we need to communicate clearly to the public that, even though we’re forecasting good economic outcomes   in the future, our assessment is that their attainment is possible only if we’re very patient in removing accommodation as headwinds gradually abate. As I argued, I do think it’s important to better explain our forward guidance to the public.  The public will be able to infer that we expect to be patient from the SEP that we’ll be releasing. But I think it’s more desirable for the Committee as a whole to opine on this topic.  I recognize that these thoughts are hard to get across and that the language proposed at the end of paragraph 5 of alternative B needs perhaps more thought about framing or other language.  But I agree with President Kocherlakota and others that it is important for us to eventually work on that forward guidance. It doesn’t have to be today, but I’d like to see that in future meetings.  And I would just add that I agree with President Williams about the kind of language that we might add to explain what particular indicators we would be looking at when thresholds are crossed.  I think all of that is very important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Yellen is expressing her thoughts and opinions on the topic at hand.


Passage number 330.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement expressing gratitude to Governor Tarullo.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 331.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I agree with the many people who have suggested that our discussion and decision today are predominantly about what we are signaling about our policies not just today, but also over the course of the next several quarters, in all likelihood.  Just to preface my assessment and positions, I want to return us for a moment to two sets of institutional difficulties that we have with market expectations. The first, as I’ve said before, goes back to the origins of the current LSAP program in September 2012.  The program, as stated in the FOMC statement and, certainly, as perceived by markets, probably did not reflect the broad consensus of the FOMC that was suggested by the strong vote that it had at the time.  That’s created a certain awkwardness since then, whereby we introduce concepts somewhat tentatively about efficacy or costs; we didn’t really want to push those publicly for good reasons, even though they may have animated concerns of a number of Committee members; and so we find ourselves having to talk publicly in terms of the articulated standard of substantial improvement in labor markets, even though people’s own individual calculi are affected by a number of things other than that. The second problem, which I think has become more apparent today, is that, once again, with the June so-called framework, as we all recall just from that meeting a few months ago, there wasn’t really a convergent view on how we were going to proceed with LSAPs.  There were several colleagues who seemed to have much more of a chronology in mind:  We’re headed toward September, and then we’re going to proceed after that.  There are others who were leery of making very many signals in any direction.  And then there were those in the middle, who, ultimately, I think, dictated the standards that the Chairman articulated in the press conference, which were data driven but, obviously, communicated some lean toward taper. So in my mind, what we have here is a matter of not only managing market expectations, but also managing ourselves.  That makes this a very messy decision, as I think is apparent in the comments of people today, which are really quite thoughtful, a cut or two above our normal interventions, on the one hand, and yet reflecting genuine and good faith differences of perspective, on the other. Now let me turn to, in a policy sense, what the standards for tapering would be.  And of course, we have two sitting side by side here:  the one from the September 2012 FOMC statement; and the second, the framework for tapering that the Chairman articulated in June, invoking and building on the September 2012 statement but trying to develop that a little further.  Well, with respect to the September 2012 statement of overall substantial improvement in the outlook for labor markets, I think it’s been pretty clear for a while that, for most people, one’s  going-in position on the wisdom and efficacy of LSAPs is pretty closely correlated to one’s position on how much labor market improvement has occurred.  Labor market conditions are potentially quite broad and encompass a general assessment of the health of the labor market, and so some want to focus on unemployment, and others want to point to net job creation, the labor force participation rate, or the fact that some traditional indicators of dynamism, even though they’re showing signs of life, are still pretty depressed by historical standards. As I think people know, my own view is that there are still a fair number of questions, as I suggested yesterday, about the relative contributions of different explanations for what’s going on. Those questions are probably going to stay with us for a while as to how much is achievable in labor markets through policies intended to increase aggregate demand. It’s also been my position, which I continue to hold, that, pretty clearly, a good bit more can be done now, and that we will not need to make a decision for a while as to whether we’re approaching the limit of what can be achieved in a prudent fashion. Now, what’s “substantial”.  This is a classic legal word that gets inserted into a standard and then is susceptible to a variety of interpretations that can be consistent with a variety of going-in positions.  So I always thought we were going to have disagreements on that, and so we do. I think we can pin down a little bit more, though, the standards that the Chairman articulated in his June press conference.  I do want to read those because there’s been a little bit of selective text use today, and I think it’s important to recall all of what he said. Sorry, Mr. Chairman, I’m repeating history, your own history, back to you even as you sit two seats down from me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This is evident in the phrase "genuine and good faith differences of perspective" and the mention of "selective text use". These indicate that different individuals have different opinions and interpretations of the situation.


Passage number 332.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I'm unable to answer your question without a specific passage or context. Could you please provide more details?


Passage number 333.
 [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  He began by drawing the attention of the reporters and the public to the economic outcomes that the Committee saw as most likely, that is, those reflected in the June  SEP.  Then he said that those outcomes “involve continuing gains in labor markets, supported by moderate growth that picks up over the next several quarters as the near-term restraint from fiscal policy and other headwinds diminishes.  We also see inflation moving back toward our 2 percent objective over time. If the incoming data are broadly consistent with this forecast, the Committee currently anticipates that it would be appropriate to moderate the monthly pace of purchases later this year.” So he’s established our collective expectations as stated in the June SEP as a benchmark for our later decisions as to whether it’s appropriate to begin to taper. Now, those are not hard numbers, obviously; they’re still qualitative standards.  But that was the benchmark.  And then, a couple of sentences later, he said, “In this scenario”—that is, our collective SEP projections— “when asset purchases ultimately come to an end, the unemployment rate would likely be in the vicinity of 7 percent, with solid economic growth supporting further job gains.” The 7 percent figure was, I think, intentionally placed in there as a number that drew attention to the fact that this was not a chronologically driven process but instead one that was data dependent.  At the same time, however, it was a number that was explicitly linked to the path projected by the FOMC itself in its June SEP. Now, I think one can look at that with a fair degree of good faith and say, “Gee, what has happened since June.”  The central tendency of the SEP in September is actually for lower growth in the rest of 2013 and into 2014.  There has been, then, inarguably, no realization of the expectations that moderate growth will pick up “over the next several quarters as the near-term restraint from fiscal policy and other headwinds diminishes.”  I think a good case can be made for the proposition, with a fair reading, that the standard that the Chairman articulated in June   arguably hasn’t been met.  This is not a case in which we would say “X” and then do “not X.”  It’s clearly an area in which there’s some uncertainty. Having said that, I would say that the way I heard Jay yesterday and John today in their descriptions of their own assessments of the data is that a reasonable external observer listening carefully could well think that the June expectations had been met. And somebody earlier made the point that there’s been some building of those expectations, not quite as unanimous as, I think, some have specified here.  Simon and Steve yesterday, I thought, made pretty clear that there was some divergence of views, even though the preponderance of expectations was toward tapering. So I would say that, trying not to be driven by my own priors and working assumptions about labor market conditions and health, I think it’s a close case whether the standards have been met.  It’s been the case for quite some time that one can massage the “substantial improvement” standard either to have realized it or to have not realized it.  Just looking at it, as you can tell, in a quasi-legalistic fashion—are we meeting standards that have been articulated, and will it be clearly erroneous not to act based on those standards.—I don’t think it’s a clear case at all, and, again, my policy priors would lead me in the direction of not tapering. But for me, the key consideration going into this meeting has been what Narayana talked about both yesterday and today—and Janet, I think, just alluded to as well—which is that there has been a pretty pronounced market tendency to read our actions on LSAPs as an indication of our overall policy orientation.  This includes expectations on when we’re going to increase the federal funds rate, despite the best efforts of the Chairman and many other people on this Committee to draw distinctions between those two policy instruments. I recognize that manifold sources of uncertainty surround expectations on the federal funds rate now: How strong is the  economy, which obviously affects people’s sense of where that trajectory is going to be, and what exactly are our intentions.  Those dilemmas I noted earlier that exist because of the greater variance of our internal views than we communicated externally probably sow some confusion, and, as many people have mentioned, there are some questions around leadership succession here at the Fed. So there are many things affecting that judgment, but it still does seem that at least a part of the market-driven, as opposed to analyst-driven, pulling forward of the expected date of liftoff is due to this general reading of what our orientation is—and I think that anecdotally and otherwise, we’ve had some reinforcement for that proposition.  In that sense, I return to where Charlie Plosser began—with the proposition, with which I agree, that signaling is what this decision is about.  I remain concerned that even a mild taper today will be read as, at least in part, flipping a switch.  I know we don’t intend it as ineluctable or inexorable, and we can do what we can, beginning with the Chairman’s press conference, to push back against that expectation.  But to me, in all honesty, it’s what’s been gripping me the most about this issue since June, as opposed to very fine distinctions as to whether there’s been just good improvement or substantial improvement or moderate improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions. I come down, in the end, for alternative B, but with some of the hesitancy and concerns that I think have been reflected in the statements of a number of you who also came down, in the end, for alternative B.  As Janet and several others have said, I think, the emphasis in the proposed statement is on assessing “whether incoming information continues to support the Committee’s expectation of ongoing improvement.”  The emphasis is on the notion that we’re still walking down that path and that the decision today under alternative B is making sure that there’s no backsliding.  This is, I think, the way we all want to frame it.Having made a case for alternative B and indicated why that’s the way in which I’ve been leaning, I do want to close with just one caution, which gets back to this issue of managing ourselves as well as market expectations.  What I’m about to say, I think, is a little counterintuitive, but bear with me for a minute.  From my point of view, it would be better for us to taper a little today on the basis of this mixed record that is susceptible to different interpretations than it would be to not taper today but then get into October or December and have more people saying, “Oh, we really need to taper,” regardless of what’s going on outside.  The reason I say that is, if we don’t taper today based on a mixed record—and I think the record would justify not tapering—that is going to draw attention back to conditions and how much improvement there is and how things are picking up.  But then, in October or December, instead of what most people expect, which is continued unspectacular but gradual progress, if there’s something of a setback in the quality of the data coming in and we taper nonetheless, that risks telling the public, the markets, and everybody that the FOMC is just hell-bent on a strategy of getting out of LSAPs and probably, then, moving the federal funds rate up more quickly as well. So this is a plea for a little collective self-diagnosis as to whether we are going to be comfortable staying with a data-dependent set of assessments in October and December and January and March. Those are the next four meetings. If that’s not the case, then, notwithstanding my policy instincts as to what, in a close case, is the better thing to do, I genuinely would rather have us taper today than have four more members of the Committee, in October or December, say, “We’ve just got to do it now,” regardless of what’s happened externally. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 334.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  If I could ask the indulgence of the last few speakers, maybe it would be a good time to take a coffee break.  Let’s come back at 10:30 and complete the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests taking a coffee break and setting a time to continue the meeting.


Passage number 335.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that would indicate contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a coffee break and then transitions to another topic by mentioning Governor Stein.


Passage number 336.
  MR. POTTER.  Second decimal place or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is simply stating a question about whether the second decimal place should be included or not.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 337.
 MR. STEIN.  We’ll talk.  So here’s the key—the no discretion.  There are two motivations.  On the one hand, say you wanted to send a more dovish message.  Well, you could, as I did in this thing, move the unemployment rate from 7 to 6.8 percent. That’s a big deal.  The difference between 7 and 6.8 percent is maybe four more months, roughly speaking, of asset purchases.  That’s substantial and it’s pretty credible, I think, if you do it this way.  So if you’re just interested in saying something a little bit more dovish, that does it.  But I think—and this is totally central, in my view—the removal of discretion is really key.  It’s the discretion that is the heart of our problem; as Narayana said, we’re going to face an existential crisis at every meeting as we go forward. I think some of us have been thinking, “Oh, once we get past the first taper, life will be good.” It’s not going to be good, because we’ve got this vocabulary, this thing means something at every meeting, and we’re going to face the same problem over and over again.  I want to kill the problem, and I think the way you kill the problem is by removing discretion. Now, the counterargument would be, if you do this mechanical hard rule, the unemployment rate, of course, is not a perfect summary statistic for the state of the labor market or for things we care about.  Look, I’m not trying to go all John Taylor on you guys.  This is not about rules versus discretion.  The very important thing in this case is, we have discretion over our other and more important tool, which is the path of the funds rate.  The way I would try to explain this is, we’re putting this thing on autopilot.  But—and I think this gets very close to what President Williams was talking about in terms of the way you shape the forward guidance, and a little bit of this is in paragraph 5 of alternative A—you make it very clear that after liftoff, we’re going to be conditioning on exactly those things that we can’t condition on if we subject the LSAP program to a mechanical stopping rule based on unemployment.  After liftoff, if labor force participation comes in a little weak or if inflation is lower, all of that, which we’re going to explain now as clearly as possible, will shape how we behave after crossing the 6½ percent threshold. So that’s basically the point.  Again, I wanted to make clear the concerns I have over alternative B—there’s a fair point that a number of people have raised:  You don’t want to just get locked into saying, “I hate asset purchases, and I’ve hated them for a long time, and I want them to die.” But I think the concern is no longer really over that, and this proposal, in fact, might lead us to do, in expectation, more in the way of asset purchases than whatever policy we may be following if we go down the alternative B route. I think it’s really that we’ve got a communication problem.  We’ve felt it now at a number of meetings, and we’re likely to feel it at a number of meetings going forward.  We’ll be doing ourselves, the incoming Chair, and the new Committee a huge favor if we can put this to one side and focus.  We’re going to have our hands full with focusing on the short-rate set of issues, and I think we’ll communicate more clearly about those if we’re focused on that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Stein, is arguing for the removal of discretion in the decision-making process, while acknowledging that there may be counterarguments for using a mechanical hard rule based on the unemployment rate. He expresses concern over a communication problem and suggests that focusing on short-rate issues would lead to clearer communication.


Passage number 338.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply consists of a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 339.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Governor.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 340.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, may I make a slight suggestion so that we’re more accurate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for a suggestion.


Passage number 341.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The word "sure" is a simple affirmation that does not indicate any conflict or differing opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 342.
 MR. FISHER. I would have that section just say “But some tightening of financial conditions has occurred in recent months and, if sustained, could slow the pace of improvement in the economy and labor market.” I don’t think you take anything away.  I think, again, market operators would wonder what we’re talking about, because they’re seeing tightening in certain sectors.  But I think if we just say “Some tightening of financial conditions has occurred in recent months and, if sustained . . .”—that’s literally true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher proposes a change to the wording of a section, suggesting that it should be modified to say that "some tightening of financial conditions has occurred in recent months and, if sustained, could slow the pace of improvement in the economy and labor market." However, he mentions that market operators would wonder what they are referring to because they are seeing tightening in certain sectors. He argues that the proposed change should simply state that "Some tightening of financial conditions has occurred in recent months and, if sustained..." because it is literally true. This indicates a disagreement about the wording and level of specificity in the passage.


Passage number 343.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But this statement is true, too.  You could say “the tightening.” It means that whatever tightening there was, even if it was small, is something that could slow the pace of the economy.  It didn’t say “the large tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is stating a fact without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement. It simply provides an explanation of the term "the tightening" and its potential impact on the economy.


Passage number 344.
” MR. FISHER.  It’s a minor change. If you reject it, fine.  I just wanted to request it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is simply making a request and stating that it is a minor change. He also mentions that if the request is rejected, it is fine. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 345.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Are there other suggestions on that or support for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 346.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think I like it the way it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement expresses a personal opinion without any indication of disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 347.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think I would like to keep it the way it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses a personal preference to maintain the current state and does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 348.
 MR. FISHER.  I fold my hand.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement, "I fold my hand. Thank you," shows a person ending their participation or surrendering in a situation, without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 349.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, I appreciate it.  I would also suggest that we keep the “on net” here that’s bracketed. Now, I was interested—I think it was President Kocherlakota, you suggested the fiscal reference in the beginning of paragraph 3.  This is a pretty strong introductory statement.  It basically has a theory, which says that the thing that’s holding us back is “federal fiscal retrenchment”—otherwise, we would see a stronger economy.  That’s something I’m perfectly comfortable with.  And it does take a somewhat more optimistic tone about the underlying strength of the economy. No one commented on that, so I’m assuming that this sentence is okay, but if anyone is concerned about it, they should say so.  [No response] All right. Let me just note, in case there was any confusion, that the introduction of “stronger economic recovery” and “inflation, over time” at the end of paragraph 3 of alternative B is simply moving the phrase that was crossed out at the beginning of the paragraph.  So there’s no substantive change intended by that movement.   In paragraph 4, I think that the sense of the discussion was to include “at its coming meetings,” and that no one seemed to have any concerns about the rest of the language. If there are concerns, please say so.  [No response] Finally, there were a couple of comments about paragraph 5.  In particular, President Williams noted some language on the post-liftoff plans. My sense of the discussion was that we ought to do this in October in a more systematic way, but I do think that the language is promising.  Let me say why I think it’s promising. The sentence that says “In determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information,” actually could apply to the threshold as well as the period after reaching the threshold.  And what’s nice about the language in paragraph 5 of alternative A is that it very explicitly says that, after we get to 6½ percent, we’re going to start looking at other stuff. Alternative B is actually a little bit vague on that particular point. Finally, I think—and I’ll ask Governor Yellen for her agreement—that most people felt it would be better to leave this sentence off for now, the last sentence in paragraph 5 of alternative B, because it’s a complicated idea.  However, I would like the permission of the Committee to explain why the SEP has this property.  And the main reason, I guess, would be that the Committee believes that it can achieve maximum employment and price stability, as the SEP suggests, by 2016.  But in order to do that, given headwinds, we’re going to have to be very patient with our rate policy.  That’s the expectation of not everyone on the Committee, but certainly the majority of the Committee. Any objections to my saying something like that. President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking agreement and confirmation from others and states that no one has expressed concerns or objections.


Passage number 350.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I don’t have an objection.  I’m very sympathetic to that description of the Committee’s views. I will say that I have tried myself to explain this issue to   reporters in the past, and I think what you just said is very clear to people in this room, but there might be some need to flesh it out a little bit.  This is a suggestion based on past experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kocherlakota states that he is sympathetic to the description of the Committee's views and suggests that further clarification may be needed.


Passage number 351.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I was planning to say a few words about it in my opening statement, and, obviously, there will be an opportunity for questions as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing their plans to address a topic and the potential for questions.


Passage number 352.
 MR. EVANS.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 353.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage itself is not provided, making it impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 354.
 MR. EVANS.  If I could just say this:  One reaction to that would be to try to get the wording exactly right.  Another reaction would be to just repeat it many times.  One of the advantages of your NBER commentary was that you followed, basically, the plain English of what you’d said in the press conference, but by repeating it over and over again, I think it sinks in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage only presents two different reactions or approaches to delivering a message, without any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 355.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are you talking about this last sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 356.
 MR. EVANS.  As an example.  When we get to a difficult concept, I wouldn’t be stymied by the fact that it’s a little hard to understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own perspective on how they would handle a difficult concept.


Passage number 357.
  If the plain English is good, then repeating it— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, I’ve discovered that elegant variation is not really a central banker’s friend.  [Laughter]  All right.  Any other comments or questions.  Again, I really do appreciate people’s openness and thoughtfulness in this discussion.  It’s a difficult decision.  In the end, I think that, while it’s worth doing this and my hope is that it will send a signal of our commitment to doing what’s necessary to achieve our objectives, I’m a little more optimistic than Governor Powell about this.  I think that we are, ultimately, going to converge to the same path, more or less, that we would be on if we took a small action today, but of course, that remains to be seen. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker expressing appreciation, sharing their own perspective, and acknowledging that the ultimate outcome is uncertain.


Passage number 358.
  MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I’ve been sitting at this table for eight years.  I think this is the single best session I’ve sat through in that everybody was enormously thoughtful.  Obviously, it’s an important decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their positive opinion about the session and the thoughtfulness of the participants.


Passage number 359.
  It’s the longest I’ve ever heard Esther speak, and— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Maybe that was the reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 360.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes, it was a very impressive statement.  And it’s the only time I’ve heard four individuals use the term “hell-bent” in eight years.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of agreement and appreciation for the impressive statement made, without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 361.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I think this was a really good discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I think this was a really good discussion" indicates that the speaker believes the discussion was positive but does not imply any disagreement.


Passage number 362.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It was very helpful.  I asked yesterday for people to think not only about today, but also about the rest of the year.  And I think we kind of backed into what might be a decent plan for the rest of the year, particularly focusing on our guidance in October and, of course, responding to the data in terms of the asset purchases. All right.  If there are no other comments, could you call the roll, Debbie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a situation and a plan.


Passage number 363.
 MS. DANKER.  Yes.  This vote is on the alternative B statement that was handed out, in which the bracketed words in paragraphs 1, 2, and 4 are included and the bracketed sentence in paragraph 5 has been dropped, and the accompanying directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


