Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 26-27, 1984A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,D. C., on Monday, March 26, 1984 at 2:00 p.m., and continuing on Tuesday,March 27, 1984 at 12:00 p.m.Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, 1/ Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, 1/ Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Burns,1/ J. Davis,1/ R. Davis,1/ Kohn,1/Prell,1/ Siegman,1/ Stern,1/ and Zeisel,1/Associate EconomistsLindsey,1/Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market Accountsession and Tuesday session before action to adoptdirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 2.
PRESENT:1/ Attended Mondaydomestic policy3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, Mr. Solomon will beelected. We have a list of [proposed] officers, which is virtuallyidentical with that of last year, with a couple of additions from theBoard's staff. Do you want to read the list, Mr. Bernard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the selection of Mr. Solomon and the list of proposed officers for the year, with no indications of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 3.
MR. BERNARD. Okay.Staff Director and Secretary, Stephen AxilrodAssistant Secretary, Normand BernardDeputy Assistant Secretary, Nancy SteeleGeneral Counsel, Michael BradfieldDeputy General Counsel, James OltmanEconomist, James KichlineEconomist (International), Edwin Truman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage lists the names and positions of people within an organization and does not mention any disagreements or conflicting views.


Passage number 4.
Associate Economists from the Board:Donald Kohn;David Lindsey;CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those are the two additions, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only provides information about the names of two Associate Economists from the Board, Donald Kohn and David Lindsey. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the statement.


Passage number 5.
MR. BERNARD.Michael Prell;Charles Siegman; andJoseph Zeisel.Associate Economists from the Reserve Banks:Joseph Burns;John M. Davis;Richard Davis;Richard Lang; andGary Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage only mentions names of individuals and their associated positions without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As usual, the associate economists fromthe Reserve Banks reflect the nominations of the Bank presidentsserving [as members of the FOMC]. We have two more, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that the associate economists from the Reserve Banks reflect the nominations of the Bank presidents serving as members of the FOMC.


Passage number 7.
MR. BERNARD. They come later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "they come later," without any conflicting viewpoints or contradictory statements.


Passage number 8.
MR. PARTEE. So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a statement of dialogue where Mr. Partee is speaking. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 9.
MS. TEETERS. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions a person's name and does not provide any context or information that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, those will be approved.Now we have the selection of a Reserve Bank to operate the SystemAccount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the approval will be given without objection and states the next step in the process. There is no conflicting opinion or discord mentioned.


Passage number 11.
MR. PARTEE. Time to move that around, isn't it.SPEAKER(.). Let's bid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments between the speakers.


Passage number 12.
MR. BLACK. New York has already got a Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that New York already has a Vice Chairman, without any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 13.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to propose New York.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking a question without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 14.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I propose New York.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 15.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 16.
3/26-27/84MS. TEETERS. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a reference or title related to something or someone named "TEETERS" on the dates mentioned. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine the exact meaning.


Passage number 17.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We have the selectionof the two Managers. I assume the present incumbents have beenapproved by their Board.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Without objection" implies that there is unanimous agreement or approval. The following sentences also indicate a smooth and uncontested process in selecting and approving the current managers.


Passage number 18.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They have been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 19.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a nomination for Mr. Sternlightand Mr. Cross.SPEAKER(.). So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if there are nominations for Mr. Sternlight and Mr. Cross. The phrase "So move" at the end suggests that someone is moving to nominate them.


Passage number 20.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Cross is not here today. Second.SPEAKER(.). So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Cross is not present and then the speaker begins a new point or topic.


Passage number 21.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. No changes areproposed in the foreign policy--"foreign policy" sounds a little toograndiose to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 22.
MR. BERNARD. The Authorization for Foreign CurrencyOperations and the Foreign Currency Directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 23.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the various directives related to ourpurchases and sales of foreign currency there are no changes proposed.Are there objections. If there are no objections, they will continuein force. We have a $4 billion intermeeting limit on changes inSystem holdings; that's the routine limit. I'll ask whether there areany objections to retaining that. If there are no objections, we willretain it. That doesn't mean we can't change it temporarily from timeto time as we go ahead, but that's the basic authorization. I hear noobjection. There is an agreement with the Treasury to warehouseforeign currencies. No change is proposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 24.
MR. PARTEE. That isn't being used currently. Isn't thatright.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply making a statement about something that is not currently being used.


Passage number 25.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is not. But it's thought to be a goodidea to keep the authority active even if the implementation is notcurrently active.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply explaining that even though the implementation is not currently active, it is still considered a good idea to keep the authority active.


Passage number 26.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. Does that need a formalmotion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a question and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 27.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need at least a "no objection." Again,there is no change [proposed]. I don't hear any objections, so it isapproved. The next item is security of our procedures and relatedmaterials. Mr. Solomon was the chairman of that subcommittee and wewill turn to Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating a decision being made without any objections being raised.


Passage number 28.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You all have copies of the reportthat we sent around containing our recommendation. I might summarizethe key points. Before I do that, I should say that none of us on thesubcommittee assumed that the leak that the GAO investigated came fromthe Federal Reserve System. But we felt that the GAO report did havesome basis for saying that our procedures were somewhat lax, or couldbe tightened up, and that there was a very large number of people with3/26-27/84access [to FOMC materials]. So, we looked at many alternative ways ofhandling the access problem. Basically, our recommendations were infour major areas: first, updated security classifications, with anaddition of one new category to the two old ones; secondly,refinements in the procedures for distribution and handling ofclassified documents; thirdly, stronger procedures for making surethat people are familiar with the rules; and finally, a reduction inthe number of people authorized to see the more sensitive documents.Briefly, the new procedures call for use of double-sealedenvelopes and distinctive cover sheets and for restrictions oncopying. Also, the rules will be circulated annually to each personon the access list who would sign off on them. In regard to thenumber of people who have access to documents, our proposal calls forcertain numbers. At the Board and at the New York Reserve Bank, thereis a reduction of five each in the Class I list and of six each in theClass II list. At the other Banks there is a reduction of one each inthe Class I list and a limit of seven for access to Class II material.The most important switch we made in the classification of documentswas classifying part I of the Greenbook as Class II. The systemwideresults of these restrictions and reductions in access work out asfollows: The Class I list is reduced from 86 to 67 people other thanthe members of the FOMC themselves; and the Class II list is reducedfrom 348 to 183. Even though we think these are reasonable, we didprovide for ad hoc exceptions by the Chairman and exceptions for adhoc assignments, which could be granted by governors and presidents.I should also point out that the limitations in each category--forexample, seven for Class II documents at Reserve Banks other than NewYork--apply separately to each type of document. Those having accessto Part I of the Greenbook, for example, may be different from thosewith access to the Managers' reports. I think that summarizes themain recommendations. We would recommend that, after discussion andquestions, the FOMC adopt this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply explaining the recommendations made by the subcommittee.


Passage number 29.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any statements, opinions, or arguments that could create contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question.


Passage number 30.
MS. TEETERS. I'd like to raise an issue that was notaddressed, which is the continuation of an existing policy, and thatis providing the Greenbook to the Secretary of the Treasury and fouror five other people at the Treasury, the Chairman of the Council ofEconomic Advisers, and the Director of OMB. We have never been ableto trace the leaks, but it seems to me that there is a potential therefor leaks coming from outside of the System regardless of how much wetighten our own procedures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating an issue that has not been addressed and expressing a concern about potential leaks.


Passage number 31.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what we did do for the firsttime was recognize the de facto practice by including it in the formalproposals. But we did not feel that it was up to us--and frankly, I'mnot sure it's very practical without raising more dust than it'sworth--to restrict access to people in the Administration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply explains what was done and shares their opinion about the practicality of restricting access.


Passage number 32.
MS. TEETERS. Well, there seems to be a lot of access at theTreasury and we don't have any idea what their security provisions arefor these documents.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing uncertainty about the security provisions at the Treasury.


Passage number 33.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But they don't get the Bluebook orthe Open Market directives or the policy records. What they do haveare the two Managers' reports, and I think they're entitled to have3/26-27/84them because those are needed both in the managing of the public debtand, of course, in the foreign exchange market where the Secretary ofthe Treasury [has responsibility].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the individuals mentioned do not have access to certain documents, but they do have access to other reports.


Passage number 34.
MR. WALLICH. Do you mean the Managers' weekly reports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement about Mr. Wallich and his question.


Passage number 35.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's the weekly they get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of personal opinion.


Passage number 36.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Just the weekly report goes to the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple and straightforward statement of fact.


Passage number 37.
MR. PARTEE. And, of course, the Greenbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee seems to be agreeing or adding on to a previous statement or discussion.


Passage number 38.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What specifically would you proposeto restrict, Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a question asking for specific details about what Nancy would propose to restrict.


Passage number 39.
MS. TEETERS. I would restrict them from the Greenbookbecause in the past we have had some distinct and fairly specificleaks of the contents of the Greenbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a decision made by MS. TEETERS. There is no explicit contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 40.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My memory may not be perfect on this, butmy overall impression is that the record has been very good in termsof identifiable leaks from them. I can recall one or two occasionswhere a newspaper reported that the Federal Reserve staff was thinkingin a certain range or reported a certain number that sounded to me asif it may well have come from the Administration. It wasn'tparticularly damaging or timely; it wasn't that we sent it to them andit appeared before an Open Market Committee meeting. I can recall oneor two instances that made me suspicious, but generally I think therecord has been pretty good. I don't know if anybody else has adifferent recollection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply reflecting on their own memory and providing their personal impression of the situation. They mention that they can only recall one or two instances that made them suspicious, but overall they believe the record of leaks has been good. However, they also acknowledge that others may have a different recollection.


Passage number 41.
MR. BOEHNE. When does the Greenbook go to the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 42.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Within a day or so of the time it'sissued, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is indicating uncertainty or doubt about the timeframe.


Passage number 43.
MR. KICHLINE. I believe it goes out on Thursday morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is straightforward and does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 44.
MR. GRAMLEY. We have been sending the Greenbook to thosethree places for at least 20 years, I think. And in the interest ofmaintaining an exchange of views with people in the Administrationthere are times, regularly, when the Chairman is provided access toinformation well ahead of time--about the same time the President getsit--and is one of the very few people who gets that kind ofinformation. There are times when we are made privy to what is goingon in the budgetary process, even at the staff level. I think wewould be jeopardizing that free interchange of information if wedidn't send the Greenbook over there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the practice of sending the Greenbook to certain places and expressing the belief that not sending it could jeopardize the exchange of information.


Passage number 45.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The only thing I could suggest wouldbe to advise them that we have reclassified Part I of the Greenbookinto a Class II document and that the Chairman and the FOMC wouldappreciate it if the three principals who get it--the Secretary of theTreasury, the Chairman of the Council, and the Director of OMB--wouldtake comparable measures to restrict access at their own agencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement suggests a suggestion and requests cooperation from the three principals involved.


Passage number 46.
3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can. The point has been made to thembut obviously it can be made again and probably would be useful to doso.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that a point has been made to someone and suggests that it can be made again for usefulness.


Passage number 47.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Now that we're moving [up itsclassification].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states a fact or action without presenting any opposing viewpoints or contradictory information.


Passage number 48.
MR. PARTEE. In connection with the reclassification it wouldbe a convenient thing to do. I do believe that there [has been no]difficulty, Nancy, except for a few times when the Secretary saidsomething. We can hardly stop that. There have been occasions whenit looked as if it had been circulated pretty widely on the staff.But with a redoubling of emphasis on security of the document we mightbe able to take care of that problem, though not the problem of theSecretary saying something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It primarily describes some minor challenges and suggests potential solutions for maintaining the security of a document.


Passage number 49.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would agree very much with what Lylesaid about ongoing relationships unless there is an apparent realproblem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement expresses agreement and support for a viewpoint previously mentioned by Lyle.


Passage number 50.
MS. TEETERS. I simply wanted to raise the issue. It wassomething that has never been changed and is a potential [for leaks]that we can't control.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is stating a fact and expressing concern about the potential for leaks that cannot be controlled.


Passage number 51.
MR. PARTEE. It recognizes something that we have been doingsince the middle '60s, I think, or certainly since the late '60s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. The statement simply acknowledges a fact without any opposing perspectives.


Passage number 52.
MS. TEETERS. Certainly, in my own mind this latest leak camefrom the Hill. And we have a continuing problem of maintainingsecurity if we release confidential material to someone outside of theSystem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 53.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think anybody has proposed that werelease the Bluebook to them. I don't know whether it makes anydifference whether we send it to them a few days before an Open MarketCommittee meeting, which is the usual practice, or a day after. Idon't think we've ever had a leak just before the Open MarketCommittee meeting. Nothing in the document is all that sensitive toissues of timing, I guess. But I don't think the particular day wesend it to them is sensitive in terms of our relationship with them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 54.
MR. PARTEE. It probably is generally sent out on Thursdaynow isn't it, Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Partee is asking Jim a question about the timing of a certain event or action.


Passage number 55.
MR. KICHLINE. Thursday morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. It simply states that it is Thursday morning and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 56.
MR. PARTEE. That's right away, so they get it very early.Then the following Monday--SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact.


Passage number 57.
 The Bluebook is--MR. PARTEE. No, not the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker explicitly states that the Bluebook is not what is being referred to.


Passage number 58.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They don't get the Bluebook at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the individuals being referred to do not possess the Bluebook.


Passage number 59.
MR. PARTEE. It might be better to send the Greenbook to themthe following Monday or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement expressed. Mr. Party is suggesting a possible alternative arrangement without any opposition or conflicting opinions being mentioned.


Passage number 60.
3/26-27/84MR. BOEHNE. These totals of four and seven [with access atthe Reserve Banks]: Does that include members of the Committee, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question and answer.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 61.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, it does. We did a spot check atabout a half dozen of the Banks and talked with the staff here. Therewas one Bank that had five [on its access list] although most of themhad four. As we analyzed who had a need to know--I don't mean in theformal sense of Class III, but in the sense of how the operations wentat the different Reserve Banks--seven seemed a reasonable number. Andthen Chuck Partee, Bob Black, and I discussed that. Originally wewere talking about restricting it to three but some of the presidentsfelt that would be excessively restrictive and that four would be areasonable number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage mentions that there was a discussion among Chuck Partee, Bob Black, and the presidents of the Reserve Banks about the number of people who should have access to certain information. Some of the presidents felt that restricting it to three would be excessively restrictive, while others believed that four would be a reasonable number. This difference in opinion indicates disagreement.


Passage number 62.
MR. FORRESTAL. Tony, in that connection--this is a technicalquestion--on page 5 you talk about limiting the Class I [materials] tothe president and three other officers. Do you really intend it to bemembers of the official staff. I think that presents a problem insome Banks. It would in my Bank, for example, where we have somepeople on the research staff who are not officers who are cleared atthe moment for FOMC Class I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 63.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that was our intention. Now,we made some recommendations on systematizing the downgrading of adocument's classification. The Bluebook would be downgraded fromClass I to the new Class II at the time of the release of the policyrecord and directive. And then it would be downgraded to Class IIIfour months later, roughly; in other words, after a six-month periodold Class II is downgraded to Class III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply outlines a plan or recommendation for downgrading the classification of a document over time.


Passage number 64.
MR. FORRESTAL. It's still Class I prior to the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact that something is still classified as Class I prior to the meeting.


Passage number 65.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's still Class I prior to themeeting, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about the classification of something before a meeting.


Passage number 66.
MR. BLACK. Bob, I don't think we addressed the issue ofwhether they had to be officers or not; it just ended up as officers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply stating a fact and expressing his opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 67.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I think that's something you reallyought to clarify because, as I said, in my particular case I have twopeople who are now cleared for access to FOMC documents--and they doreview the Bluebook--and they are not officials. So, that would putme in an awkward position. On a broader question, I must say that Icertainly understand why you are trying to reduce the number of peoplecleared for access, but I really think clearing only four people isunduly restrictive for the Reserve Banks, particularly if one of thosepeople is the first vice president. With the president and the firstvice president, that leaves us with only two people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Forrestal believes that clearing only four people for access to FOMC documents is unduly restrictive for the Reserve Banks, particularly if one of those people is the first vice president.


Passage number 68.
MR. PARTEE. We were not thinking of the first vicepresident.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by Mr. PARTEE is simply expressing a thought or opinion without any indication of conflict or disagreement with others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
MR. FORRESTAL. You were not. Well, that's the question, Iguess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker states that the person being addressed was not present, implying a disagreement or contradiction about their attendance or involvement in a certain event. The phrase "Well, that's the question, I guess" also suggests that there may be unresolved disagreement or uncertainty regarding the matter.


Passage number 70.
 That makes it a little better if you don't include--MR. PARTEE. You can, of course, if he's going to substitutefor you at a meeting. You can clear him for that purpose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests considering the option of including Mr. PARTEE if he is going to substitute for the person being addressed at a meeting.


Passage number 71.
3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems there may be somemiscommunication here. You were thinking the first vice presidentwould not get it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 72.
MR. PARTEE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MR. PARTEE simply affirms that something previously mentioned is correct.


Passage number 73.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He's an addition to the pot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply states that someone is being added to a group or situation. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 74.
MR. FORRESTAL. That puts a little different light on it.But again, if the first vice president is going to substitute fromtime to time, it seems to me he ought to be getting the material on afairly regular basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement made by Mr. Forrestal regarding a situation. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 75.
MR. BLACK. Bob, in our case, since we had to give up one, wedecided that the first vice president would not be one of the fourunless he was substituting. He can give it up more easily. But ifyou were out of the Bank, you could made an ad hoc exception for him.That was the way we were planning to do it. I'm sure that will differfrom Bank to Bank. It seems rather bad to have to deny access to yourfirst vice president, but I don't think we have any alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and discussing a potential solution, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 76.
MR. FORRESTAL. My druthers would be to leave it at five,Tony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 77.
MR. BOEHNE. On this ad hoc clearance, do you view that asbeing a big deal or is that just something that's handled in eachReserve Bank as it comes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about the perception of an "ad hoc clearance."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 78.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Each Reserve Bank would handle it butthere would not be a standing ad hoc.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage states that each Reserve Bank would handle the situation, but it also mentions that there would not be a standing ad hoc. This implies that there may be disagreement or contention regarding the approach or method of handling the situation.


Passage number 79.
MR. BOEHNE. I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 80.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And under our new procedures it wouldrequire that the Secretary of the FOMC be notified immediately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contradictory or conflicting statements that would indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states a requirement for the Secretary of the FOMC to be notified immediately under new procedures.


Passage number 81.
MR. GUFFEY. Bob Forrestal has raised a question that'stroublesome to me also and that is restricting the number to four,which would mean I'd have to cut out the first vice president. Underthe by-laws, on all other things he operates in my stead when I'mgone, which is reasonably frequently. To go through the process ofsending a wire to add him on an ad hoc basis for some indeterminatetime while I'm gone seems to me unreasonably burdensome. I'd like tosuggest that this be amended to permit four as designated and topermit the first vice president to have access without this specialauthorization at the time the president is not there. As I say, hehas all the powers that I have when I'm not present.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 82.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He doesn't have any powers with respect tothe Open Market Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement about someone's lack of powers.


Passage number 83.
MR. GUFFEY. Yes, that is true. But the fact of the matteris that he stands in my stead and ought to be able to have the kindsof information that I would have if I were there. That seems quitereasonable to me. The only thing I'm suggesting is that there be abuilt-in ad hoc exception without the notification process for thefirst vice president at the time the president is not in the Bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is simply expressing his belief that the first vice president should have access to the same information that he would have if he were present. He is suggesting a built-in exception without the need for notification in certain situations.


Passage number 84.
3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't understand. Given thefact that we all have such good attendance records here, I gather thatyou're not talking about the very rare case when your first vicepresident would be attending [an FOMC meeting] in your absence, Roger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is just expressing confusion and seeking clarification.


Passage number 85.
MR. GUFFEY. No, I'm not. I'm talking otherwise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, explicitly states that he is not talking about something specific, indicating that there is no disagreement present.


Passage number 86.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. He cannot participate on the morningcall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement "He cannot participate on the morning call" does not involve any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the person in question is unable to participate in a specific activity.


Passage number 87.
MR. GUFFEY. That's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey simply acknowledges that the previous statement or answer is correct.


Passage number 88.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, I don't understand. What doesthe first vice president do in your Bank in regard to the FOMCdirectives if he's not in on the call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states confusion and seeks clarification on the role of the first vice president in regards to FOMC directives.


Passage number 89.
MR. GUFFEY. Among other things, he has handled my board ofdirectors for a discount rate action when I'm not there. He certainlyought to have available to him what the Committee has done and what itis thinking about preceding that kind of action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Guffey believes that someone should have access to information about the committee's actions and thoughts before taking a specific action.


Passage number 90.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In effect, it really becomes five,doesn't it then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states an observation without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 91.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, I'm suggesting that it remain four butthat we have an ad hoc exemption without the clearance procedure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement suggesting a specific proposal without any opposing viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 92.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A permanent ad hoc.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 93.
MR. GUFFEY. Yes, but only when I'm out of the Bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. It merely states that the person named Mr. Guffey experiences something (presumably peace or lack of conflict) only when he is outside of the bank.


Passage number 94.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any text provided.


Passage number 95.
MR. GUFFEY. Only when the president is not available. Itwould seem to me to be a fairly simple matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion, but there is no conflicting or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 96.
MS. TEETERS. The most likely occasion would be when thefirst vice president would sit in for the president in a conferencecall. And that has been very rare.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It merely states a fact about a rare occurrence.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not all that rare.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that something is not rare, without expressing any form of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 98.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have no objection to that if thatis the consensus view of the Committee and if it's clearly understoodthat it would only be in the president's absence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses a conditional agreement but also mentions the need for a consensus view from the Committee. This implies a potential disagreement or difference of opinion regarding the decision.


Passage number 99.
MR. BLACK. I think it's a good improvement, Tony. I wouldgo along with that. In fact, I was planning to send Norm a telegramsaying I'd like an ad hoc exception for just that purpose when I amout of the Bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black expresses agreement and support for Tony's improvement suggestion.


Passage number 100.
MR. BALLES. I'd like to support that, Tony, because I foundmyself in the same position as Roger. We have three people in theresearch department who are actively engaged in research and analysisof policy and I would not want to take any one of those off. My firstvice president is on the list to receive the Bluebook now under the[current] authorization, although he never in practice gets it. Theonly time he would look at it would be an overt occasion when he3/26-27/84substitutes for me at this meeting or, alternatively, when he wouldparticipate in a conference call when I was out of town or otherwiseunavailable, or on occasion when I'm out of town and he has to handlea telephone conference on the discount rate, as Roger mentioned. So,if we could somehow get that exception you're talking about carefullycontrolled but built-in to avoid the necessity of formally notifyingthe Secretary every time I'm out of town, it would surely help. Wewould treat it as a true exception, not just a routine everyday accessto the FOMC Class I materials.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and support for the proposal mentioned earlier.


Passage number 101.
MR. GUFFEY. Yes, that's also true with regard to theupgraded [classification] of the wire from the Desk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the wire upgrading process.


Passage number 102.
 There isinformation there that would be helpful if there were going--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there consensus on this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear consensus on this point. The passage is expressing a hypothetical situation, suggesting that if certain information were available, it would be helpful. However, it does not indicate whether there is agreement or disagreement about the existence or usefulness of the mentioned information.


Passage number 103.
MR. MARTIN. It sounds good to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of any disagreement or contention in the passage. Mr. Martin simply states that the idea or suggestion sounds good to him.


Passage number 104.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I interpret this, Mr. Solomon, as notlimiting the prerogative of the Chairman to have more limitedexecutive sessions for whatever purpose.SPEAKER(.). And you have even more ad hoc exceptions thananybody else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 105.
MR. PARTEE. This would be on a strict need-to-know basis.You would keep a record of when you let the first vice president haveaccess, I take it. So, if we had to follow down a leak, he would becaught up in it. But it wouldn't be a continuous matter; it wouldjust be for specific occasions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward statement about the security measures being discussed.


Passage number 106.
MR. FORRESTAL. Special occasions. Did we settle thequestion I raised earlier, Mr. Chairman. Does anybody have anobjection to amending this part A to indicate that Class I is limitedto the president and I would suggest language such as "three otherindividuals designated by the president.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 107.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: text from?"


Passage number 108.
MR. FORRESTAL. Otherwise, I'm going to make some newofficers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, is stating their intention to make new officers.


Passage number 109.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we'd want them to be on thepayroll of the Federal Reserve Banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a statement of opinion by Mr. Partee, expressing what he believes should be done.


Passage number 110.
MR. FORRESTAL. Oh yes, of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 111.
MR. PARTEE. You said "three other individuals." That couldbe anybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by MR. PARTEE is simply seeking clarification or further information.


Passage number 112.
 Let's see, Jack Anderson and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Three other officers and employees." Isthat the language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that Jack Anderson and three other officers and employees are being considered or discussed. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage.


Passage number 113.
MR. FORRESTAL. "Staff members." And they would, of course,be research staff.members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states a position or title ("Staff members") and adds an explanation that these staff members would be research staff.


Passage number 114.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's the magic word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple question asking for the "magic word." There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 115.
 Employees, staff-10-3/26-27/84MR. BLACK. Staff members, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage mentions staff members, but does not provide any indication of conflict or disagreement among them.


Passage number 116.
MR. AXILROD. You use "persons" on Class II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Axilrod without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 117.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Use "Federal Reserve personnel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention or imply any disagreement or contention between parties regarding the use of "Federal Reserve personnel."


Passage number 118.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Federal Reserve personnel. There seems tobe a consensus on that point. Any other comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage states that there is a consensus on the point that there are Federal Reserve personnel, indicating agreement among the individuals being discussed. There are no conflicting viewpoints or opinions mentioned.


Passage number 119.
MR. KEEHN. Tony, it's not part of what you've taken a lookat, I'm sure, but did you also consider the way in which we distributethe Bluebooks. The point I would make is that they are distributed ata time at which our security is at its very lowest level I wouldthink--namely, over the weekend. And each time we have to develop aprocedure by which we're going to handle them. I wonder if there's away we can distribute them to the Banks at a time when our proceduresare best geared to handle them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and expressing a concern about the distribution of Bluebooks.


Passage number 120.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How, in fact, do they get to the Banksnow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question asking how something is done. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the statement.


Passage number 121.
MR. ROBERTS. They don't get there all the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Roberts.


Passage number 122.
MR. KEEHN. They come in via something called CannonballExpress. And Cannonball Express delivers at a variety of times; itcould be either Saturday afternoon or anytime on Sunday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing information about the delivery times of Cannonball Express.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 123.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Cannonball Express is a private deliveryservice.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.  The speaker states that Cannonball Express is a private delivery service, which implies there may be disagreement or differing views about its status or classification.


Passage number 124.
MR. KEEHN. I hope it is. And we have to go through aprocedure to deal with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Keehn simply expresses his hope for a certain outcome and mentions the need to follow a procedure to address it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 125.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The alternative, though--to do whatyou have suggested--is giving out the Bluebooks on Monday morning. Wechecked around and there were objections to that because presidentsand members of the Committee would not have a chance to consult withtheir three other people. So, I don't know what the alternative is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents disagreement or contention between the speaker and the objections mentioned. The speaker suggests giving out the Bluebooks on Monday morning, but there are objections to that idea. Therefore, there is a disagreement or contention regarding the alternative solution.


Passage number 126.
MR. KEEHN. I suggest it as a possible alternative because wehave some problems. If they were distributed Thursday night by pouch,I think that would eliminate all the problems and deal with theconcern we were suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting an alternative solution to address the problems and concerns that have been raised.


Passage number 127.
MR. PARTEE. They're not ready on Thursday night.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee simply states that "they" are not ready on Thursday night without any opposing views or conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 128.
MR. ROBERTS. It is a problem. For example, I didn't getmine this time. Usually I have it delivered late Sunday, so I don'thave any time for consultation except while flying on the airplane.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Roberts is simply stating that there is a problem with the delivery of something he normally receives on Sundays. There is no clear indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 129.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I looked at mine a half hour ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement conveyed in the passage. It is a simple statement about the speaker's action of looking at something.


Passage number 130.
MR. BLACK. Don't your people work on weekends, Ted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question from Mr. Black is straightforward and does not indicate any opposing views.


Passage number 131.
MR. ROBERTS. Up until Sunday at about midnight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple statement of time and does not involve any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 132.
-11-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Of course, if it's the consensus viewhere, I'd go along with that. But there is one disadvantage tosending it out Thursday night and to all the Banks having it Fridaymorning: We'd be adding one critical weekend of possible leaks. Andthat two- to three-day period before we have a meeting is when themedia is the most focused.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their willingness to go along with the consensus view, but also highlighting a potential disadvantage of sending out the information early. The statement about the media being most focused before the meeting is a general observation, not a point of contention.


Passage number 133.
 On the other hand, with the general view--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just looking at it from the productionside, what is the problem in getting it out a day earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents two different perspectives or considerations, without suggesting any conflict or opposing views.


Passage number 134.
MR. AXILROD. It would have been impossible before the moneysupply started coming out on Thursday night. It's more possible nowto do it Thursday night, but I would say it runs the somewhat needlessrisk of errors. But it's certainly possible now, whereas it wasn'tpossible before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is discussing the feasibility of a certain action and acknowledges that it is now possible, whereas it previously was not.


Passage number 135.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether we should somedayreview the magic day upon which we hold Open Market Committeemeetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty or indecision about whether they should review the specific day in which Open Market Committee meetings are held.


Passage number 136.
 We wouldn't get into this weekend problem if it--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If it were on Wednesday instead ofTuesday or instead of Monday and Tuesday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is discussing a hypothetical scenario and does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a conditional statement.


Passage number 137.
MR. PARTEE. We've discussed that too at other times.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the topic has been discussed before.


Passage number 138.
MR. GUFFEY. There's one other problem associated with this.The way the Bluebook is sent, two copies come to our Bank that are puttogether in one package and we have to designate somebody in the Bankeither Saturday night or Sunday to open that material and repackageit, with one going to Tom Davis and one to me. If each were packagedseparately with our name on it, we'd eliminate that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains a problem and suggests a solution.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 139.
MR. AXILROD. Normand knows better than I do, but myimpression is that distribution of the Bluebook is a continuing,miserable problem. And I think Cannonball Express is probably onlythe latest in the efforts to find a reliable delivery service.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The use of words like "continuing," "miserable problem," and "only the latest" suggests that there have been ongoing struggles and frustrations with the distribution of the Bluebook.


Passage number 140.
MR. BERNARD. That's primarily because the main deliveryservices just don't deliver on weekends.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Bernard, stating a fact about the main delivery services not operating on weekends. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 141.
 Given that it's ready onlyon Friday evenings, we have to rely on--MR. BALLES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 142.
 Well, that's exactly--MR. ROBERTS. In view of all this stepped-up security, Tony,maybe the [additional] day is not that much exposure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a suggestion or thought from Mr. Roberts regarding the level of exposure given the increased security measures.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 143.
MR. AXILROD. We were very close, Mr. Chairman, to having itready this Thursday night. With a little more experience and if wedon't have last minute data that would involve [revisions], it mayprove possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential disagreement in the passage. The statement "With a little more experience and if we don't have last minute data that would involve [revisions], it may prove possible" implies that there might be differing opinions or doubt about whether it will be possible to have it ready by Thursday night.


Passage number 144.
 But I would--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just give you a reaction to it. Ithas the problem of another day, which means the weekend, which I thinkis a problem. We have an existing problem of relying upon thesecarriers, which doesn't make me feel all that happy on the other side.In terms of substance, let me just raise a question with you: What isthe point of getting it so early. You are supposed to be making up-12-3/26-27/84your own minds before Mr. Axilrod prejudices your view. Maybe it's agood idea to get it late.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 145.
MR. BALLES. I'll speak to that. I think it's a good idea toget it early because we do have people at the Reserve Banks--whetherit's one, two, or three--who spend a good deal of their time onanalysis of policy options and so forth. As things now stand, if theBluebook doesn't come in until Sunday, they never do get a chance toread it or provide input or advice to the principal who comes to themeeting, at least in my case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement and support for the idea of receiving the Bluebook early.


Passage number 146.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why can't they give you that advicewithout the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact or opinion without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 147.
MR. BALLES. Well, they can; it's just better if they knowall the nuances and the considerations that are in the Bluebook. Ithink they would benefit from knowing those before they render advice.And on the other point, Mr. Chairman, Norm knows we have had some realhorror stories in terms of security in getting this material to theWest Coast. It wasn't just a matter of it not arriving but a matterof it getting lost in the mail. It was out there floating around andwe didn't know where it was and Norm didn't know where it was. Wefinally retrieved it after extra copies were sent out to us. He and Iwere both very, very much concerned about the security problem of itjust getting lost in the mail because of this unreliable weekenddelivery service. I'm very nervous about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and concern about the importance of knowing the nuances and considerations in the Bluebook, as well as the security problems they encountered in getting the material to the West Coast.


Passage number 148.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How does the ordinary pouch go, whateverthe pouch is. I keep hearing about it. What does it consist of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, the speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification about the topic of the "ordinary pouch." There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 149.
MR. BLACK. We would get it Monday morning that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of a suggestion or plan.


Passage number 150.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who delivers it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 151.
MR. BERNARD. Well, I'm not sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bernard expresses uncertainty about something but there is no conflict or contradiction present.


Passage number 152.
MR. CORRIGAN. It's our check couriers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that check couriers belong to "us."


Passage number 153.
MS. TEETERS. It goes in the afternoon, right. It [can't]come out Thursday night.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a factual statement about the schedule.


Passage number 154.
MR. BERNARD. The problem with the pouch is that we wouldhave to have the Bluebook ready by about 5:00 p.m. or it's just toolate to make it into the pouch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the problem with the pouch and the time constraint for having the Bluebook ready.


Passage number 155.
MR. GRAMLEY. On what day, Friday or Thursday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 156.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Thursday to get it to us on Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a timeline for when something needs to be delivered (Thursday to get it to us on Friday).


Passage number 157.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we'd never make the Thursday night pouch.We could make the Friday night pouch if that would get it deliveredany better. But I doubt that it would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing doubt about a potential solution without contradicting or arguing against anyone else's point of view.


Passage number 158.
MR. BERNARD. I don't believe that delivers until Monday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of disbelief by Mr. Bernard regarding a delivery schedule.


Passage number 159.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, I know. As I said, I don't think thatwill help one bit. But if we tried for Thursday, we'd be through-13-3/26-27/84about midnight. As it is we could get it out in the course of the dayon Friday earlier than we used to get it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging a fact and expressing their personal opinion about it.


Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whom does the pouch go with--our checkcouriers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking about the recipient of the pouch.


Passage number 161.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, simply responds affirmatively by saying "Yes."


Passage number 162.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do they get to Washington.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 163.
MR. CORRIGAN. It goes out of Richmond; it doesn't go out ofor come in to Washington. Everything that goes by pouch in and out ofWashington goes through Richmond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact regarding the routing of mail.


Passage number 164.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What you're saying is that if we wereto try and get the Bluebook out to the Reserve Banks on Friday and youdon't finish preparing it until midnight on Thursday, then you are nottalking about the pouch but some kind of special express service thatwill get it to us by Friday afternoon. I don't think we'd all get itby Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 165.
MR. AXILROD. Well, that's what we do now. We have anexpress service special that goes out whenever it's ready on Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the current practice of having an express service special on Fridays.


Passage number 166.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I know, but it comes in over theweekend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The sentence simply states that the speaker knows something and acknowledges that it comes in over the weekend, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 167.
 What I'm saying, though, is that if it doesn't go out untilsometime after midnight on Thursday, I don't think everybody would getit on Friday in time to--MR. CORRIGAN. There may be a better solution to this. LastSaturday we tested for the first time this new high speed facsimiletransmission among all 13 of us, the Federal Reserve Board and the 12Federal Reserve offices. This thing really works fast and produces avery good copy, and it may be that we can use that. That wouldeliminate the carrier and it would also eliminate the security problemupon receiving it at the Reserve Banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that if the document is sent out after midnight on Thursday, it may not reach everyone on Friday in time. Mr. Corrigan then suggests an alternative solution using high-speed facsimile transmission, which contradicts the speaker's statement about potential delays.


Passage number 168.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you control the number of copies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or disagreement. It simply poses a question about controlling the number of copies without taking any specific stance or presenting conflicting views.


Passage number 169.
MR. CORRIGAN. I don't know where the machines are in mostother Fed offices, but at least in my Bank--and for precisely thatreason--it's right next to my office and it's very tightly controlled.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the location and control of the machines in their office.


Passage number 170.
MR. PARTEE. There's a really good suggestion. We could sayat 2:00 p.m. Friday afternoon or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee suggests scheduling something for Friday afternoon, which is presented as a good suggestion.


Passage number 171.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's fairly easy to deal with. AllMr. Bernard would have to do is call that number and say "We're aboutto transmit" and some designated person would just stand there andphysically take it off the machine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is giving a straightforward and simple solution to a problem.


Passage number 172.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that in operation now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a direct question, asking about the current status or existence of something. It does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 173.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 174.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can it take charts.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply asks a question without expressing any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 175.
-14-3/26-27/84MR. CORRIGAN. It really makes good copies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that would suggest contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that "It really makes good copies."


Passage number 176.
MR. AXILROD. We could try that, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply suggests a possible solution or approach.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is it secure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not seem to provide any information or indicate any disagreement or contention about the security of something. There is not enough context to determine what is being referred to as "it" in the question.


Passage number 178.
MR. CORRIGAN. It's more secure than Cannonball.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement made by Mr. Corrigan is not a source of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 179.
MR. AXILROD. We have gone through that, Mr. Chairman, withthe Federal Reserve Bank of New York in getting comments from Mr.Sternlight. The transmission has been terrible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the phrase "The transmission has been terrible," suggesting that there has been a problem or disagreement regarding the communication between Mr. Axilrod and Mr. Sternlight from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.


Passage number 180.
MR. CORRIGAN. Not with this new one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement that there is no disagreement with the new one.


Passage number 181.
MR. AXILROD. I don't know. The new one may work. It's theold one that doesn't work so well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely expressing uncertainty and speculation about the effectiveness of the new item compared to the old one.


Passage number 182.
MR. CORRIGAN. It really is good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "It really is good" expresses a positive opinion and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 183.
MR. GUFFEY. Will it print a blue cover. [Laughter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 184.
]MR. ROBERTS. It could be transmitted that way and then wecould pick up the regular report when we come down here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Roberts is informative and does not involve any differing opinions or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 185.
MS. HORN. Mr. [Vice] Chairman, would you speak just a minuteto the security [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage because the content is unintelligible.


Passage number 186.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Our report doesn't get into thisquestion. It seems to me that if the Chairman wants, he can authorizea trial run on it next time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the report does not address the question and suggests that the Chairman has the authority to authorize a trial run in the future if they desire.


Passage number 187.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, let me look at it and we'll seewhether we can make some alteration next time. This doesn't enterinto this report. Are there any other issues. Should we reconsiderwhen we meet. I won't do it now, but--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing the possibility of making alterations or reconsiderations in the future.


Passage number 188.
MR. PARTEE. It seems to me that we once went through all thedays of the week and it turned out that Tuesday was the only possibleday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 189.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in it. Can you please provide the passage for me to analyze?


Passage number 190.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but that had to do with the dayof the directors' meetings and the last day of the settlement week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about the directors' meetings and the settlement week without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, I thought that Tuesday was aparticularly awkward day in terms of the data flow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a personal opinion about a specific day, and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 192.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, it had to do with directors' meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply responds affirmatively to a statement.


Passage number 193.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do all Banks have their directors'meetings on Thursday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply asking a factual question about the timing of directors' meetings at banks.


Passage number 194.
MS. HORN. Thursday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 195.
MR. FORRESTAL. We have a lot of ours on Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement that does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 196.
-15-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, it's either Thursday or Friday.No Bank has a day different from that for directors' meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about a possible day for a directors meeting. It does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 197.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought one Bank had them on Monday orWednesday, but that could have changed. Well, we'll look into thesethings. Meanwhile, I guess we can approve the report with the twoamendments that were made. Do I have a motion.SPEAKER(.). Move to approve.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 198.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "Without objection" suggests that all parties present agree with the statement or proposal that has been made.


Passage number 199.
MR. PARTEE. Mr. Chairman, did we take up item 7 on theagenda.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a question being asked by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 200.
MR. GRAMLEY. Not yet. You skipped it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the speaker has not mentioned something yet and that the listener has skipped it. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 201.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where we are [on the agenda].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty or lack of knowledge about their current location in the agenda.


Passage number 202.
MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to answer the question.


Passage number 203.
 GRAMLEY and MS. TEETERS. Bankers acceptances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of "Gramley and Ms. Teeters" and "Bankers acceptances" does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention. It seems to be a statement of fact or reference to specific individuals and financial instruments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 204.
MR. PARTEE. Yes. There was a Manager's recommendation verydifferent from [the recommendation in the memo], and I thought weought to have some discussion of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement indicated by the phrase "very different from [the recommendation in the memo]" and the suggestion for further discussion.


Passage number 205.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where am I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for the location of the speaker.


Passage number 206.
 I'm following--MR. PARTEE. You were on number 8. Somehow item 7 got lost.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying the sequence of numbered items.


Passage number 207.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's go back to bankers acceptances. Iskipped it because it's not on this [summary] memorandum. Anyway,let's consider bankers acceptances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely discussing the topic of bankers acceptances.


Passage number 208.
MR. PARTEE. RPs on bankers acceptances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight, you have a memorandum.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. Sternlight has a memorandum without expressing any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 210.
MR. STERNLIGHT. As noted in my memo to the Committee, Mr.Chairman, I felt the decision on whether or not to continue doingrepurchase agreements in BAs was a very close one. In fact, I hadinitially written a summary for my own staff summarizing the pros andcons, which came out marginally for staying with the operations. Wekicked it around for a while and were persuaded, with varying degreesof enthusiasm, to come out on the negative side. But again, for someof us anyway, quite narrowly. That was our evaluation of, on the oneside, the modest usefulness of continuing the operations and, on theother side, a small but nonnegligible risk of continuing thoseoperations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially believed that they should continue doing repurchase agreements, but after discussing it with their staff, they were persuaded to come out on the negative side. This disagreement is seen in phrases like "varying degrees of enthusiasm" and "quite narrowly."


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the modest usefulness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "What is the modest usefulness" is a straightforward question that does not express any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 212.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, that we do part of our operations inthem when we do repurchase agreements. For the System Account it hasworked out in the last year that about 7 percent was in BAs. Whenthis issue was reviewed a year ago the average had been more like 10to 15 percent. When Mr. Axilrod and I presented a memo just a year3/26-27/84ago on this subject we also thought the decision was close and cameout narrowly for continuing the operations. One factor that weighedin that narrow balance was that our withdrawal might add to generalmarket anxieties about the banking system, which we regarded then asless acute than in the previous summer and fall--that is the summerand fall of 1982--but still present in some measure. We are nowanother year past that relatively sensitive period of 1982, so thatreason for not withdrawing seems to carry a bit less weight. In themeantime the use of BAs in our repurchase agreements has diminishedsomewhat further. So, in my view, those factors tip the scale fromnarrowly in favor of continuing to narrowly for withdrawing. But asour recommendation stated: If the decision is to withdraw, it shouldbe with several months' notice to the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information and discussing factors that weighed in on a past decision.


Passage number 213.
MR. PARTEE. Peter, am I right in thinking that if you knewsome very, very compellingly bad information about a large bank thatyou wouldn't want to make RPs on their bankers acceptances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 214.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We would try to duck it. If it were knownin the market, then I think the market would not present us with sucha name because that just wouldn't be a good name circulating in themarket. But if we had some information and the market in generaldidn't, then we would hate to make the waves that would be made byrejecting it, so we probably would take it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a hypothetical situation and the potential actions that would be taken in that scenario.


Passage number 215.
MR. PARTEE. And that would also include a foreign agency orbranch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 216.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It could, yes; and that tends to be a fairlysizable proportion of what we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that a certain aspect of what Mr. Sternlight does can be a sizable proportion of his work.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 217.
MS. TEETERS. Are you typically offered more of these thanyou accept.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is contention or disagreement as Ms. Teeters seems to imply that she is often offered more than she accepts.


Passage number 218.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, but Governor, we don't really have thatchoice. When we are doing RPs, we will make agreements with thedifferent firms to do an even $5 million or $10 million and so on.It's only late in the day that we find out what actual acceptances arebeing presented. They don't present us with a million at such andsuch a rate in a particular bank that is named then; the names usuallycome up later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply explains a process or logistics of making agreements and receiving acceptances.


Passage number 219.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What rationale would you give in yourpublic announcement that gives a few months' notice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is giving a hypothetical situation and asking for the rationale behind a public announcement that provides a few months' notice. There is no indication of disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 220.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, that we have found this of limitedusefulness and that the market is mature and certainly doesn't needour participation for support purposes, but so as not to beprecipitate we are making the change as of 3 months hence or 6 monthshence or whatever. I'd say something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Sternlight is stating a decision or perspective about a particular situation without offering any opposing views.


Passage number 221.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My reaction to this is that the issuedoesn't turn at all on its usefulness to open market operations, whichseems to me close to nil one way or the other. We were in therehistorically because of some idea that this market ought to benurtured and supported and for a kind of regulatory coloration--thatwe determine what is an eligible acceptance and all that business.And there may be some usefulness there yet. I don't know what it is3/26-27/84but maybe there is. But against that, and given what I know or havefound out about the bankers acceptance market recently--that it isoperating in a high, wide, and handsome way--it strikes me that Idon't particularly want to endorse that. And we get into the messyregulatory question as well--this question you described: Ifsomething goes wrong, do we do it or not do it or what kind of signalsare we sending. We may be well advised to get out. My onlyreservation is: Are we really losing something on surveillance on theregulatory side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own reaction and thoughts on the issue at hand.


Passage number 222.
MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, we got out of buying andselling them some time ago. Isn't that right, Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is asking for confirmation from Peter regarding a statement about their past actions.


Passage number 223.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The outright [purchases and sales], yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not depict any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement made by Mr. Sternlight.


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't examine them anymore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The sentence simply states that "We don't examine them anymore" without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 225.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There are some people, I think, whomisinterpret the Federal Reserve eligibility as a good housekeepingseal. We learned more about bankers acceptances when we looked intothe Mexican line than we did at any other time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the author's opinion regarding the interpretation of Federal Reserve eligibility and their experience with learning about bankers acceptances.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what worries me: that wegive this implicit blessing and we don't really use it to see whetherthe market is behaving within certain parameters yet there's thisassumption that we do. If we don't use it, get rid of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing concern about giving implicit blessing to something (presumably a market) without actually utilizing it to assess whether it is operating within certain parameters. The speaker suggests getting rid of it if it is not being used.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 227.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But can we really have anannouncement that we will be discontinuing this within a few monthswithout raising questions that we think some banks are shaky orwithout the market wondering what lies behind our doing this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement raises questions and concerns about the motives behind discontinuing something within a few months. It implies that there might be instability in some banks or undisclosed reasons for the decision.


Passage number 228.
MR. MARTIN. Deregulation. And we're relieving the reportingburden on financial institutions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is stating that they are relieving the reporting burden on financial institutions as part of deregulation.


Passage number 229.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we say we have plenty of governmentsecurities and no probability of any shortage any time soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the availability of government securities without any indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 230.
 We saywe don't need it for open market operations and we say the market isstrong on its own and therefore--MR. MORRIS. The market has matured.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions the market being strong and matured, indicating a positive view without any contradictory statements or disagreement.


Passage number 231.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't use this now for any surveillancepurposes or any that I can understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker clearly states that they do not use something for surveillance purposes and also expresses their lack of understanding of any potential surveillance use.


Passage number 232.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It's not used in a significant way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that "It's not used in a significant way." There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 233.
MS. TEETERS. If we stop using it for repurchase agreements,could we drop that distinction between eligible and ineligible now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement asking if a distinction can be dropped.


Passage number 234.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that's a distinction that stillapplies for re-discount at the discount window, and relief fromreserve requirements would still hinge on that aspect. I don't thinkthat would be affected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is expressing his opinion and providing an explanation for his viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 235.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You haven't made that distinction in youroperations, have you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is an implied disagreement or contention in the passage. The question "You haven't made that distinction in your operations, have you?" suggests that the speaker believes that the person being addressed has not made a distinction in their operations.


Passage number 236.
-18-3/26-27/84MR. STERNLIGHT. No. We have a requirement for what iseligible for our purchase but that goes to the market acceptability ortradability of the name.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that there is a requirement for eligibility in their purchase, which is related to the market acceptability or tradability of the name.


Passage number 237.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The more I hear, the more I think we oughtto get rid of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing a personal opinion and does not mention any opposing views or disagreements.


Passage number 238.
MR. PARTEE. I do too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement without any opposing viewpoints or contradictory statements.


Passage number 239.
MR. MORRIS. As far as the regulatory aspect, the New YorkReserve Bank could still exercise some surveillance over the marketeven though we were not operating in acceptances as RPs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 240.
 Is thatdependent upon--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think it is absolutelydependent but I may be wrong. Historically when we used to buy themoutright--maybe not in recent years but going back to the '20s, '30sand '40s--somebody would sit there and say: Is this a goodacceptance. Has it got the document attached. Does it meet thecriteria of eligibility. That has faded away through the years. Ithink that was part of the purpose of our being in there: That wewould only buy the good stuff and the idea was that the market wouldthen gravitate toward the good stuff because that's the only thing wewould buy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

In this passage, the speaker is providing an explanation of their perspective on the topic but there is no contention or disagreement present. They are simply discussing their personal belief and historical context without contradicting or debating another viewpoint.


Passage number 241.
MR. GUFFEY. Wasn't there a time, though, in the recent pastwhen we used bankers acceptances when collateral was otherwise short.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 242.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Going back some years, yes. When governmentsecurities were in short supply it was helpful but it hasn't been thatcritical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 243.
MR. GUFFEY. But that's no longer present. The market ismature; I don't see why we don't get out of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, is expressing his opinion about the market being mature and questioning why they shouldn't get out of it. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 244.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 245.
 We could have a line in theannouncement that says that if the budgetary deficit--MR. PARTEE. It is conceivable that we might have someembarrassments looking ahead. We don't have any now. We can get outgracefully now. And it won't present a possible issue later on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee's statement "It is conceivable that we might have some embarrassments looking ahead" suggests some potential problems or issues in the future, while the previous speaker is confident that there are currently no issues and they can exit the situation smoothly.


Passage number 246.
MR. BOEHNE. To me, the marginal reasons for being in thishave gotten weaker and weaker over the last few years and there aren'tany good reasons that I can see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Boehne, expresses his personal opinion that the reasons for being in "this" (the context is not provided) have gotten weaker and weaker over the last few years. He states that he cannot see any good reasons for it. There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in this passage as it solely presents the speaker's viewpoint.


Passage number 247.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there any point in putting this out forcomment. What do our lawyers say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking for input or advice from lawyers.


Passage number 248.
MR. OLTMAN. You don't need to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: provide a speaker and a microphone for Richard.


Passage number 249.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've said that about some other things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that something has been said previously about other things, but it does not specify what those things are or suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 250.
MR. MARTIN. You're asking for a legal opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is not contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple statement of fact. Mr. Martin is being asked for a legal opinion.


Passage number 251.
MR. BLACK. It might make it a tad easier to resist buyingsomething else if we are going to get any pressure to buy something wedon't want--some favored security somewhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 252.
-19-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You are recommending, though, thatyou continue to have the authority just as you have the authority,although you haven't used it, to buy them outright.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a recommendation to continue having authority to buy something outright.


Passage number 253.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The answer is no. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or opposing positions.


Passage number 254.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Does this require a formal vote. Orwhat does it require.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply asks a question and does not present any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are we doing. We would still havethe authority to buy but we're not going to exercise it. I didn'tunderstand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no apparent contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing confusion or lack of understanding about a situation, but there is no indication of conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 256.
MR. STERNLIGHT. That's what was done when we withdrew fromthe outright [market]. There was no formal change in theauthorization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states what was done when they withdrew from the market and mentions that there was no formal change in the authorization.


Passage number 257.
MS. TEETERS. Did we announce it when we withdrew from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question and does not show any active disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 258.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think we did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing their own personal opinion and there is no indication of contention or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 259.
MR. PARTEE. I think all it takes is Committee acceptance ofthe manager's recommendation, which is to stop in practice doing RPson bankers acceptances over the next several months in a graceful way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that all it takes is the committee's acceptance of the manager's recommendation.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I really have no problem with that but itraises the question of why we have the authorization. But we can facethat down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement. The speaker does not have a problem with something and is questioning the purpose of the authorization, but they are still willing to address it at a later time.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 261.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, one could conceive of asituation in which we would want to use the authority and we mightwant to use the authority without waiting for the next FOMC meeting.Presumably the Executive Committee could authorize that if there weresome reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests the possibility of using authority without waiting for the next FOMC meeting, indicating a potential disagreement or contention on whether or not to wait for the meeting.


Passage number 262.
MR. PARTEE. Executive Committee on what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of a person's title and position on a committee. There is no indication of any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 263.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is an Executive Committee onforeign currency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there is an Executive Committee on foreign currency. It does not suggest any form of disagreement or contention regarding this Committee.


Passage number 264.
MR. PARTEE. No, I think it would have to be a wire by theChairman or a notification vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a possible requirement for a certain action.


Passage number 265.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the time being we don't have to facethat. If there is no objection, we'll leave the authorization for thetime being and review it later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply suggesting to delay addressing a certain matter until later, and it seeks agreement or absence of objections from the readers.


Passage number 266.
MS. TEETERS. Are we going to have an announcement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about whether or not there will be an announcement.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, I guess we're up to [agendaitem 9], the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that they have reached agenda item 9, the minutes.


Passage number 268.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, do you want to decide whetherthere should be a length of time between indicating to the market thatwe're not going to be in and actually not being in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about a decision-making process.


Passage number 269.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the presumption isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase is stating an assumption or belief without challenging or contradicting any other statement or perspective.


Passage number 270.
-20-3/26-27/84MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. But I don't know whether agreement wasreached on what that time interval should be. I would suggest about 3months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is stating that he is unsure if an agreement has been reached regarding a time interval but offers a suggestion based on his own estimation.


Passage number 271.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can delegate that to the Chairman andthe Manager if there is no objection. We have to get to the minutesin a minute. The thought occurred to me in our discussion ofconfidentiality that we have a request--I guess from Mr. Fauntroy, butI'm not sure how hard it is being pressed by Mr. Fauntroy--that wegive his staff rather than the whole subcommittee on the House BankingCurrency Committee Part II of the Greenbook modified to redact thosevery few sentences that have some confidential projection or policyimplication. There is very little of that in Part II. It is mostly apretty straightforward rendition of the business picture and thefinancial picture and so forth. There is an obvious problem with itat least in the sense that we did it recently for the Redbook and itbecomes a question of whether conceding some of these things to themis helpful in terms of harmonious Congressional relationships,assuming it's harmless, or whether it only encourages the nextrequest. The fact is that it is a little hard to make a bigintellectual case about this because there isn't much in [Part II of]the Greenbook that is not in the public domain anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a request and considering the potential implications and consequences of granting it, but there is no strong disagreement or conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 272.
MR. PARTEE. But it's our analysis of the statistics, ofcourse, which may differ from other analyses from time to time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that the analysis of the statistics may differ from other analyses at times, indicating that there can be variations in interpretation. However, it does not imply any specific contention or disagreement in the current context.


Passage number 273.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a pretty straightforward analysis, Ithink, for the most part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, the speaker presents their analysis as straightforward and fairly uncontroversial. They also express their personal opinion by using "I think," indicating their subjectivity. However, there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 274.
MR. GUFFEY. When is that released--if ever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any argument or disagreement. It is a simple question asking about the release date of something.


Passage number 275.
MR. AXILROD. After five years.SPEAKER(.). Except for the parts discussing foreign banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the duration and content of a discussion.


Passage number 276.
MR. GRAMLEY. What about the parts from the internationaldivision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply asks a question about the parts from the international division.


Passage number 277.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is one place where some deletionswould have to be made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that there may be some deletions that need to be made in a certain place, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 278.
MR. GRAMLEY. If we do this, it might be wise to put adifferent cover on it and stop calling it an FOMC document.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is suggesting a potential change and rephrasing without expressing opposing views or objections.


Passage number 279.
MR. ROBERTS. Stop calling it a Greenbook. That's how theyidentify these things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states someone's opinion/request to stop using the term "Greenbook" to refer to something.


Passage number 280.
 They hear there's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we did with Redbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they did something with Redbook after hearing about it.


Passage number 281.
MR. GRAMLEY. Make this one beige too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The statement simply instructs someone to make something beige.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 282.
MS. TEETERS. But Lyle, if we do that, then it is not beinglimited to Fauntroy and his staff. It becomes almost a publicdocument and not an FOMC document.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Ms. Teeters is expressing disagreement or contention with Lyle's suggestion. She argues that if the document is made available to the public, it loses its status as an FOMC document and becomes a public document.


Passage number 283.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think one would have to assume this isvirtually a public document anyway whether they promise not to3/26-27/84reproduce it. Copies go to every member [of Mr. Fauntroy'ssubcommittee] of the House Banking Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply expresses the opinion that the document is already considered a public document, regardless of any promise made not to reproduce it.


Passage number 284.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why not give them a Blackbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a suggestion without any conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 285.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They already think it is accompanied by ablack file.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "They already think it is accompanied by a black file" is presented as a fact or belief held by a certain group, without any conflicting opinions or arguments mentioned.


Passage number 286.
MR. PARTEE. If I were sitting down in Mr. Kichline's chair,I would object strenuously because I think it would affect the way itis written. I think the Redbook has been greatly affected by becomingthe Beigebook and I think the Greenbook would be affected by becominga public document. One is just much more careful--much more stylisticand formalistic--in the way things are said. For example, the staffwouldn't point out that there's something wrong with the GNP figuresbecause of the treatment of PIK or they would say it in such a subtleway that no one could understand what they were saying. And I thinkthere would be a loss of capability to communicate with the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 287.
MR. MORRIS. Couldn't all that be brought over to Part I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 288.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I suppose so. You remember, there didn'tused to be a Part I; there was just a Part II. Part I came aboutbecause we thought we would do those projections and that they oughtto be more confidential than Part II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 289.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It didn't used to have any projections atall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about something not having projections in the past.


Passage number 290.
MR. PARTEE. It had no projections at all when I came here.But I must say, I think it is a way of communicating. What you'llprobably have to do is develop a Part I supplement or something thathas more of the material that used to be in Part II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. Mr. Partee is simply stating his opinion and suggesting a potential solution.


Passage number 291.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you're right in worryingabout some inhibition on the way the document is written. I don'tknow how great that is and I don't know whether there is any generalimpression that the Redbook has diminished since it is written to bedistributed or whether in fact that has led to any difference in theway people write it. Is that a common appreciation. We do deletethese sections--they are distributed separately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea that there may be some inhibition on the way the document is written. They are also unsure about the extent of this inhibition and whether there is a general impression that the Redbook has diminished. The statement about deleting sections is not related to any disagreement but rather an explanation of a practice.


Passage number 292.
MR. GRAMLEY. I have the perception from reading theBeigebook that apart from some certain stylistic changes--taking outcomments such as one director said something and taking out the viewof panelists--that the content of the Beigebook is not materiallydifferent from what the Redbook was before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their perception that, apart from certain stylistic changes, the content of the Beigebook is not materially different from the Redbook.


Passage number 293.
MR. BOEHNE. Another way to approach this is to ask: Whatwill be the next request and is it easier to say no at that point thanto say no at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting an alternative way to approach a situation.


Passage number 294.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we took a very strong line that PartI was verboten and that has not been pressed at this point. Now, whatthey will do six months from now or a year from now--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 295.
MS. TEETERS. Just looking at the current Greenbook, I thinkthe very first sentences of Part II would have to be totally-22-3/26-27/84rewritten. That reads: "The pace of activity picked up vigorouslyearly this year. Housing activity surged, auto purchases and otherretail sales rose strongly, and industrial production advanced rapidlyin both January and February." There's no question about where theFederal Reserve staff views the first quarter as a result of that.Practically every one of those adjectives would disappear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: In this passage, MS. TEETERS expresses disagreement or contention with the current Greenbook. She suggests that the first sentences of Part II should be completely rewritten, indicating that she disagrees with how the Federal Reserve staff views the first quarter.


Passage number 296.
MR. KICHLINE. We didn't try to leave any doubts in thatdocument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 297.
MS. TEETERS. That goes to Chuck's point about communication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it simply references Chuck's point about communication.


Passage number 298.
MR. MARTIN. You wrote 4 headlines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement present. The statement by Mr. Martin about writing four headlines does not indicate any conflict or differing opinions between individuals.


Passage number 299.
MR. BOEHNE. That would become: "The economy grew in thefirst quarter on several fronts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement simply states a fact without any opposing views or conflicting information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 300.
"MR. KICHLINE. I think there is some concern. When you gothrough these with a little time lag, it's pretty difficult to spot awhole series of things that are a potential problem. They come up inTed's area particularly. On the domestic side, in the past there havebeen occasions when the monetary data we had were not for the fullmonth and we put in rates of growth for the full month. Or we haveput in our corporate bond and stock markets forecasts of variousthings going out several months. With time, I think the sensitivitydeclines. I do remember for many years I was assigned the unpleasantchore of writing the Quarterly Report for Mr. Proxmire's JointEconomic Committee and that report was very different from theGreenbook. It supposedly said the same thing--it was on currentfinancial conditions--but it was quite a different animal. When youwrite something you have in mind the nature of the audience and itmakes you more sensitive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions concern about potential problems that arise in the monetary data and forecasts. This suggests that there may be disagreement or debate over the accuracy or reliability of these data and forecasts.


Passage number 301.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there is something to that. Butof course you are risking that if they really press, we'll tell themwe will reinstate the Proxmire-type reports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the point being made and expresses agreement with it before introducing another potential consequence.


Passage number 302.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I'm not adverse to that. And if I haveto do this, I would like to get some double mileage out of it. Forexample, we can get some bulletin articles out of doing that and savesome staff time to do something else. If we put a public document outbut beef up Part I in a selected way to cover other things, it'sconceivable that the Committee might be better off with a differentPart I and a Part II that we use [as a public document].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 303.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't want to probe all yourminds, but how many people read Part II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 304.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Now you have to ask how many peopleread it some of the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply poses a question and does not present opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 305.
MR. BALLES. Once a year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage seems to be a statement or response from Mr. Balles without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 306.
MR. PARTEE. [The Governors] don't have the personal staffsthat the Presidents have to give us all that information. We have toread Part II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement "The Governors don't have the personal staffs that the Presidents have to give us all that information" suggests a disagreement or contention about the difference in resources available to governors and presidents.


Passage number 307.
-23-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we have to linger on thisany more. We won't do anything immediately but I think we ought toreview the whole issue. I don't have any particular feeling that PartI should be longer. But we'll get the answers to Part I when wediscuss Part II. We won't do anything for the moment. Now I'll go tothe minutes. Do we have a motion.SPEAKER(.). So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a plan of action and requesting a motion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 308.
MR. MARTIN. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker is identified as Mr. Martin, indicating that there is another person involved in the conversation or discussion. The use of the word "second" suggests that Mr. Martin is responding or countering a previous point of view or opinion.


Passage number 309.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, the minutes areapproved. Foreign currency operations, Miss Greene.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Without objection, the minutes are approved" indicates that there was unanimous agreement and approval. The mention of "Foreign currency operations, Miss Greene" does not introduce any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 310.
MS. GREENE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear statement or argument in the passage provided.


Passage number 311.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 312.
MR. BOEHNE. I have two questions in two quite differentareas. The first question: When the chart show was given in January,as I recall there was a chart that forecast some decline of the dollarthis year. I don't think it was given with a great deal of confidencebut as I recall the chart the dollar was down. The Greenbook forecastis a good bit stronger and I gather that whatever your interest rateforecast was two months ago it is probably higher now. How would youdraw the chart on the dollar now, if you had to do it, compared to twomonths ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing the differences between the previous chart's forecast of the dollar's decline and the current Greenbook forecast. There is no evident disagreement or contention.


Passage number 313.
MR. TRUMAN. Fortunately, since we do the forecasting forthat purpose on the basis of quarterly averaging, it allows us tosmooth out some factors. The chart show forecast was based onprojections from the fourth quarter of 1983 through the end of theprojection period and we had particular numbers for the interveningquarters just because we do that for the convenience of it. In fact,we had felt that the dollar was going to stay up longer than we havein this forecast although we have left the projection mostly the samefor the balance of the period--going out after the third quarter ofthis year. So it is the same for the fourth quarter of 1984 and thefourth quarter of 1985. For the first and second quarters we moved itdown just slightly, from 131 to 130 on average for the first quarterand 129 or something like that to 126 or so for the second quarter,because it looked like interest rates, if anything, could have firmeda bit--and also because we have been burned so badly, if I may put itthat way, as you alluded to President Boehne. We had felt that itmight be some time before the cumulative effects of the currentaccount would begin to show through; in fact, they have come insomewhat sooner and stronger than we had implicitly projected at thattime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of their forecasting process and acknowledging that their previous projections on the strength of the dollar and interest rates may have been slightly off. However, there is no direct disagreement or contention between multiple parties.


Passage number 314.
MR. BOEHNE. My other question has to do with the debtsituation. Is there anything that can be said about that at thispoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is asking for information about the debt situation, indicating a desire for more information rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're looking at me rather than at thepeople at the other end of the table. Well, I think the answer tothat is "Yes." Most of the attention right now is focused onArgentina where, as you know, they have a new government and a verydifficult external problem. The amount of indebtedness is large; it's-24-3/26-27/84half the size of Brazil's or Mexico's, but it is still fairly large.The new government has had a lot on its mind to say the leastinternally as well as externally and they were not moving very rapidlytoward an external--or internal for that matter--economic adjustmentprogram. In a sense they lost a quarter or so while they werepursuing other priorities. As a result, there are possibilities atleast of more substantial problems. I suppose it's fair to say thatthe possibility of getting a letter of intent this week before the endof the quarter is at the vanishing point. It seems very unlikelyunder those conditions that interest [arrears] will be brought up todate through the fourth quarter of last year, which means those loanswill become nonperforming early in April and will affect earningsstatements early in April.But more important than that: This is the first time, Ithink, that this has happened to any of these major borrowers. Andwhat psychological reaction it will have on the banks' attitudes or onthe market, and indeed on Argentina, remains to be seen. That wouldbe amplified further if it is followed by a classification of theloans, which isn't automatic and which seems to be natural unlessactivity picks up pretty rapidly with the [International Monetary]Fund. There are some indications that it is picking up now and therehas been a reasonably straightforward effort going on to reachagreement with the Fund just in the last week--in terms of actualdiscussions with the Fund even in the latter part of last week, to bemore precise. There are indications that the government wants toreach an agreement. Certainly, the Fund wants to reach an agreement.There are discordant voices within Argentina and some very realdifficulties on such little matters as how far they can reduce thebudget deficit, to take one example. Wage policy traditionally entersinto these negotiations. They have been following an ad hoc policyfrom month-to-month of increasing real wages. Inflation isaccelerating; monetary policy is lax; and the [peso] is probably alittle overvalued. And two-thirds of their exports would'be eaten upby the need to pay interest. Otherwise there wouldn't be any problem.I might say in just looking at the Argentina problem thatthey have a big trade surplus, very largely based on agriculturalexports. The country is reasonably self-sufficient. Part of theirbig debt reflects some recent current account deficits, but not halfof it and maybe not more than two-thirds of it. In rough numbers theyhave had proportionally an exceptionally large amount of capitaloutflow, and like some of these other countries they finance privatecapital outflow by the government borrowing the money back. But theassets have flown. They don't generate any income for Argentinabecause the income stays abroad as well as the assets, and it puts avery large burden on their current account to manage their externaldebt. We have a problem within Argentina and, of course, we have thecontrary problem that whatever happens to Argentina--which in and ofitself might be a manageable situation--how can you expect a situationto remain manageable or what are the risks that it will spread toother borrowers and we will have a much bigger problem on our laps.So, that is the focus of concern.Now, there are continuing concerns with other countries.Peru lost a finance minister recently. Mexico continues to look goodfrom the external side but it still has sluggish growth. However, itdoes look as if they may be approaching a situation where they will-25-3/26-27/84not have to rely much, if at all, on net new external expansion.Brazil, on the other hand, is just in the middle of what has finallybecome, I think--there are still some questions about it--a prettyforceful internal adjustment program, tightening their monetarypolicy. But the success of that is still not clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are concerns with Argentina's financial situation, but also mentions that there are indications of progress and a desire to reach an agreement with the International Monetary Fund. Additionally, there are differing opinions on the success of Brazil's internal adjustment program.


Passage number 316.
MR. BOEHNE. Do you think there will be interest rateconcessions forthcoming from the banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 317.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what you mean byconcessions. It's a very foggy word. The idea of giving what onemight term a subsidy, which Argentina no doubt would like, would be anextremely difficult one for the banks and in itself would raise a lotof questions of precedent for the other countries. Certainly, theArgentines will at the very minimum go for whatever concession--morenarrowly defined as a low spread--they can get. That would give bankssome heartburn too on the theory that the Argentine payments are notas large as the payments of other countries and why do they deserve asnarrow a spread as Mexico has gotten. The Argentines probably won'tbe very happy with the Mexican spread. That poses a problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is discussing the possibility of giving subsidies or concessions to Argentina, but also raises questions about the difficulties and potential precedent it may set for other countries. Additionally, there is potential disagreement between Argentina and Mexico regarding the amount of spread or interest rate that banks are charging.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 318.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On those 22 reschedulings that havebeen held up, one went through; it was controversial. The newgovernment came in and they basically want better terms. On those,what the banks have offered them is to reconsider the maturities butnot the spreads, and so far there has been no movement becauseeverything is held up in Argentina. It's not only the IMF thing,which of course is the key. There is also still that billion dollarsof money that they could make available to Argentina that would becoming back to them as interest. Then there are the 22 reschedulingson which there is no movement. So, there is an impasse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is an impasse regarding the 22 reschedulings, with no movement or progress being made.


Passage number 319.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One can say increases in interest rates inthe United States don't help any of these problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that increases in interest rates in the United States do not help any of the problems mentioned, without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 320.
MR. PARTEE. It's close to a six month give-up of interestfor them. I think the last payment was October 12th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the last payment being made on October 12th and expressing their opinion that it is close to a six month give-up of interest for the other party involved.


Passage number 321.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was October 3rd or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply provides a date without any conflicting information or opposing views.


Passage number 322.
MR. TRUMAN. It was the 13th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about a specific date, the 13th.


Passage number 323.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. However, some banks have told me that theyhave gotten scattered payments since then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of fact about the experience of some banks.


Passage number 324.
MR. TRUMAN. They are [not] paying the interest. They havebeen paying some of their trade arrears, which in some cases involvespayments to banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Truman, makes a statement about a specific situation without conflicting opinions or contradictions.


Passage number 325.
MR. PARTEE. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Partee's observation.


Passage number 326.
MS. TEETERS. In these renegotiations, Tony, are the ratesbeing offered these countries a spread over LIBOR or prime and thenthe rate moves as those rates move. Is that the way they transmit thechange in rates in the United States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification about how rates are transmitted in the United States.


Passage number 327.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or in the Eurodollar market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statement that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the existence of the Eurodollar market.


Passage number 328.
-26-3/26-27/84MR. GUFFEY. How much of that Argentina debt resides in U.S.banks and how much in non-U.S. banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 329.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's $9 billion dollars or something likethat for U.S. banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the amount of money associated with U.S. banks without any expression of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 330.
MR. TRUMAN. It's something like $9-1/2 billion for U.S.banks out of the $25 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply provides information about the amount of money allocated to U.S. banks.


Passage number 331.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I looked at the hit that the New Yorkbanks would take if the loans become nonperforming on March 31. Itdoesn't add up to a lot. is the most vulnerablebut the numbers still are not terribly large yet, although it has adefinite impact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 332.
MR. GUFFEY. When the loans go nonperforming, what percentagedo the banks have to charge off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement without any conflicting views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 333.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They don't have to charge offanything automatically just because a loan is nonperforming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a neutral statement providing information without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 334.
MR. BOEHNE. They have to take out what they put in, I guess.Don't they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is simply making an observation and asking a question based on that observation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 335.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They would have to not record the accruedinterest for the first quarter and also subtract out from the firstquarter earnings what they already had accrued from the fourthquarter. So they get a double hit in the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention in the passage. The phrase "they get a double hit in the first quarter" implies that the situation described is disadvantageous or unfavorable for the subject, suggesting disagreement or dissatisfaction with the outcome.


Passage number 336.
MS. TEETERS. Do they have to put up reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 337.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, not at this point. They don't have tobut the process is beginning that leads to classification and then tofurther classification and at that point they would have to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a process without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or disagreements.


Passage number 338.
MR. TRUMAN. Our investigation, Mr. Chairman, suggests thatnot all banks would automatically in all cases back out the fourthquarter [accrued interest] under those circumstances. It's notexplicitly required by the instructions. It's an acceptable practice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Instead, it presents a statement about the investigation's findings and the conclusion that not all banks would automatically back out the fourth quarter accrued interest, but it is an acceptable practice. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 339.
MR. PARTEE. They would deduct it from their reserve for baddebts, wouldn't they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 340.
MR. TRUMAN. They don't always. That's the form in whichthey often would take out the fourth-quarter [accrued interest] ifthey were doing the fourth quarter. But at least my informationsuggests that they don't always do that in all cases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Truman is simply stating that his information suggests that accrued interest may not always be taken out in the fourth quarter.


Passage number 341.
 They do stopaccruing after 90 days but the previous period in some cases--MR. ROBERTS. The previous period is usually a reserveadjustment and the current period is a reversal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any evident contention or disagreement. It is providing information about the accrual of a specific period.


Passage number 342.
MR. PARTEE. That's the way they are supposed to do itaccording to the Call Report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is just stating a fact about how things are supposed to be done according to the Call Report. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 343.
MR. TRUMAN. That's right. That's the so-called acceptableway of doing it: to deduct it against loan loss reserves and thenreplenish the loan loss reserves to that extent. That, in effect,-27-3/26-27/84takes the income hit in the first quarter. But in some cases, Iunderstand, banks have declined to do that--or their internalaccounting people have chosen not to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But in some cases, I understand, banks have declined to do that--or their internal accounting people have chosen not to do that" indicates that there is a difference in opinion or action regarding deducting loan loss reserves against income.


Passage number 344.
MR. ROBERTS. If you had an adequate reserve you wouldn'thave to replenish it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact or suggestion that having an adequate reserve would eliminate the need to replenish it.


Passage number 345.
MR. PARTEE. Yes. You might have to later on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the possibility of some future action may arise.


Passage number 346.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Adequacy is in the eye of thebeholder.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement "Adequacy is in the eye of the beholder" is subjective and does not necessarily suggest contention or disagreement. It implies that perceptions of adequacy vary from person to person and can be subjective or based on individual perspectives.


Passage number 347.
MR. ROBERTS. That's right. The bank is the beholder.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 348.
MR. PARTEE. Banks are supposed to have some outsideaccountants that tell them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about the supposed role of outside accountants for banks.


Passage number 349.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I have a request that may be toodelicate for you to comment on--I'm not sure--but I'm going to read itanyway. I'm scheduled in early April to give a talk to a bankingassociation for foreign trade, as Chuck knows. They tried to get himand had to settle for me. In any event, the point may come up at thatmeeting in terms of comments that have been made in the press that youhave had a role, and maybe a leading role, in urging the banks toreduce the interest rate that they are charging these troubled LatinAmerican countries. If that question comes up, is it true or not.What should I say. No comment. I don't know. Maybe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 350.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think you want to get drawn deeplyinto that subject, but I haven't made any great secret of the factthat in the situations where there has been clear improvement I thinkthat ought to be taken into account in setting terms--whether interestrate terms or maturity terms or the size of the package or whatever.But we haven't gone around on a case-by-case basis [unintelligible]drawing out interest rate spreads. A clear case of improvement isMexico.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining their thoughts on taking into account improvements when setting terms in certain situations, but they haven't gone into detail about interest rate spreads. The mention of Mexico as a clear case of improvement does not imply any disagreement.


Passage number 351.
MR. PARTEE. I think it was stated quite a bit more broadlythan that in the article in The Wall Street Journal that you probablyare referring to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply referring to an article and clarifying the extent of its statement.


Passage number 352.
MR. BALLES. It was. That's the article I was referring to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a direct statement of agreement.


Passage number 353.
MR. PARTEE. I don't know. As a matter of fact, I called tofind out if anybody knew whether you had been doing this or not afterI read that article and I couldn't find anybody who did. I think itwas more broadly stated in terms of a considerable interest rate give-up. It reminded me of the days when they used to say that the Fedtold the banks they ought to continue with those REIT loans. We neversaid it, but that was what all the bankers said we said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their perspective and recalling a situation from the past.


Passage number 354.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if interest rates keep goingup, the question is going to arise as to whether the [unintelligible]banks are capable of devising some kind of new relationship in regardto the increase or whether the financing put together by the IMF isgoing to have to be revised in the middle of the year, although thatcould create consequences. In other words, there has been some talk,but it has only been in general terms, about the banks and a cap on-28-3/26-27/84payment of interest rates; and any rise in interest rates would becapitalized so that it wouldn't disturb the cash flow projections andthe financing that has been arranged for the year. So far there isnothing very concrete, even though there has been a good deal of talk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply discussing different potential scenarios and options regarding interest rates and financing arrangements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 355.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I detect an interesting phenomenon in thisarea. When you talk to the banking statesmen, if there are suchpeople--or to those who would like to think they are banking statesmenat large banks or small banks or American banks or foreign banks--theytalk very freely about reducing interest rates and the need forconcessions, for caps, or whatever. When their delegates arrive atthe banks' advisory committee meetings that atmosphere seems to benoticeably absent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The author mentions a difference in the views expressed by banking statesmen when talking individually and when they gather as delegates in advisory committee meetings. This implies a discrepancy in the attitudes or positions held by these individuals.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 356.
 I think it's fair to say that we can have formalconversations that probably encourage larger thinking but it doesn'tget transmitted very much in their--MR. BALLES. That's surprising, because I know that at leastat two of our big banks on the West Coastthose at the top level have stated that they feelconcessions ought to be made on interest rates. I wasn't aware thatthe people who show up at these meetings are taking a different view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests disagreement or contention as the speaker states that formal conversations encourage larger thinking but are not transmitted widely. However, Mr. Balles contradicts this by mentioning that top-level executives at two big banks on the West Coast have expressed the opinion that concessions should be made on interest rates. This implies a difference in views between the speaker and Mr. Balles.


Passage number 357.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. by and large does notshow up at these meetings. does. In some cases wherebanks were not at these meetings, I could only report an impression.I don't try to track all these down. Bankers who have talked inrather sweeping terms are also reported to be with banks that don'twant to participate or want to raise the interest rate when thetelegrams go out. They think the terms are too narrow. I don't thinkI'm completely misreading this situation: There's a difference betweenthe guy [whose] bonus is being determined by the performance of theseloans and the interest rates on them and the executives who aresomewhat above those levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly presents the author's observations about the participation of banks in meetings and their views on interest rates, without indicating any conflicting opinions or conflicting interpretations of the situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 358.
MR. BOEHNE. Some of the regional bankers in my territoryhave said that they won't kick another dime into these but they wouldtalk about interest rate concessions. Apparently what you are sayingis that they will talk about it, but that's about as far as it goes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The regional bankers are not willing to contribute more money, while the speaker is suggesting that they should consider interest rate concessions.


Passage number 359.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a lot of very tricky problems arisein interest rate concessions or roll-ups or whatever in maintainingany sense that these loans are then currently performing and[unintelligible]. That raises a whole range of other problems abouthow many reserves and so forth and it changes the whole nature of thenegotiation with foreign countries. There's a legitimate fear thatonce they began making concessions, where does it stop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a discussion about the potential problems and consequences associated with making interest rate concessions or roll-ups in loans.


Passage number 360.
MR. BOEHNE. Right. I was told by the regional bankers in myterritory that regional banks around the country were getting togetherto come up with a uniform approach to the next round when they wouldbe asked to kick in more. But I never did actually hear the result ofthat get-together. Have you heard anything about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is simply stating the information he received, and he is seeking clarification or confirmation from the other person.


Passage number 361.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, and I don't think it's verylikely, or practical either, for them to organize and talk that waybecause among the banks that aren't coming along there is a mixture.There are very few of the important regional banks that don't comealong eventually, although there may be 30 or 40 of the smaller banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that it is not likely or practical for the banks to organize and talk in a certain way, without any mention of disagreement or contention among them.


Passage number 362.
-29-3/26-27/84MR. BOEHNE. I think the next time you try to get them tocome along it's going to be a heck of a lot tougher than the lasttime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's belief that it will be more difficult to convince a group of people to come along in the future compared to the past.


Passage number 363.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It gets a lot tougher not just for them;it gets tougher for the bigger banks and for the European banks. Thewhole process is getting tougher. But if you want to look at theother side of it and hold this thing together a while longer, it isquite feasible, as I suggested earlier, that Mexico will come backnext year and we can forget about all those regional banks and smallerbanks. And maybe the bigger banks wouldn't have to provide anythingeither. That doesn't say there isn't a lot of refunding to be done.But I think it's easier if we can make a distinction betweenrestructuring or refunding and new money. Mexico might be gettingclose to becoming a country that in some sense has made the adjustmentand isn't totally dependent upon these greatly ginned up programs.And then people will begin saying yes, conceivably they are beginningto see the end of the process--"end" is stretching a little, but atleast an end of the process of a mass draft of new money for onecountry--and we can begin looking more hopefully at other countries.But we have to hold it together for a little while longer before thatcan happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the challenges and possibilities related to the restructuring and refunding of banks in Mexico.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 364.
MR. FORRESTAL. There was some talk in my District, Mr.Chairman, about the banks getting together in connection with theBrazilian situation to resist any kind of new money going in but thatnever did materialize either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions some talk about banks getting together in connection with the Brazilian situation to resist any new money going in, but it ultimately states that it never materialized. This implies that there was disagreement or contention among the banks regarding the issue.


Passage number 365.
 I was going to ask some--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The basic arithmetic here, of course, isstill very strong. They can sit there and talk about not getting anynew money. The fact is that they're getting more interest out of allthese countries and they're putting in new money. It may be nice tosay the choice is no new money, but the response of the [debtor]country is no interest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the debtor country receiving more interest and new money, without expressing any conflicting views.


Passage number 366.
MR. FORRESTAL. In that connection, if the Argentineans don'tmake an accommodation with the IMF and these loans are put into anonperforming status, does that automatically trigger a technicaldefault on the part of Argentina.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question about the potential consequences if Argentina does not make an accommodation with the IMF.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it could. In some sense they're intechnical default now. They're in a position where a lot of bankscould say Argentina is in default if they wanted to take action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is merely presenting a possibility or suggestion that banks could consider Argentina to be in default.


Passage number 368.
MR. FORRESTAL. Are the Europeans likely to do that, forexample. That's what I was thinking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or differing viewpoints. It is a simple question asking for speculation about the likelihood of a certain event, without any conflict present.


Passage number 369.
MR. ROBERTS. It just takes one, doesn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Roberts, is making a statement rather than engaging in a debate or discussion.


Passage number 370.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a mixture of opinion in Europeand a mixture of opinion in the United States. So far they've heldranks, but I think the nonperforming status will give some of themthat idea. It will be an event. We will see what happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It only mentions a mixture of opinion in Europe and the United States, and speculates about the potential impact of a nonperforming status.


Passage number 371.
MR. GUFFEY. Is there any significance to the fire in yourashtray.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking about the significance of a fire in the ashtray.


Passage number 372.
MR. GRAMLEY. He's an arsonist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "He's an arsonist" simply presents a fact without any conflicting views or opinions being expressed.


Passage number 373.
-30-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. This is because the passage consists of a series of dates and numbers, and it does not present any opinions, arguments, or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 374.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, just a point. When these loans arerenegotiated and when regional banks do express reluctance on variousgrounds, is it sometimes appropriate when that happens for presidentsto make calls and just state the Federal Reserve's position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. HORN is making a statement and asking a question about the appropriate actions in certain situations.


Passage number 375.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were trying to avoid that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses a clear and unified intention of avoiding something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 376.
MS. HORN. Yes, and so am I. Sometimes we get calls fromstaff members from various places and it's a little hard--at leastspeaking for myself--to read the seriousness of the problem andwhether it really does warrant a Fed president stepping in or whetherto tell these staff members that they really ought to try the regularchannels [through] the correspondent banks. It's a little hard toread the calls we're getting from the System to the banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention about how to handle calls from staff members and whether the Federal Reserve president should become involved or if the regular channels should be used.


Passage number 377.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From the System.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 378.
MS. HORN. From the Federal Reserve System to the banks.Sometimes I get calls from staff members either in Washington or NewYork suggesting that I call this, that, and the other bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 379.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 380.
MS. HORN. No, during these negotiations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states "No" in response to a question.


Passage number 381.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But even then, wasn't it couched interms of asking the banks what their view was on this matter andwhether they were going to go along or weren't going to go along.[Unintelligible] stating the Board's policy as we saw it but sayingthat, of course, they have to make up their own mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a perspective but acknowledges that the banks have the autonomy to make their own decisions.


Passage number 382.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are raising the specter in my mindthat there are more such calls than I was aware of. And I hope that'snot the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fear or concern that there may be more calls than the speaker was previously aware of.


Passage number 383.
MR. PARTEE. Always a disturbing thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any kind of contention or disagreement. It is a standalone statement without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 384.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have not been encouraging such calls.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the author has not been encouraging such calls, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 385.
MR. PARTEE. Unless we are prepared to guarantee the loans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is making a statement about a condition that needs to be met in order to guarantee the loans. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 386.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we did those about a year ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a fact about something that happened in the past.


Passage number 387.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the case of Mexico I can recall thatthere were a few calls of inquiry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is providing a personal recollection of a few calls of inquiry regarding Mexico.


Passage number 388.
 I'm not aware of any since then,but maybe I'm--MR. ROBERTS. Yes, Brazil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is not aware of any contention or disagreement since then and acknowledges that they may not have complete information.


Passage number 389.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, in the case of Brazil there werea few but not very many.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement mentions that there were a few disagreements but not many.


Passage number 390.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't think there were any on thisrecent Brazilian exercise. I'd be interested in knowing where thatcame from. Any other questions in this area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing curiosity and open to receiving more information. They express interest in finding out the source of the information and are open to any further questions in that area.


Passage number 391.
-31-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE. What did happen with the dollar this morning,Gretchen. You seemed to allude to a decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating that there was a discussion about the decline of the dollar in the morning.


Passage number 392.
MS. GREENE. It eased somewhat from Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Greene, states that the situation eased somewhat from Friday without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 393.
MR. PARTEE. Just somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 394.
MS. GREENE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The given response is incomplete and does not provide any context. Without more information, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 395.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A four-pfenig drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "A four-pfenig drop" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement without any conflicting views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 396.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to revert to the other issue: I havetold the banks when they have asked that it's their job to round upall these things. I've made some statements about general support forthe program, which they can use in public, but not in terms ofcontacting individual banks. [Let's turn to] domestic open marketoperations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 397.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only includes a statement made by Mr. Sternlight.


Passage number 398.
]MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I need more context or the actual passage in order to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 399.
 Peter, do you anticipate a situation like wehad in September when we had all that money just pouring into our--MR. STERNLIGHT. It looks very much as though it could bethat large or even a little larger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question followed by a statement that suggests a similar situation may occur.


Passage number 400.
MS. TEETERS. Do you expect the total balance to go up intothe $30 to $40 billion area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking for an expectation of the total balance going up to a specific range.


Passage number 401.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Our figures have it up to about $40 or $42billion, something like that. I think the Board staff's projectionsare not quite that high, but not far from it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is simply stating the figures and acknowledging that the Board staff's projections are slightly lower but still close to his estimate.


Passage number 402.
MS. TEETERS. And there's no indication on the part of theTreasury to cut back on their borrowing to compensate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is no indication of the Treasury cutting back on their borrowing.


Passage number 403.
MR. STERNLIGHT. They cut back a little on Treasury bills acouple of weeks ago. I've been having conversations suggesting areview of that. But I don't think we'll get very much help there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there was a cutback on Treasury bills and suggests a review of the situation. The statement about not expecting much help does not create any disagreement either.


Passage number 404.
MR. RICE. Does it seem likely that these funds will staywith you as long as they did last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply asks for an opinion about the likelihood of funds staying with someone.


Passage number 405.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [The Treasury balance] comes down again inearly May, fairly fast. I don't have a very clear time profile,Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 406.
MR. PARTEE. There could be a debt limit problem couldn'tthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows a statement made by Mr. Partee, suggesting the possibility of a debt limit problem. This opens up the possibility for disagreement or debate regarding the existence or severity of such a problem.


Passage number 407.
MR. STERNLIGHT. In early May I think there could be debtlimit problem, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply agrees that there could be a debt limit problem in early May.


Passage number 408.
MR. PARTEE. I move it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement by one person, Mr. Partee, who has an intention to take action. There is no indication of disagreement or contention as there are no other individuals mentioned or conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 409.
MS. TEETERS. I second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The line simply states that Ms. Teeters is seconding the statement or proposal being discussed.


Passage number 410.
3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there is no objection, we will approve[the recommended leeway increase] with a note in the commentary thatthis is in reaction to a very large increase in the Treasury balanceand not monetary policy. We have to ratify the transactions since thelast meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing the approval of a recommended leeway increase, with a note that it is in response to a large increase in the Treasury balance rather than monetary policy. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 411.
MS. TEETERS. We didn't ratify the foreign currency ones, didwe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is simply asking a question without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 412.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There were none.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 413.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a question asking if there is a motion.


Passage number 414.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot determine without the passage.


Passage number 415.
MS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided.


Passage number 416.
 TEETERS and MR. RICE. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It only mentions the names "TEETERS" and "MR. RICE." There is no information to indicate any conflict or difference of opinion between them.


Passage number 417.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection" indicates that there is agreement or consent from all parties involved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 418.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is a statement made by Mr. Kichline, but it is unclear what the statement is without referring to the Appendix. Therefore, there is potential for disagreement or contention in the interpretation of his statement.


Passage number 419.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The [next] item on my agenda says:Committee discussion of economic situation and policy implications.Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the next agenda item is a discussion of the economic situation and policy implications.


Passage number 420.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, the Eleventh District economy isgrowing, although somewhat unevenly. The weakness in the energysector has caused manufacturing to be sluggish, but most economicreports indicate that both residential and nonresidential constructionhave continued their strong growth. In the District, the S&Lsituation, which has been in the national news, is a matter ofconcern. In Texas the S&Ls had a 32 percent increase in assets in1983 and the federally insured S&Ls from Texas closed about $20billion in loans in 1983 as compared to $9 billion in 1982. Ofcourse, we had the closing of Empire Savings in Mesquite, Texas, whichis out where I had mentioned earlier the land switching that was goingon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is giving information and stating facts about the economy in the Eleventh District of Texas.


Passage number 421.
MR. PARTEE. You never said it was Mesquite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 422.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, it's right out there next to the cowboys.It's the largest S&L closure in the history of the corporation. Mynotes say that it was caused by funding questionable real estatedevelopment loans with a deposit base that consisted of 90 percentjumbo CDs and 10 percent core deposits and that about $9-1/2 million,or roughly 3 percent, is uninsured. Office construction continuesstrong. Just to cite Dallas as an example: In January we had 15million square feet of office space under construction compared to a3-year average rate of about 8 million square feet. Vacancy rates inDallas are around 22 to 23 percent and in Houston are 26 percent.Most people we talk to seem quite concerned about the whole realestate picture, particularly that there has been so much built in themultifamily area; but a lot of that concern is now beginning to shiftto single-family construction, although the pace of activity doesn'tseem to slow down. There are anecdotal comments such as that theMesquite situation was the tip of the iceberg and that there are somereal problems in the making out there. Land prices continue to jump--and jump daily. wanted to buy a little piece of3/26-27/84land in downtown Dallas for a parking lot. The owner was asking $40 asquare foot. He offered $38 and the seller didn't take it and twoweeks later he bought it for $52. So, it's moving pretty fast.On the agriculture side--and on the call the other day somequestion was raised about agriculture--our feeling is that creditconditions at our District agricultural banks are characterized bymostly improved cash flows for District farmers who are cotton farmersand ranchers who are livestock producers; both now enjoy profitableprice levels for their products. The feed, grain, and wheat farmersare probably faced with over-production. The rate of loan repaymentseems to have quickened and farmers are requesting fewer renewals andextensions right now, although the longer-term outlook still causes usa little concern, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and sharing their opinion on various topics, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 423.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your comments raise a number of questionsin my mind. Let me just cite some of them and other people cancomment on them. On this last issue, the agricultural situation, yourcomments are not what I am getting from some people in the Midwest.They say the banks are liquid enough but the ability to repay after afew years is getting less. Land appraised values have declined andland price [declines] if anything are accelerating and a lot offarmers are getting increasingly stuck. On this energy situation thatyou started out with, my impression is that in recent months it hasbeen getting a little worse or going downhill instead of uphill forsome reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement or contention regarding the agricultural and energy situations. The speaker mentions that their impression of the agricultural situation differs from what they have heard from some people in the Midwest, and they also mention their observation that the energy situation has been deteriorating instead of improving.


Passage number 424.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, we did get an improvement inthe rig count; it has backed off a little but it seems to be comingback slightly. It's still a difficult situation but what I see atleast is that whatever movement there is seems to be a little on thepositive side. I'd say that there is not further deterioration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states that there has been an improvement in the rig count and acknowledges that the situation is still difficult. However, the speaker also notes that there seems to be some positive movement.


Passage number 425.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Prices of unused rigs went up a littlefrom a very low level and have begun receding again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that prices of unused rigs increased slightly and are now decreasing again.


Passage number 426.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, I would think that reflects the demand.We had a little uptick in drilling and that has slackened off a bit.I don't have any specific knowledge of the price but I know there isan abundant supply stacked up in the yards. So, if the price istrending down, people might not be able to hold those things forever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact and speculation about the market situation.


Passage number 427.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I just don't comprehend what isgoing on down there with all this land speculation and the S&Ls andall of that. I'm confused [unintelligible] exposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual expressing confusion and lack of understanding about land speculation and S&Ls.


Passage number 428.
MR. BOYKIN. It's difficult for me, as I say, to get a feelfor this. The banks tell us that they don't feel exposed--that whatthey are doing is good and that it will be all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement by Mr. Boykin and mentions the stance of banks without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 429.
 The S&Ls, Ithink, have fully anticipated that there will be fallout from Mesquiteand that there are a number of other S&Ls--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are almost 50 S&Ls down there thathave grown by more than 100% in the last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply provides information about the expectations of the S&Ls.


Passage number 430.
MR. BOYKIN. Right. And the largest increase was a thousandand some odd percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is presenting a fact about the largest increase, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 431.
-34-3/26-27/84MS. TEETERS. Are these brokered deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, the passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "TEETERS" without providing any context or information to determine what it refers to.


Passage number 432.
MR. BOYKIN. Mostly it seems to be brokered deposits, andabout half of the money is going into construction loans as opposed tojust the mortgages at the end. They are taking equity positions.They are--well, like Mesquite. They were building up the value daily,two or three transactions a day, and getting it up to the price wherethey wanted it and then packaging it and selling it out to lesssophisticated small S&Ls out in the country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating facts about the types of deposits and loans being made by certain institutions.


Passage number 433.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And in many cases apparently making noattempt to sell the houses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that in many cases, there is no attempt to sell the houses.


Passage number 434.
MR. PARTEE. Less sophisticated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention as it only includes a statement without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 435.
MS. TEETERS. The most recent housing starts figures showed avery large increase in multifamilies in the Southern and Southwesternareas. And you seem to have an increase in commercial building also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating facts about the recent housing starts figures showing a large increase in multifamilies in the Southern and Southwestern areas, as well as an increase in commercial building.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 436.
MR. BOYKIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Explanation: The word "Yes" suggests that there is disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 437.
MS. TEETERS. What is your vacancy rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is straightforward and does not involve any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 438.
MR. BOYKIN. The vacancy rate is about 22 percent in officebuildings; I was told by a broker that the warehouse constructionseems to be doing a little better. Prices had been going for about$2.00 a square foot right before the first of the year and now thoseprices are up to $2.35 to $2.50 a square foot. I'm trying to rememberwhat the absorption rate percentage is and I really can't, but thefeeling is that the absorption is picking up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating facts and observations about the vacancy rate and prices in office buildings and warehouses.


Passage number 439.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you explain this record or near-record volume of office building in a city that has a 25 percentvacancy rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the record or near-record volume of office building in a city with a 25 percent vacancy rate. There is no contention or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 440.
MR. BOYKIN. A lot of optimism and the fact, first of all,Mr. Chairman, that the funds are available. Take the big build-up infunds in S&Ls, for example. We know they are going to have to dosomething with that money and they are trying to shove it out as fastas they can. On the office building side, there seems to be enoughactivity to continue to encourage developers and builders.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an optimistic view and states that there are funds available for investment in S&Ls and office buildings, which encourages developers and builders.


Passage number 441.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is happening to the price on allthese existing buildings that have all these vacancies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking a question about the current state of prices on buildings with vacancies. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 442.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, there have been a lot of concessions made.If you want a year's free rent, that's not too hard to get on a five-year lease. There has been some shaving of prices but I would say theprice is pretty well holding at around the $20 a square foot level butwith incentives such as paying moving costs or maybe a year's freerent or something like that. That is the way they have been doing it.I heard fairly reliably that a small insurance company went out to theLos Galenos area close to Dallas-Fort Worth and took a very long-termlease and got the first 5 years free.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 443.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think you can build a new buildingany place at these interest rates and expect to rent it at $20 asquare foot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing disbelief or doubt about the feasibility of renting a new building at a specific rate in the given interest rate context.


Passage number 444.
-35-3/26-27/84MR. BOYKIN. No. We just started a hole for the first of twoof our Twin Towers. The excavation is underway. There is a bankthat's going to be the lead tenant of that. A 55 story building wasjust topped off for [unintelligible]. Mercantile Bank has announcedtheir 60 story building. The InterFirst building is a 70 storybuilding; the steel is about half way up. There continue to be newannouncements about an area we call the "crescent development." Theyjust dug the biggest hole that has ever been dug in Dallas and it's onthe north side outside the loop. It's going to have a really firstclass hotel and three office buildings of over 20 stories, anotherhotel, shops, and an underground parking garage for about 2600 cars.And that [project] is underway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a factual description of ongoing construction projects in Dallas.


Passage number 445.
MS. TEETERS. Are there vacancies in the residential area orare the sales of new houses--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It only asks if there are vacancies in the residential area or if new houses are being sold.


Passage number 446.
MR. BOYKIN. New houses are selling. Used houses are turningover now. Three of four sold in my neighborhood that had been on themarket three or four days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage simply states facts about the current real estate market without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 447.
MS. TEETERS. You don't have the same evidence of excesscapacity in the residential sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the lack of evidence regarding excess capacity in the residential sector.


Passage number 448.
MR. BOYKIN. No, but now in the multifamily area it does seemto me that we really are overbuilt. The condos built at Faulknerpoint, which the Mesquite Empire Savings & Loan was behind, consist ofover 6,000 units, which is estimated to be about a 7- to 12-yearsupply. They have over 6,000 vacant and they are selling them at arate of about 20 a month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the overbuilding of condos at Faulknerpoint and the high number of vacant units. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 449.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 450.
MR. KEEHN. I thought I might amplify a bit on the commentsthat I made on the phone last week about the agricultural sector. Inour area there are some parts of the District where the agriculturalproblems are getting somewhat on the serious side but there are somecontradictions that are developing on the positive side. Commodityprices have improved from what were very low levels. The opportunityfor exports seems improved, particularly to the Soviet Union and toAfrica, and certainly that picture ought to be improving rather thandeteriorating. And we expect that the participation in the 1984 grainprogram will be higher than we might have thought several weeks ago.So, in the short term, the situation seems to be better and wouldprovide for an improved situation. But having said that, there aresome serious longer-term problems. I think it is fair to say thatsome parts of the area are going through a significant transition. InIowa, for example, 50 percent of the farm land is debt free and for 35percent [more] the debt level is reasonable. Then you get down to the15 percent where the troubles really are developing. There the debtlevels are high and the debt was created as a result of purchasingland at values that were exceptionally high. The land values hadgotten out of the economic production scheme and were really prettymuch relating to inflation. As inflation has backed off, farm valueshave gone down and the debt has built up. That, as a consequence, iscausing the problems that you see [reported] so much in the press,which are not necessarily reflective of the agricultural sector as awhole. There are also a couple of timing considerations. First, thisis line renewal time for most of the agricultural banks and I think-36-3/26-27/84the banks put a pretty special focus on their credit exposures. Also,it's a time when farm auctions are typically taking place so that thewhole problem and the emotionalism that is involved with that comesback into focus. And then, frankly, it's a slow time of the year. Itis February or March before things begin to pick up and as aconsequence that gives people an opportunity to talk about it. Idon't in any way suggest that the problems aren't serious. They are.But I think they are not necessarily reflective of the conditionsthroughout our District as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily providing information and analysis about the agricultural sector.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 451.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you look at the aggregate figures--Idon't remember them offhand but somebody here collects data and makesan estimate--there are a lot more than 15 percent that have theseheavy debt burdens. It's a minority but it's very sizable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is contention or disagreement. The speaker initially states that they don't remember the aggregate figures, but someone else in their presence does. This indicates a potential difference in perspectives or interpretations of the data. Additionally, the statement that there are "a lot more than 15 percent" with heavy debt burdens implies disagreement or discrepancy with a previous claim or commonly accepted belief.


Passage number 452.
MR. KEEHN. Well, I'm really referring to Iowa particularly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a statement made by someone.


Passage number 453.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Iowa is probably better off. Thecalculation of average farm income relative to assets is 2 percent.If a farmer has 25 percent of his farm mortgage at 13 percent, the 2percent is gone. I don't know what the correct number is, but itdoesn't take very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information without any opposing viewpoints or disagreement. It discusses the calculation of average farm income relative to assets and mentions that a certain percentage would be affected if a farmer has a specific mortgage percentage. However, there is no explicit contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 454.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're talking about 2 percent gross,before servicing debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 455.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This question cannot be answered without a specific passage provided.


Passage number 456.
 All expenses before interest--MR. PARTEE. Your investment sector has done quite a bitbetter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply about the investment sector performing well.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 457.
MR. KEEHN. Yes, Chuck. I think it's a fair comment withregard to the industrial sector that those parts that are susceptibleto a cyclical improvement are indeed experiencing it. Many of them,particularly those that are consumer-related, are doing very well. Infact, many are right up to the top on capacity. The sectors that arehaving a problem are those that are dealing with some pretty secularproblems; they are doing better this year than they were last year butnowhere near as well as some of the other parts. But I think they arebeyond the scope of monetary policy. They have some special problemsall their own.I must say I've been very impressed with the continuedprogress on the wage side. People I talk to are still settlingcontracts in the 4 to 5 percent area but nearer 4 than 5. And theyexpect to have a pretty good year this year, although they are allvery, very apprehensive about the auto negotiations. They can do wellnow but if the auto negotiations go badly, that would create adifferent environment. On the price side, though, those sectors thatare doing well and are up toward the top of their capacity arebeginning to move through price increases with some success. Theyfeel growingly encouraged that they are going to be able to put theprice increases in and make them stick. So, particularly in thosesectors that are doing well, the price pressures are beginning togrow; and with the passage of time that could be a significant risk.Broadly, I think the answer to your question is that the industrialoutlook in the Middle West is far better than it has been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that some sectors are doing well and experiencing improvement, while others are not. They mention that the sectors facing problems have "some special problems all their own" and are not within the scope of monetary policy. This suggests that there may be differing opinions on the effectiveness of monetary policy in addressing the issues faced by these sectors.


Passage number 458.
-37-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It consists of a math expression and the name "Mr. Boehne."


Passage number 459.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, Si said some of what I was going to say.My District, particularly the Pennsylvania part of it, has been one ofthe slowest in the whole country. Every time we have looked at it,the District as a whole has only been 10th, 11th, or 12th [among theFederal Reserve Districts]. And yet as we look over what has beenhappening, there really is a broad base to our recovery. Inmanufacturing, it looks to us as though we have been having the mostsignificant growth period since 1977-1978. Manufacturing has beenexpanding now for about a year and a quarter. We are also noticingthe same kinds of things that Si reported. We do an informal surveyamong the biggest manufacturers in our District. About a year ago,for example, only about 5 percent were reporting any kind of pricepressure. What we find now is that about 40 percent of them arereporting higher input prices. We see it particularly in thefabricated metals area and some in printing. So, it really is arecovery that is hitting our manufacturing area. We've tended to comeup last in these areas, yet it's clearly the strongest in a half dozenyears.Outside manufacturing I have just some anecdotal evidence.I've gone to a couple of shopping centers over the last severalweekends and I couldn't find a parking place. Sales volumes are veryhigh; they are running something like 20 percent over a year ago.Real estate [activity] is quite brisk. It's about average with therest of the country and that's really quite good for our areatraditionally. The banks are reporting rather substantially higherincreases in consumer loans, in particular, and to some extent inbusiness loans. On the agriculture side--Pennsylvania is a bigagriculture state, although most people tend to think of the Midwest--the big problem in recent months has been the Avian flu problem withpoultry. That has turned around. What we hear about weakness is inthe export business. Again, just to add on to what Si said,unemployment is still high in some of the industries that have morethan cyclical problems--those with secular problems. However, I didfind as I talked to a lot of people around the District, that they aremuch happier than they were, obviously, with this pretty good increaseover the last year but they almost plead "Don't end the party sosoon." They say it has been a half dozen years of pretty rough timesand it has been especially rough from about 1980. It has just been avery long dry spell and they are beginning to feel better about it.Most of them see a relationship between their own business andinterest rates. There is much more awareness of [the effect of]interest rates on their business than I have seen. They talk a lotabout the deficit. But even though business is much better, theycontinue to think it's not going to last very long because they seeinterest rates going up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is providing information and observations about the recovery in his district, as well as the concerns and attitudes of the people he has spoken to.


Passage number 460.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you hear about wages when youtalked to them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide information about any contention or disagreement. It simply asks about the wages the person heard about when they talked to someone.


Passage number 461.
MR. BOEHNE. The same as Si. I think the wage increasesgenerally have been fairly modest. We're seeing that in the publicsector. Philadelphia, with its new mayor, has taken a pretty hardline this year with the public area. There is concern that the auto[negotiations] might set a new pattern, but so far wage increases havenot shown any material increase. As I indicated a moment ago, there-38-3/26-27/84are some inflationary pressures on the price side, especially in thoseindustries that have had some cyclical upturn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing information about wage increases and inflationary pressures without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 462.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 463.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Tenth District hasenjoyed some of the strength that has been evident in the economyelsewhere. There are two or three areas to mention, and I'll focuslargely upon your question with respect to the agricultural sector.As you know, we do a rather extensive quarterly agricultural survey ofbank lending and the most recent one indicates that there is somestability felt among the bankers--stability in the sense that thingsare not getting worse and that they are manageable. But there's avery long period of adjustment [ahead] for the agricultural sector.In terms of specificity, they look to the projections for net farmincome in 1984 that are now running some 50 percent greater than netfarm income in 1983. Part of that is the PIK program that has comeearly in 1984 in which the sales have taken place of grain that hasbeen shipped to the producers themselves. So, some of that income hasalready taken place. They have serviced the current debt and as aresult the banks are feeling somewhat comfortable about the upcomingperiod. But the point that I think should not be lost is that thereis nothing on the horizon that they can see, absent a Russian graindeal or some other magnificent event, by which the agriculturalsituation is going to improve from this rather low stable level--inparticular in the debt service area. Farm liquidations were a verysmall percentage of farm holdings; that has gone up modestly. Therehas been some voluntary liquidation--that is, encouragement by thelender to liquidate in order to service debt--but that again hasstabilized. I think you have to understand when you're talking aboutthe agricultural community that, as Si indicated, January, Februaryand March are times that they sit around the hot stove and talk aboutproblems. It's only when the sun begins to warm things up and the sapbegins to rise that optimism comes back into that area. There hasbeen a pickup on Main Street of small ticket farm equipment sales butthe large machinery sales are still very weak. But there is someencouragement on the agricultural input side--I'm talking particularlyof [sales of] chemicals and fertilizers, which have been very brisk.In other words, the producers are anticipating large plantings thisyear and have the money to put into fertilizers and chemicals.Energy and mining are still very weak, particularly energy.Just to give you a benchmark: The last report that I have is that thenumber of oil rigs working in the Tenth District is 716; that's upfrom a low level of 574 a year ago contrasted with 1981 levels ofabout 1600. So, there is some modest exploration and production goingon but it is indeed modest. With respect to the general aviationsector, there is a good deal of optimism. They are not producing butthey think and still hope that production is going to increase in thelatter part of the year. In the commercial construction field, Denveris beginning to have an absorption rate of their overbuilt situationthat looks very favorable. Kansas City and Omaha have what might becharacterized as a commercial construction boom. In Kansas City therehave been seven major downtown office buildings announced within thelast 90 days and two or three of them have holes in the ground and areready to come out. That is in contrast to Tulsa and Oklahoma City,which essentially are overbuilt in the commercial area. We have seenno real evidence of pressures in the area of wage increases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about different sectors of the economy and their current conditions.


Passage number 464.
-39-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states an equation or expression without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 465.
MS. HORN. We are approaching capacity in a number of ourindustries. In autos, given the current mix of demand, we're atcapacity for the larger types of cars. Those steel products relatedto eventual consumer products are going at capacity. Aluminum is verymuch using its capacity. Alcoa is talking now about doing a lot ofingot importing because they are so backed up. They are at capacityrelative to the current plants and construction. Of course, all thesecompanies have plants that they closed down during the last recession.They are at this point deciding not to reopen them. Heavy trucks aregoing full out--light trucks a little less--as are [the companies thatproduce] the equipment that goes into these heavy trucks. The tireindustry is at more than capacity, working every shift their unionswill let them. Of course, we have our weak points. One is electricalmachinery. Foundries--the ones that are still open, which are veryfew--still haven't gotten their first order, so to speak. Machinetool orders are up, though that is not yet really reflected in termsof their production strengthening a great deal. The reaction to allthis strength seems to be, as I mentioned earlier, not reopening theold capacity but concentrating on more efficiency within the currentcapacity and not bringing back workers but doing a lot of overtime orsub-contracting. All of these reactions I think come from a couple ofcauses. Number one is a skepticism about the future--fear of highinterest rates and so forth. Another reason for these reactions isone that I view as very healthy. I think we are seeing some reactionto the intensity of foreign competition and people are now beginningto manage their businesses a little differently. We really hear aboutinventory control, about schemes to change the way of manufacturingfrom having huge plants and more people than they can manageefficiently to having smaller plants. They are working on set-uptimes and on the quality of the final product and so forth. We'rehearing a lot about those adjustments and the new manufacturingtechniques, if you will. And, of course, these techniques are used inservice industries as well in order to meet competitive pressures.So, while I don't believe in discontinuities and in sudden and drasticchanges in productivity and quality, I do think we really are seeingsome significant differences in this recovery that I think represent abeginning of a trend.What all this has to do with prices is less clear. Icertainly agree with a comment that was made that these people wantmore time in the recovery. Of course, these folks that I'm talkingabout particularly may have waited a long time to take part in therecovery as their industries are being affected at this stage in therecovery. They will talk about concern about future inflation butthere is less support when you say this may be the point in therecovery when we need to do something about it. They say "But give usa little more time." So the public opinion out there is that, yes,there is a problem of future inflation but don't do anything too soonabout it. Now, when we ask these people what effect this is having ontheir prices right now and what effect it will have in the future, I'mnot sure the story is completely believable. What is happening now,of course, they are honest about. We see so far some little increasein prices in these industries. There is a dissatisfaction with profitmargins and they don't expect too much cost pressure on that side inthe future. And then they say they are not going to increase prices--that they aren't going to be able to. And I think that's just a-40-3/26-27/84current pessimism. They are dissatisfied with their margins and Ithink they are just waiting for the moment. We've seen a littlenarrowing of the discounts in steel but that isn't very broad yet. Inautos we've seen some shifting between models and some restoration ofdealer margins and so forth.I might just make a comment looking to the auto contract.The one piece of information I can add to the discussion is on theindustry side. Of course, with the new union leader, the union ismaking the expected strong sounds. I have from a private source inthe industry--however, a source that I think wouldn't involve too muchposturing by the company--that, in fact, the company is ready to standfor a very long strike and that this management is making quitederogatory comments about previous managements giving the shop away,which might lend credence to the company's willingness to standstrong.Finally, in machine tools there is no price movement butthat's an industry where we don't have capacity pressures. Realestate prices have firmed and maybe increased a little. So, wehaven't really seen the price movement yet but the dissatisfactionthat is expressed by a lot of these people and the closeness tocapacity makes me think that their comments--pessimism from theirpoint of view about future price increases--may not reflect what willcome to pass and that we may get those price increases sooner ratherthan later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily provides information about various industries and their current capacity levels. There are some observations and opinions expressed by the speaker, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument.


Passage number 466.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sure that they are never satisfiedwith their profit margins but if you can believe the figures that wehave this morning, profit margins in corporate business are higher nowthan at any time in the last decade.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about profit margins in corporate business being higher now than at any time in the last decade.


Passage number 467.
MS. HORN. We have a lot of industries in the Fourth Districtthat I would think are on the bottom side of that average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Horn is simply stating a fact about industries in the Fourth District without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 468.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There must be quite a few of themelsewhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a neutral observation about the existence of a certain group of people in different locations.


Passage number 469.
MR. GUFFEY. They are all in Dallas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement of fact. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 470.
MR. MORRIS. It was also a pretty lousy decade for corporateprofits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement made by Mr. Morris is an opinion about the state of corporate profits during a specific decade. While others may have a different perspective on this matter, no explicit contention or disagreement is presented in the given passage.


Passage number 471.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right--not much beyond the firstyear of recovery. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply stating a fact without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 472.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a question for Mr.Kichline. I've been going around New England giving speeches againstthe deficit and I argue that the problem with a deficit that doesn'tdecline as the economy expands is that at some point in 1985 we arelikely to see a capital goods boom--which is clearly showing signs ofdeveloping great momentum now and by a year from now ought to haveenough momentum so that the corporate sector will have to come intothe credit markets to take a substantial amount of the total creditflows. And at that point in time interest rates are going to have togo up enough so as to squeeze back the interest sensitive sectors ofthe economy--namely housing and automobiles--sufficiently to make roomfor the increased corporate demand for credit. Now, I look at your-41-3/26-27/84projection through '85 and I don't see any squeeze on the interestsensitive sectors. Sure, housing starts come down a bit from what wehave now but throughout '85 they are running at about the same levelas in '83. And the automobile industry is projected to show asubstantial continued rise throughout the period to a levelsubstantially above the '83 level. Paul Craig Roberts might look atthis and say "Gee, that's not too bad. What are you guys worriedabout the deficit for." My questions is: Should I revise my speech.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 473.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, maybe you should leave out '85 and letthe time horizon be a bit fuzzier. I think it's very hard in anenvironment where rates are not regulated to pinpoint the time atwhich it all will explode. But I think our forecast really has in itthose sorts of pressures building. In part, the impact of the deficitis showing up even now in our view, and it has been for some time, interms of the current level of interest rates. And it shows up in theexport sector where in a sense exports are being crowded out via theforeign exchange value of the dollar. You are right that thisforecast still has growth sustained in '85. In part, you're reallylooking at continuing fiscal stimulus pushing up incomes. We do havehousing as rather the weak sector. As you mentioned, it doesn'tcollapse but it doesn't grow. Autos we have growing. Business fixedinvestment, which we have growing quite a lot in '84, slows a bit in'85; but it certainly doesn't go downhill. I guess my concern withthe deficit is not so much the crowding out argument in a given periodof time but that we are looking at a structure that over time is notdesirable. As a part of this process, business fixed investment isgoing to be a smaller part of GNP over the longer run than itotherwise would have been and interest rates are going to be higherand the interest sensitive sectors are going to get squeezed.Pinpointing it, I think, is a problem. I might note too that in '85we do have built into this forecast a very small cut in the deficit;it's about a $20 billion dollar package. But if you envision that aspart of something that would be going on in '86 and '87, presumablyyou would have beneficial effects in '85.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kichline is providing his perspective and concerns about the deficit and its impact on the economy, but there is no direct contradiction or argument presented.


Passage number 474.
MR. MORRIS. But the question is: When do we reach a level oftotal demand for credit that will require a substantial contraction inhousing. That's what I would like to know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is posing a question and expressing his curiosity about when a significant decrease in housing might be necessary due to a high demand for credit.


Passage number 475.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have demand for credit well above ourtarget already.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a fact about the demand for credit being higher than the target. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 476.
MR. MORRIS. I know. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "That's right" indicates agreement with Mr. Morris's statement.


Passage number 477.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I have difficulty answering thatquestion. I really have difficulty answering the housing questionbecause I think there are some very funny things going on. Dallas maybe one part of it but the funny things are more widespread, withadjustable rate mortgages and institutions quite willing today tooffer discounts. I have a concern that as interest rates rise we mayindeed find that housing will change more than we have forecast. Inpart, as we get into '85 all these neat things such as discountedmortgages for the first year will be at an end. That first year willhave ended and, depending on rate levels, we may find lots ofpressures in '85 that we have not been able to readily define. But Isuspect the housing number, if anything, is on the high side ratherthan the low side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 478.
-42-3/26-27/84MR. MARTIN. Frank, I would join Jim in that hypothesis ofthe [likely] scenario. What is going to happen to housing will be acredit loss not an interest rate replay of the old disintermediationprocess, because the thrift institutions can pay the market rate.They can go buy the money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement between Mr. Martin and Jim regarding their hypothesis about the housing situation.


Passage number 479.
MR. MORRIS. The issue is that if rates go high enough, theywon't be able to find enough customers who are eligible to borrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It simply states a concern that if rates increase too much, there may be a shortage of eligible borrowers.


Passage number 480.
MR. MARTIN. Oh, yes. Look at the builders that they areworking with. The Pulte homes people have now issued $4 billion worthof builder bonds so far and it's on a stairstep going up. Thebuilders and the developers they are working with will simply put upthe points on the front and raise the price of the house. They canset the loan payment in accordance with whatever it takes to move themerchandise. But I think we will have severe credit problems, maybein '85 or '86 or whenever, and substantial thrift institution lossproblems. And that's what will cut off the housing--not theavailability of funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is sharing their perspective and predicting potential future problems in the housing market.


Passage number 481.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've reached this advanced stage ofeconomic development--and I'm serious about this--where you don't evenneed a buyer for the houses in order to build them. You see thatgoing on in Dallas. It's a process of self levitation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement about the advanced stage of economic development and providing an example to support their statement.


Passage number 482.
MR. MORRIS. May I suggest that Dallas is not the UnitedStates. Certainly, I don't see a lot of speculative building inhousing going on in New England.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply making a suggestion and sharing his observation about the lack of speculative building in New England.


Passage number 483.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope Dallas is the exception.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses the speaker's hope that Dallas is different or stands out in some way, but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 484.
MR. MORRIS. I just have a hard time reconciling myself tothis picture of another year and three quarters with no seriousproblem in either housing or automobiles. I hope it works out thatway, but it just seems to me too good to be true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage shows personal doubt and skepticism expressed by Mr. Morris, but there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 485.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without knowing the specific passage you are referring to, it is impossible to accurately determine if there is contention or disagreement present. Please provide the passage in question for further analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 486.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to comment on the thriftindustry and housing and very briefly on this situation with regard tocommercial property development and the syndication process, thelimited partnership process. Accepting the staff projection ofinterest rates, we have a situation in the thrift industry in whichthe losses could run between $700 million and $2-1/2 billion,depending on certain aspects of the sale of assets by theseinstitutions. As we all know, the sale of assets has been one way inwhich they have kept their profitability and avoided losses. Ofcourse, what is happening is that the interest rate increase that hasalready occurred is affecting the turnover of the 30-monthobligations, many of which are coming due now. And the weakerinstitutions may have 40 or 50 percent of their nonbrokered--I saythat carefully--funds in and around that maturity category. So, weare seeing the beginning of a conversion of 30 or 40 percent of theliabilities at a time when that conversion of assets can run perhaps10 percent of the assets. These interest rate increases, of course,are likely to continue at least in the near term. The nonoperating-45-3/26-27/84income of these institutions, which one could look at as 15 basispoints or 20 basis points against the asset, is becoming increasinglydifficult for them to accomplish. As there is more discussion of thecredit risks and the overbuilding and the question of values, it isgoing to be more difficult for them to attain that 15 or 20 basispoints. That could push them toward the upper end of that range oflosses. And here I'm talking about 1984. Before, at lower levels ofinterest rates, there was an expectation of turning over the 30-monthpaper at lower rates than face rates. Of course, the outlook for thatindustry was one of reasonable profitability for this year. That, ofcourse, tends to push these savings banks into very deep operatinglosses. It tends to produce some reliance upon the Federal Home LoanBank System. Perhaps not unduly, it tends to force even more franticefforts to attain fee income by originating loans without, let's say,complete or careful credit analysis and risk analysis.That means, of course, that the housing numbers that are inthe Greenbook could be supported with an increasing exposure of riskfor these institutions, with what that means down the road. We'vealready seen the Mortgage Bankers Association delinquency figures.The foreclosure losses continue. That is almost never talked about inthe financial press, but the rate of foreclosure is substantial as therate of bankruptcy continues to be on a very high plateau; [so], inanother segment of the private economy the foreclosure losses are verysubstantial. With regard to the comments on commercial development,of course, the new element in housing is the builder bonds. As I'veindicated, in one case that is a rather large number. The newerelement in commercial development is, of course, the limitedpartnership syndicate that the Congress has been trying to address insome of the so-called "loophole closing" proposals. Those syndicatescontinue to flourish; the limited partnership sales are substantial.Down the road that is going to mean that these heavy vacancies aregoing to cause those partnership interests to be of little or novalue, with a resulting impact on the commercial development process.My only point is that as we witness the interest rates unfolding asgiven in this scenario here, we're building up a future problem inhousing, in development companies, and in the commercial real estatesector of the economy. All those things inevitably will producelosses and close thrift institutions and commercial banks and otherkinds of enterprises down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is expressing concerns and warning about the potential losses and problems that could arise in the thrift industry, housing, and commercial property development due to interest rate increases and risky practices. He is suggesting that these issues will lead to closures of thrift institutions and other enterprises, while also expressing disagreement with the lack of discussion about foreclosure losses in the financial press.


Passage number 487.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only provides the name "Mr. Forrestal" without any context or accompanying statements.


Passage number 488.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how much time we're going tohave tomorrow. As you know, I have to testify in the morning and Idon't know when I will get back. We may have to go to or after lunch.I'd like to get a little more done tonight, but I also am conscious oftime passing and I would ask those remaining to concentrate on pointsthat have not been made before. Mr. Roberts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their uncertain schedule for the next day and expressing a desire to be efficient with their time.


Passage number 489.
MR. ROBERTS. I think most points have been covered. I'llmake a very brief statement. In the Eighth Federal Reserve Districtthere's a very broad general feeling of optimism, confirmed by surveysthat we've done, meetings with our board and branch boards, andsessions I've had with large and small companies, commercialconstruction people, and business economists. I find no realexception to that general pattern, whereas maybe a fourth of thosepeople three months earlier would have had some remaining pessimism.There are rising expectations of price increases to come later thisyear on the heavier industry side. We hear talk in the chemicalindustry in particular about major price increases to come later on.On the consumer side, all the evidence we've picked up is ofcontinuing confidence in spending. [Representatives of] three verylarge nationally-based department stores indicated to me that salesslowed down a little in February but since then, in 10-day salesreports, each has indicated that sales have picked up again and thatthey think the earlier slowdown was weather-related. Housing is verystrong in our District. In all the major cities we're seeing someincreases in prices in the 7 to 10 percent range after stability forquite a while. Autos are very strong. Added capacity is beingplanned in the large-car category and in special areas. Chrysler justannounced an expected $350 million expenditure to produce more mini-vans, which is a red hot product in their line that they are producingin the St. Louis area. Business loan demand, according to bankersthat I've talked to, is beginning to pick up now in the major citiesof the District after having picked up some earlier in the outlyingareas. None of this is related to merger activity. In the wage area,the only indication of change that I've seen is at TWA and Ozark whereconcessions have been made by employees. I don't think that relatesto the general economy; it is a reflection of the pattern ofderegulation in that industry. I would certainly concur with the viewthat Governor Martin expressed about the shift of risk in the mortgagearea from the savings and loans to the borrowers. This is a risingconcern on the part of the major savings and loans in my District.Even though they're shifting a lot of the risk away from themselves,they are worried about the impact generally from rising interest rateson the variable rate loans. If there are any problems in my District,-49-3/26-27/84they seem to be a residual from the past and they would be in areas ofexcess real estate financing, coal mining, agriculture, and theforeign area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents the speaker's observations and findings without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 490.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles, what do you have to say thatwill add to our sum of knowledge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking Mr. Balles for his input in order to contribute to their knowledge.


Passage number 491.
MR. BALLES. I will try to make this very brief. Thebusiness statistics in the West are quite good. The aerospaceindustry, which I don't think anybody has commented on, is verystrong. Boeing is adding workers back after cutting back for twoyears in a row. Electronics demand is strong in Silicon Valley. Onecurious thing I've noted is that business statistics are better thanthe business attitudes, at least among some of our directors. Andthat requires a word of explanation. Housing and lumber, of course,are so important in the Pacific Northwest that I think some of thepessimism of the people in that industry is based on their lack offaith in the sustainability of the uptick we've had. They seeinterest rates about to rise even more and they fear that will justcut off the resumed demand that we've seen in recent months inhousing. So, they really are not holding their breath waiting for asustained uptrend in that area. On the matter of what is going on inthe mortgage area, in the West we find that almost half of themortgages made last year in California, Nevada, and Arizona, which isthe area of the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco, were based onadjustable rates. That, of course, leads right back to where the riskhas shifted. That may be the salvation of the housing industry if itkeeps up and borrowers can continue to be encouraged to go along withadjustable rate mortgages. You asked about agriculture and that'sawfully difficult to say anything about now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting various observations and information about different industries without expressing any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 492.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've heard a lot about it since then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there has been a lot of talk or information about a certain topic since a specified time.


Passage number 493.
MR. BALLES. In that case I won't add to the pessimism thathas been [related]: that there is the overhang of previous debt andthat some agricultural borrowers are having real trouble. I thinkI'll stop at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states that they will not add to the pessimism that has been discussed previously. There is no indication of a conflicting opinion or debate.


Passage number 494.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 495.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't know anything aboutwhat is happening in the agricultural sector but I do share JerryCorrigan's concerns about where the economy is going. I think thedangers are very great that the economy may grow faster than the staffis forecasting for this year. The two areas where that is most likelyto happen are business fixed investment and the change in inventories.The staff projection for business fixed investment essentially saysthat, after slightly faster growth than had been anticipated earlier,the growth rate continues from the second half on through all of 1985just where we thought it was a month ago. And indeed, it's a markedlylower rate than we're seeing currently. Business fixed investment wasgrowing at a 23 percent annual rate in real terms in the later half of1983 and that tools right down to 5 percent by the latter half of1985. I think we probably are going to see a major revision incapital spending plans develop over the first half of this year as aconsequence of the fact that the economy is growing so much morestrongly than had been widely anticipated. And I think we're going tosee, even in the Cleveland District, the beginnings of some desire to-50-3/26-27/84increase capacity. On the inventory side, the Board staff briefed usthis morning and showed us a chart on the ratio of inventories tosales, which is as low now as it was in early 1973. Of course, partof that is a consequence of better techniques of managing inventories.But it's also true that the number of companies reporting slowerdeliveries is back to where it was in late 1972. And my guess wouldbe that during the course of this year we'll see some efforts to buildup inventories relative to sales, so we'll see a bigger kick frominventory investment.On the price side, the thing that stands out most is thestaff forecast for prices relative to unit labor costs. There is onlya 0.2 difference there, with 5 percent projected for the fixed-weightdeflator for gross business product as opposed to 4.8 percent for unitlabor costs. That isn't even enough to take into account the effectsthat depreciation would bring. And the ratio of corporate profits toGNP declines during the course of 1984 from the peak in the firstquarter despite very active markets and relatively stable unit laborcosts. I just don't think that's the way businesses are going toprice this year. I think they're going to have the opportunity toimprove their profit margins and will do so. The big sleeper,however, in the price area is one that I've talked about before. Idon't know whether it's going to happen, but the labor forceprojection that the staff has included in its forecast is for growthof 2.4 million from the fourth quarter to the fourth quarter. Thatcompares with a 1.2 million increase during 1983. Now, last year'sincrease was very, very small. We did not see the kind of cyclicalincrease in the participation rate that we usually get. The staffforecast has one thing going for it now: namely, that in February wedid get a big increase in the labor force and an upward movement inthe participation rate. If this proves to be the beginning of atrend, then that forecast may be right. If it's a one-monthphenomenon and we were to see the continuation of the slow growth inthe labor force that we had last year, we'd be down to an unemploymentrate below 6 percent by the fourth quarter and then we'd have a bigproblem. The word that Bob Forrestal put out is "caution." Icertainly would agree with that and I may even be going toward a redlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker does not express disagreement or contention with any other individual or idea in this passage.


Passage number 496.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided does not give any information about Governor Wallich. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 497.
MR. WALLICH. I just wanted to comment on one aspect of theGreenbook projections. As we look at the very high first-quarter realgrowth and the tapering off very rapidly for the rest of the two-yearperiod, one gets the impression that perhaps not too much hashappened. But there is a distinction here between the level at whichthe economy operates and the rate of growth at which it operates. Andwe have now raised the level very substantially. If we have 8 percentinstead of, let's say, 4 percent for the [first] quarter, I think that[produces] 1 percent more GNP at an annual rate. And if the 6 percent[projected] for the second quarter were to materialize, that would beanother 1/2 percent of GNP over a 4 percent growth rate. That meansthere's $50 billion or so more GNP in the economy. The capacity dataseem to bear that out from the fourth quarter to the second quarter;in the forecast we're chewing up almost 4 percentage points out ofcapacity and we're really getting into the range where pressuresbecome strong. The same is true of the unemployment rate. We're nowmoving close to what is technically known as the equilibrium rate of-51-3/26-27/84unemployment. And at the same time we're encountering a verysubstantial speed effect in the sense that unemployment is coming downvery rapidly. So that factor adds to inflationary pressures. Itseems clear, finally, that inflation expectations have increased overthe last few months. That means that real interest rates, despite therise in nominal interest rates, may not have increased. They mayindeed have come down, if one could make so precise a calculation. Soon net the economy is operating at a higher level with greaterpressures, perhaps less interest rate constraint and, in a sense, moremomentum even though we see that the projected rates of growth fromthe summer on are now lower than they were in the previous forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of observations and analysis made by Mr. Wallich.


Passage number 498.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Partee, without any further information or context provided, so it's not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 499.
MR. PARTEE. Well, the question, of course, is whether in thefuture [those growth rates] are going to be that low. I agree withyour concerns and I agree with Lyle's. Clearly, the economy has beentoo darn strong for several months now and if it continues very muchlonger, we will have used up any slack we have and will be backed intoa period of a substantial inflationary pressure. We're at 81 percentcapacity utilization, I think Bob said. Even using the staffprojection, we get up to 85 percent in a not very long time. The onlytime that level exceeded 85 percent in recent years was around the endof 1977 and early 1978. And, of course, that was a period when highinflation conditions were developing. So, we have used a lot of ourcapacity and unless we do get this slowing growth in the economy thatthe staff has forecast, before we know it we will be into a period ofgrowing inflationary pressures. And that's the thing we haven'tfaced. Now, certainly, fiscal stimulus has been a problem with theeconomy. But I have some feeling that another problem has been thatthere is too much credit. If you look at the credit ratios, they arehigh compared with earlier cycles. For consumer credit and even forbusiness credit they are showing sharp increases and are getting up tothe upper end of previous ranges. Somebody who is well positioned inthe home building industry said to me not long ago that he hated totell me this but the difficulty in the home building industry was thatthe lenders were throwing money at the builders. They were callingthem up and saying "Come on, why don't you use my money. Why not havesome more starts." And that wasn't in Dallas either, Bob. It's anindication, I think, of conditions that are just too accommodative--given the backlog of demand that we perhaps have developed for housesand durables and things like that and certainly given the optimism ofconsumers, which is just too strong to have that kind of moneyavailability around. So, I see the danger much more clearly than Ihave at previous Committee meetings over the last year as being thedanger of expansion over the staff projection rather than below thestaff projection. And I think the danger of that is much greater thanbefore because of having used up the unused resources that wepreviously had available.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 500.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If nobody else wants to pronounce thebenediction, we will quit for the evening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage simply states that if no one else wants to pronounce the benediction, then the activity for the evening will end. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 501.
[Meeting recessed]3/26-27/84March 27, 1984--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states the date and session of a meeting.


Passage number 502.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply an attribution to someone named Mr. Axilrod without any additional context.


Passage number 503.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any more or less technicalquestions for Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply asks if there are any more technical questions for Mr. Axilrod.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 504.
MR. RICE. Steve, the Bluebook says that the alternative Bproposal is consistent with the staff forecast of GNP. Does that meanthat alternative B takes into account the rise in interest rates thathas already occurred. Or does it mean that it will result in anadditional rise in interest rates over and above what has occurred.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification about whether alternative B takes into account the rise in interest rates that has already occurred, or if it will result in an additional rise in interest rates over and above what has occurred.


Passage number 505.
MR. AXILROD. It assumes a funds rate--well, it says 10-1/2percent, but I'd say on the order of 10-1/4 to 10-1/2 percent. We hada 10-1/4 percent funds rate for a few days. We don't have that todayand we didn't have it yesterday, so I think that really assumes afurther rise in interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod about the assumption of a further rise in interest rates.


Passage number 506.
 Today funds are--MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 507.
 You mean a further rise from today but not from--MR. AXILROD. I would say from the average of the last twoweeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The individual mentioned is simply clarifying that they are referring to a further rise from the average of the last two weeks, not from the present time.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 508.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we should over-estimate Mr.Kichline's ability to predict the economy and even more Mr. Axilrod'sability to project interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The passage expresses doubt or skepticism towards the abilities of Mr. Kichline and Mr. Axilrod to predict the economy and project interest rates, suggesting that their abilities may be overestimated. This implies disagreement or contention with the idea of relying heavily on their predictions.


Passage number 509.
MR. RICE. But it's helpful to know what they have in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice is simply expressing his opinion or perspective.


Passage number 510.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is neutral and does not express any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 511.
MR. MORRIS. Steve, I'm surprised at the very small estimatethat you came up with on M2 with respect to the IRA accounts. We aretalking about an awful lot of money here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 512.
MR. AXILROD. That was a small estimate of the distortingeffect on the seasonal. We might have gotten some of the seasonal butit could be more; I really don't know. But that was an estimate ofhow much we thought the seasonal might be off in some reasonable way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Axilrod is uncertain about the extent of the distortion effect on the seasonal.


Passage number 513.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided does not contain enough information to accurately determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 514.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 515.
 Well, a quarter to a half [percentage point],but I would take all of that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that an annual rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a range for a percentage point and expressing willingness to accept the entire range.


Passage number 516.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. We don't think it is very large, butthat's just another way of saying we don't think we made a big errorin the seasonal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or belief.


Passage number 517.
MR. MORRIS. Do we have very good data on the IRA accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply asking a question about the availability of data on IRA accounts.


Passage number 518.
-53-3/26-27/84MR. AXILROD. We have IRA accounts at banks; unfortunately,we don't have them outside banks. No, we don't have very good dataand that's a big problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While the passage mentions a problem with not having IRA accounts outside banks and not having very good data, there is no clear contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 519.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Are there any other questions."


Passage number 520.
MR. PARTEE. Do the data you have indicate that they aregoing up faster this year than last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the data.


Passage number 521.
MR. AXILROD. Don may have [numbers on that].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 522.
MR. KOHN. I don't have the numbers, Governor Partee, butthey are growing faster this year than last year. The big jump wasfrom the year before that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the growth rate of the numbers.


Passage number 523.
MR. AXILROD. Our problem was not only the IRA and Keoghaccounts but we had to make an estimate of how much the MMDA shiftsearly last year in January should be allowed for in calculating theseasonals so as not to distort the seasonals. That, as much as theIRA/Keogh accounts, was a problem to us in estimating the seasonals.We tried to make some sense of how far we could be off if we madedifferent assumptions and we came up with this rather minimal number.But that doesn't say that the IRA/Keogh accounts didn't have bigeffects in and of themselves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the problem they faced in estimating seasonals, including the impact of IRA/Keogh accounts and the need to account for the MMDA shift. They mention different assumptions and calculations made, but there is no disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 524.
MR. CORRIGAN. You also have this big [unintelligible] inthese old, maturing 30-month certificates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the existence of a "big" element in the mentioned certificates.


Passage number 525.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply confirms a statement made by Mr. Axilrod without introducing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 526.
MR. ROBERTS. On this large increase in reserves in Februaryto accommodate the build-up in excess reserves: I notice that you sayexcess reserves are subsiding and that pretty much takes care ofitself. But if loan demand is rising and the excess reserves go intoloans, what is the effect of that prospectively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the potential effect of excess reserves going into loans when there is a rise in loan demand.


Passage number 527.
MR. AXILROD. As a matter of fact, the excess reserves seemto be running high in this two-week period in the latter part of Marchas well. But we think the excess reserve build-up has beenaccompanied by a high funds rate, so it isn't as if people are takingexcess reserves and have gotten rid of them aggressively into marketinstruments or things like that. I don't think that the build-up ofexcess reserves is pushing loans out or pushing money out. I think itis really rather transitory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents Mr. Axilrod's opinion and observations about excess reserves and their impact on loans and money flow.


Passage number 528.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have an estimate for reserves andthe monetary base for March handy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking if the person has an estimate for reserves and the monetary base for March.


Passage number 529.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. Our estimates indicate a relatively low[or slightly negative growth] and assume excess reserves a littlelower than I think is going to be the case at the end of this month.For March we would have a drop in total reserves but I think it isbest to assume that reserves are about unchanged following the 19percent increase. And the monetary base is falling to only a smallincrease of 2 to 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There doesn't seem to be contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing estimates and explaining their assumptions about reserves and the monetary base.


Passage number 530.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you have for nonborrowed reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The question asks for information or clarification about the amount of nonborrowed reserves, making it a neutral or informational statement rather than presenting any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 531.
-54-3/26-27/84MR. AXILROD. Well, we have a drop there also, and it mayeven have dropped a little more than [our estimate]. We have a dropof around 7 percent, but I think a lot of that is the distortions ofthe excess and required reserves in March. It looks as if they areincreasing about the same as they increased in February--at about an 8percent annual rate. So this variation is largely the variation inexcess reserves and some variation in borrowing. It's a sort ofsustained expansion in the reserves that is providing the base for thedeposit expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the factors contributing to a drop in reserves and deposit expansion.


Passage number 532.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions. Well, let me sum upwhat I think is a difficult situation in terms of arriving at ourpolicy judgment. Drawing upon what you people were saying yesterday,on the surface we certainly have a strong expansion. We haven't hadmuch change in the inflation picture. The wage picture to date--Imake no statement other than to date--looks surprisingly good. Therereally is no evidence, looking backward, of a real change there.Attitudes seem to be carrying over. Obviously, the issue is how tosustain progress, not just where we stand now. I think we have somevery large distortions in the economy that are becoming more apparent--they may not be apparent in quite the way many predicted--arisingout of the deficit. We have this enormous foreign trade deficit. Idon't know how big the housing industry is these days--maybe you know,Governor Martin--but I don't think it is much bigger than our foreigntrade deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a summary of the speaker's thoughts on a difficult situation regarding policy judgment.


Passage number 533.
MR. MARTIN. $100 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states a specific amount of money without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 534.
MR. PARTEE. It's more or less that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a general statement or opinion.


Passage number 535.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to illustrate the problem: We havethis decline, by whatever it has declined, and it is equivalent tolosing half or more than half of the housing industry in terms of GNP.Another way to look at it is that domestic demand has been expandingconsiderably faster than GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply presenting two different ways of looking at the same problem.


Passage number 536.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What is the estimate of domesticdemand--at least 1 percent more than GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides a specific estimate of domestic demand being at least 1 percent more than GNP.


Passage number 537.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's more than 2 percent if you takedomestic private demand. Do you have that figure handy, Mr. Zeisel.You computed it for me the other day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for a figure to be confirmed by Mr. Zeisel.


Passage number 538.
MR. ZEISEL. I'm sorry I just came walking back in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 539.
MR. KICHLINE. For the first quarter it is 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a percentage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 540.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That figure you gave me excludesgovernment, doesn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage indicates potential contention or disagreement because the speaker questions whether the figure provided excludes government.


Passage number 541.
MR. KICHLINE. It excludes government but it includesinventory investment and it allows for an adjustment of this PIKdistortion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply explains that the exclusion of government and inclusion of inventory investment in the discussion allows for an adjustment of the PIK distortion.


Passage number 542.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it would be less if you includedgovernment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply suggests that if government was included, something would be less.


Passage number 543.
MR. KICHLINE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It simply starts with the statement "MR. KICHLINE." without any additional context to suggest disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 544.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It seems to me that it's verydifficult to have as useful a discussion, and ultimately a decision onwhether and how much to tighten open market operations, if we don'tfactor in what the Board of Governors may do on the discount rate.Let's say we tightened along the lines of alternative B and presumablygot a fed funds rate in the neighborhood of 10-1/2 percent. If thenthe Board were to move the discount rate a half point, we might notget a full 50 basis points out of that move coming on top of thisbecause there is some expectational component. But I think we wouldget very close to that. So, we really would end up with somethingvirtually close to alternative C. It seems to me that we have thisproblem that doesn't usually arise. This time we have a combinationof circumstances where the markets are expecting a discount rate move.There are some good arguments for that. There are some argumentsagainst it, I'm aware. If we want to be in the posture of not sendinga strong signal that we're taking the initiative--that we are simplynot resisting the market's tendency to drive up interest rates--thereis an argument against a discount rate move. If we want to indicate amore forceful view, then there is an argument for it. All I'm saying,though, is that I don't see how we can know whether to talk in termsof the objective as alternative B or alternative C unless we have somesense as to whether there is going to be a discount rate change. Irealize that you would be reluctant to talk about that in a largegroup but I don't know quite how to address this question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging that there are arguments for and against a discount rate move, and they are unsure how to approach the decision without knowing whether there will be a discount rate change.


Passage number 545.
MR. PARTEE. You're talking about the rates, not theaggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the conversation is specifically about rates and not aggregates. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 546.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm talking about rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the speaker is discussing rates without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 547.
MR. PARTEE. I don't see how this changes the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. PARTEE is making a statement and expressing confusion about how something changes the aggregates, but there is no argument or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 548.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am certain that we are not going toarrive at a discount rate decision at this meeting. In making yourcomments you may want to make whatever observations you want from yourparticular perspective about the discount rate and how it might affectyour judgment as to what should be done on monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their certainty about not reaching a discount rate decision at the meeting and suggests that the listeners provide their observations and perspectives on the topic. The passage does not provide any conflicting or contradictory statements.


Passage number 549.
-57-3/26-27/84MR. GUFFEY. To join Tony, I have the same dilemma withrespect to which of the alternatives to select if indeed a discountrate action may be forthcoming. But the more important part as far asI am concerned is how the Desk would react to a discount rate increaseand whether it would use the post-1979 operating regime or the post-1982 regime. In other words, the latter approach would involveadjusting the borrowing level in some measure to moderate theincrease, if I understand [that regime]. If we go with the post-1979regime then we're going to get a one-for-one result--a half pointdiscount rate increase produces a half point rise in the federal fundsrate. If we use the post-1982 practice, we moderate it by adjustingthe borrowing level. I think Steve appropriately raised this issue ofwhether it will be incorporated in some measure in the directive. Butsome expression from the Desk or the Chairman as to how they wouldreact to a discount rate increase is important to deciding whether togo with alternative A, B, or C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely discussing their own dilemma and considering different options and approaches.


Passage number 550.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not so sure it is so importantif one looks at it in terms of the monetary growth, which is theinitial focus here. But I will accept any comments anyone wants tomake here as to how one manages one's affairs in the interim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their uncertainty about the importance of something but also expresses openness to hearing other opinions or comments.


Passage number 551.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But a considerable number of peopleon this Committee have an interest in interest rates not just in themonetary growth. And I cannot see that this isn't an extremelyrelevant factor. Now, we can always give two votes, I suppose: oneon one assumption and one on the other assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 552.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let us proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Let us proceed" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests a desire to continue or move forward without any conflicting ideas or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 553.
MR. GUFFEY. If I look at "B," for example, it may beattractive to me at least in terms of a 10-1/4 percent or maybe 10-1/2percent funds rate. But if we get a discount rate increase on top ofthat and use the post-1979 procedures, that would get it up to 11percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, seems to find the "B" option attractive based on a funds rate of 10-1/4 or 10-1/2 percent. However, he expresses concern about a potential discount rate increase, which would result in a higher rate of 11 percent. This indicates a disagreement or contention regarding the potential impact of a discount rate increase on the attractiveness of option "B."


Passage number 554.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the first instance, I will repeat: Ifyou are talking about "B," I don't see an interest rate there and Idon't see a borrowing assumption there. So, I think we can do acertain amount of talking. And I would suggest that we proceed. Mr.Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they don't see certain information and suggesting that they can continue the conversation.


Passage number 555.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I agree with those yesterday whoindicated that they think the economy is currently very strong andthat we will be lucky if we hold inflation down to the level that theGreenbook is forecasting. Accordingly, it seems to me that our mainobjective ought to be to deal with the aggregates. I would focus, ofcourse, mainly on M1 and try to get that to the midpoint of our 4 to 8percent range and hold it there in order to reduce the risk thatinflation would really be a problem in 1985. I like the M1 path of"C" because that would get M1 to the midpoint by midyear. But theBluebook associates that with a federal funds rate of 11 percent ormore and I would feel a little more comfortable--and here I amassuming no change in the discount rate--if we let the federal fundsrate move up to the neighborhood of 10-1/2 percent and hold it thereuntil we have some additional information on the behavior of theaggregates. I like the "B" specifications for the federal funds rateand the borrowing. I have to say, though, that I have no confidence-58-3/26-27/84in my ability to tell you what kind of growth in the aggregates we'regoing to get under current procedures if we push the federal fundsrate to that level or indeed to any other level. I just don't thinkthat there is really any way for us to know under our currentoperating procedures. But we've now had 2 months of experience,roughly, under contemporaneous reserve accounting and I was happy tohear Steve suggest that he thought there might be some merit inlooking at the idea of introducing some automaticity into that. Iwould strongly endorse that and would express the hope that somewherealong the way we get as close as we can to something approaching totalreserves. If we do get to that point, we ought to think about thediscount rate as a penalty rate at all times. I think that kind ofprocedure would greatly enhance our chances of controlling theaggregates and inflation and help us maintain this hard-woncredibility that we have finally gotten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 556.
MR. PARTEE. Do you mean a penalty rate above the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking for clarification.


Passage number 557.
MR. BLACK. Yes. That's right--in order to control totalreserves more closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black simply confirms the previous statement without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 558.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I would support alternative B. Idon't have the confidence in the behavior of M1 that Steve suggests hehas--that, after not having served as a very useful target in '82 and'83, it is somehow going to revert to its old historic norm in '84.But I think the rate of growth of debt is quite clearly excessive.That growth plus the extraordinarily strong economic numbers that havecome in tell me that we have to move now to moderate the rate ofadvance in the economy. I think moving to "C" and having a funds ratepossibly as high as 12-1/2 percent is a little overkill. It seems tome that we need more feedback from the effect of interest rates thanwould be implied in alternative C, and the idea of returning to theold automaticity sends a chill up my spine. I certainly would like torestrain the funds rate range to no higher than the "B" level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris disagrees with Steve's suggestion that M1 will revert to its old historic norm in '84 and also disagrees with the idea of having a funds rate possibly as high as 12-1/2 percent. He expresses his concerns about the growth in debt and the need to moderate the rate of advance in the economy, but he believes that alternative C is excessive and that more feedback from the effect of interest rates is needed.


Passage number 559.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage since the passage itself is not provided.


Passage number 560.
MR. BALLES. Several people commented yesterday to the effectthat the potential for inflation accelerating down the road is nowincreasing, unfortunately. Certainly, the work that we've done in ourBank strongly supports the same conclusion: that inflation begins toaccelerate as we approach the unemployment range of 6 to 7 percent orthe operating capacity range of 80 to 83 percent. And I fear that maybe down the road. So, for that reason I also would come out insupport of alternative B and would suggest a borrowing assumption--since it isn't listed in the Bluebook table though it is listed in thetext of the Bluebook--of about a billion dollars. That would seemreasonable to me. I think we should not shrink from letting the fundsrate creep up to 10-1/2 percent in the near future for starters, and Iwould hope that it wouldn't have to go much above that. But I thinkwe are going to have to do something more than we've done recently toslow down the generally rapid thrust of all these aggregates,especially M1. I was glad to hear Steve's remarks--and perhaps I'mreading more into them than he meant--but it almost sounded, Steve, asif you're ready to take M1 off probation, which I would welcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Balles is expressing his agreement with the conclusion that inflation may accelerate in the future and he supports alternative B and suggests a borrowing assumption of about a billion dollars. He also mentions his hope that the funds rate doesn't go much above 10-1/2 percent and mentions his agreement with Steve's remarks about M1.


Passage number 561.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Mr. Corrigan" as it only gives information about an individual without expressing any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 562.
-59-3/26-27/84MR. CORRIGAN. This is a real predicament, to put it mildly.I guess I would come out supporting alternative B, with the borrowingnumber and so on that go with it in the Bluebook, even though I mustconfess that I like the aggregate profile in "C" better than that in"B." But at this point "C" scares me a little in that it couldactually make things worse in the short run. That is what I see asthe great dilemma. If we went with "B" and that meant that thefederal federal funds rate had to get up to 10-1/2 percent or so, likeJohn, I would say "So be it." But in the context of "B," I wouldfavor the directive variant 2 that Steve has in the Bluebook.Personally, I would favor an asymmetrical directive that would saythat we would strongly resist money and credit growth above thespecifications of "B" and be tolerant of shortfalls in the growth ofmoney and credit below "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents their preference for alternative B and expresses some concern about the potential consequences of alternative C, but there is no argument or opposing view expressed.


Passage number 563.
"MR. PARTEE. Did you say "strongly resist".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply includes a question asked by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 564.
MR. CORRIGAN. I think I said "strongly." I'm not sure whatthat means, though, Chuck. I won't try and define that. I am verytroubled by this credit growth, in particular. Those numbers arereally very, very strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan expresses his concern about the credit growth, stating that the numbers are "very, very strong." While he acknowledges that he is not sure what "strongly" means in this context, there is no clear disagreement or contradicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 565.
 I certainly would favor an asymmetricaldirective, one that would--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On those credit growth numbers, I don'tknow if the number was touched upon yesterday but that shouldn'tchange the general comment: February growth was swelled by thesemergers and is accompanied by a decrease in equity, which isn't a veryhealthy thing. The equity is not in the number whereas the debt is,and that makes a difference of 2 percentage points or so for onemonth, if I remember correctly. It's still strong, however you lookat it. But it doesn't show an acceleration; it just shows strength.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their personal opinion and observations without engaging in any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 566.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions a person's name, Mr. Corrigan, without providing any context or information for potential contention or disagreement.


Passage number 567.
 I don't know the right adjustment for themergers, but if you look at bank credit or total credit--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's strong, no question. There's justthat extra bulge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating their lack of knowledge about the right adjustment for mergers, but acknowledges that bank credit or total credit is strong. The use of language like "no question" and "just that extra bulge" indicates a level of agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 568.
MR. CORRIGAN. And it's partly for that reason. Also, whenwe set these targets for 1984 we seemed to say that if velocity wasgrowing, the Committee was thinking in terms of M1 in particular beingabout at the middle of the range. So, I certainly would not resistany shortfall in the growth of money and credit during the secondquarter relative to the specifications of alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Corrigan presents his perspective and reasons for not resisting a shortfall in the growth of money and credit during the second quarter relative to the specifications of alternative B. There is no clear contention or disagreement evident in the passage.


Passage number 569.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 570.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, when [we face] an economy [that] isexpanding as rapidly as it is and the outlook is that it probably willslow down because of its own internal dynamics and, on the other hand,the economy may continue to expand rapidly and slow only a little, Ithink it's a good time to rely on what we consider to be acceptablerates of growth in the money supply. I would do that and let thedynamics of the economy--the rate of expansion--determine pretty muchwhat interest rates will be. In other words, if we set the course ofgrowth for money at rates of expansion within target ranges that webelieve to be appropriate, then we should stick with that. And ifmoney and credit demands in the economy intensify and force interest-60-3/26-27/84rates up, then we should accept that. On the other hand, if the[growth in the] economy moderates as we hope and expect, that leavesscope for interest rates either to stay at current levels or perhapseven fall somewhat. I think alternative B is the alternative that ismost consistent with that way of looking at things. So, I wouldaccept the rates of growth for the aggregates set in alternative B andwould accept the federal funds rate fallout from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their opinion and proposing a course of action based on their analysis of the economy.


Passage number 571.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage because it only mentions Governor Gramley without providing any context or information about their actions or beliefs.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 572.
MR. GRAMLEY. I agreed with Emmett all the way up to where hesaid that alternative B was his choice. I start with the view thatthe staff forecast is not an unreasonable one but that if it is wrongit's likely to be that growth will tend to exceed the 5.3 percent ratethe staff has forecast for the fourth quarter to the fourth quarterand that we will have somewhat more price pressures. I would be happywith the kind of growth the staff was forecasting a month or two ago--4 to 4-1/2 percent or somewhere in that neighborhood. But 5 to 5-1/2percent and possibly more in the second year of a recovery when we'removing rapidly toward much higher rates of resource utilization forboth capacity and labor is something that I find disturbing. Now, "B"is essentially the alternative that is consistent with the staffforecast. And that means, I presume, that in the second half of theyear if we stayed with "B" and extended it with the same interestrates that we are talking about as consistent with "B," we would findthat money growth would slow with the slowdown in the pace of theeconomic expansion that is forecast. And this is a policy that Iwould call leaning with the wind. It's providing enough money in thefirst half to keep interest rates from going up too much and thenletting the money growth come down a little as the economy begins toslow down of its own natural processes. If we are in the second yearof a recovery and are willing to supply the kinds of increases in theMs that are involved in "B" and to permit credit to grow by more than11 percent, when are we going to get back to a policy that is designedto bring inflation down over a long period. So, I just don't think"B" is the right alternative. I share your worries and concerns aboutthe economy, but I think we've got to go further than that. Now, "C"is a bit of a shock perhaps, but I think we ought to move in thatdirection; something between "B" and "C" is where I would come out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Gramley disagrees with Emmett's choice of alternative B and proposes alternative C instead. He argues that the staff forecast of 5 to 5-1/2 percent growth and the current policy of supplying increases in M and allowing credit to grow by more than 11 percent are concerning and not effective in bringing down inflation. He believes there needs to be a policy that is designed to bring inflation down over a long period.


Passage number 573.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question inspired by yourcomments. It really wasn't developed yesterday, and I will direct itto Mr. Kichline. We face various probability distributions of theoutlook. I saw in the paper this morning that somebody is projecting2 percent growth in the second quarter. I guess a lot of people arestill projecting 4 or 5 percent. Can you explain to me theprobabilities and the kind of profile of that kind of slowdown.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for an explanation of the probabilities and profile of a potential slowdown in growth. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 574.
MR. KICHLINE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage, as the passage itself is not provided. Please provide the passage so a proper analysis can be made.


Passage number 575.
 I saw the 2 percent number but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't have to explain the 2 percentfigure necessarily, but what are the chances of that and what is theevolution of events that would produce it. In your view how probableis it that we will see what you have projected. Did you project 6percent or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 576.
MR. KICHLINE. We have 6 percent for Q2. Are you talkingabout the second quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 577.
-61-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Suppose it were in the neighborhoodof 4-1/2 percent. How likely or how unusual would that be and whatwould have to happen to get that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply poses a hypothetical scenario and asks a question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 578.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I don't view that as inconceivable atall. We struggled with this whole issue. There are some technicalreasons that the number could readily come out below 6 percent andthere are some rather substantive reasons that it could come out below6 percent. My personal view is that 6 percent is a good number. Ifit's wrong--and I'm assuming that interest rates don't decline in thisenvironment but perhaps are where they are now or rise a bit--I thinkthe odds favor a smaller number than 6 percent. One example is in theauto area where we have production levels that we think are sensible.But GM is closing several plants. At the moment the way the CommerceDepartment is going to measure the numbers, they are not inclined tochange the seasonals; and if they don't do that, we're going to findauto production declining substantially. That's a technical reasonbut it shows up in the numbers. There are a number of cases wheresome of the retail sales may well have come early in the year due toweather effects and we may be facing a situation where the economy isnot that strong. So, I feel very comfortable with the 6 percentnumber; but if I were to bet that it's not 6 percent for the secondquarter alone, I would bet on a little lower number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker presents reasons why the unemployment rate could be below 6 percent, but is willing to bet on a lower number for the second quarter alone. This indicates a disagreement or uncertainty about the exact unemployment rate.


Passage number 579.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The major vulnerability, if that is theright word, is that retail sales may develop less buoyantly than youhave forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a potential vulnerability or concern related to retail sales potentially not meeting the forecast.


Passage number 580.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think housing is the other area.Those housing numbers may well be in the process of change as well.We have seen a half point increase in the VA rate with the general,even mild, rise in interest rates. It seems to me that some of theattitudes in the housing industry may change and take a little of theedge off what was really an extraordinary increase in residentialexpenditures in the first quarter. I do feel comfortable looking fora very strong number for the full year, but your question was reallyon Q2 and my assessment of what the odds would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their own opinion and analysis of the housing industry and its potential impact on residential expenditures.


Passage number 581.
MR. PARTEE. If retail sales fell below your projection inthe second quarter--I'm talking right ahead--wouldn't the result bejust a larger increase in inventories. It would seem to me,especially with the inventory/sales ratio so low, that it wouldn'taffect production.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Mr. Partee is expressing his opinion and asking a hypothetical question. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 582.
MR. KICHLINE. Perhaps some, but we do have inventoryincreases in this forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that there are inventory increases in the forecast.


Passage number 583.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 584.
MS. TEETERS. In answer to your question: In the second yearof the recovery from the mid-1970s recession, the quarterly patternwas a boom and bust pattern, essentially. It averaged out to a goodyear. I haven't looked to see whether they have revised thatparticular pattern out, but there was a good quarter followed by a badquarter followed by a good quarter and it was [primarily] in theautomobile sector of the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MS. TEETERS provides a straightforward description of the quarterly pattern in the second year of the recovery from the mid-1970s recession. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 585.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without any context or passage provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the mentioned statement about Governor Martin.


Passage number 586.
-62-3/26-27/84MR. MARTIN. I would like to join those who indicatedyesterday that there are number of signposts leading us to somethinglike an 85 percent capacity figure as in 1978 and 6 percentunemployment--putting us at or even below the natural rate ofunemployment. But I think there may be some merit in qualifying thosetrends. In talking about 80 or 85 percent capacity in this secondyear of recovery I think probably all of us are keeping in mind thatthe importance of imports both to the business sector and to theconsumer sector is different this time. Capacity of 81 or 82 percentin the United States doesn't mean 81 or 82 percent capacity in Germanyor the United Kingdom or Japan or for the steel producers in Brazil orfor the exporters to the United States in Mexico and so forth. Interms of our stress on industrial production, I think it isappropriate. These are rather spectacular increases but the contextis that manufacturing--I'm varying my element here a bit--accounts forsomething like 25 percent of the labor force. In the short run, itisn't so much a matter of industrial production as it is perhapsproduction of value in services and employment in the servicesindustry. I recognize that that has shown a strong increase also, butI don't think we are talking about 81 percent of capacity of officesor of computers or telephones or the other tools in the services area.So, I think it needs to be qualified a little.Secondly, the vulnerability of some sectors has beenmentioned. I have some difficulties going from the staff forecast tothe alternatives on page 6. My difficulties are--let me characterizeit unfairly--the gaps between the rates of growth in alternatives A,B, and C. I have a little difficulty moving from a 6-1/2 percentgrowth in M1 to an 8 percent growth. That's a rather heroic jump tome. My druthers are for an "A prime" where we look at the 7 percentthat we've just been told is the [projected] rate for M1 in March. Wemight wind up at 7-1/4 percent or somewhere in between [the 6-1/2 and8 percent rates of Alternatives B and A]. I don't have any marvelouseconometric approach here to give you. I'm just going in the middle[of the Bluebook ranges]--for the M2 figures and the M3 figures and afederal funds rate that perhaps would stop at 11 percent and not at11-1/2 percent. I'm impressed by the hints of the lagged effect ofthe interest rate increases we've already had. One mentionedyesterday was of 125 basis points on CDs and 100 points in thismaturity and 80 points in that maturity. We haven't seen the effectsof the lag response to those numbers. So, I would vote for an "Aprime," if you will, with borrowings around $800 million, not abillion, and a 10-1/4 to 10-3/4 or even 11 percent range on fed funds.I agree with Governor Rice that we ought to be a bit flexible withregard to fed funds. The market is moving and we should to somedegree validate the moving. But I think too much of a slowing nowmight indeed be a shock, considering the vulnerabilities and thepotential softness that we face, as noted by the Chairman in hisusual, very good summary statement. So, I vote for an "A prime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their own perspective and opinions.


Passage number 587.
"MR. PARTEE. "A minus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a statement by someone identified as "MR. PARTEE."


Passage number 588.
"MR. MARTIN. "A minus." Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin simply gives a response, which is "A minus," and expresses his gratitude with "Thank you."


Passage number 589.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 590.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I would like to point out one thing thatis remarkably different in this expansion: We don't have any pressure-63-3/26-27/84on oil prices. During the 1970s we always had upward pressure on oilprices and the threat of very large increases in prices, and in mymind that takes a great deal of the inflationary pressures out of thesituation. As regards the aggregates versus interest rates: Havingsat here, I don't believe in the aggregates except in a very broadsense as an indicator that is as good as some of the others that arearound. But to run monetary policy with highly volatile interestrates in order to obtain a rate of growth in the money supply which wedon't really control directly seems to me really bad. So, I come tothe conclusion that what is important is the interest rate. Thatdoesn't mean that it's an interest rate on fed funds which we say is10 to 10-1/2 percent and it comes in at 10-1/4 percent. I think somevariation in that interest rate is good. I think we also can followthe market with it. I have a great deal of sympathy for Tony's andRoger's point of view that what we decide today is not independent ofthe discount rate. I don't want to get [unintelligible] because Ihave to vote on both of those decisions. I want to come out with apolicy that somehow puts those two together. If we vote as aCommittee to go for alternative B and then as a Board to raise thediscount rate, we're going to end up with 11 percent on the fed fundsrate. On the other hand, if the Board decides to raise the discountrate, then we get trapped. If we raise the fed funds rate to 10-1/2percent, the staff may come back and say the fed funds rate is 10-1/2percent and as a result the borrowings are going to be a billion andhalf dollars because [banks] are going to utilize the discount[window]; we may then have to raise the discount rate to keep theborrowings at a certain point. There is a certain amount ofcircularity going on here. We have raised interest rates already; the[funds rate] average of the last two weeks is 10.36 percent. I thinkit was probably the proper move. I would go with a fed funds rate ofabout 10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 591.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I object a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 592.
 You say we raised--MS. TEETERS. Well, we didn't resist it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they did not resist raising something.


Passage number 593.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a little different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "That's a little different" does not express disagreement or contention but rather a recognition or acknowledgment that something is slightly distinct or unique.


Passage number 594.
MS. TEETERS. I am assuming that we are going to raise thediscount rate to 10 percent if we decide on alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is assuming that they will raise the discount rate to 10 percent if they choose alternative B.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 595.
MR. PARTEE. Raise the discount rate to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is suggesting raising the discount rate to 10 percent, which may be met with disagreement or differing opinions from others who may favor a different approach or have concerns about the potential consequences of such a decision.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 596.
MS. TEETERS. It's at 9-1/2 percent isn't it.SPEAKER(.). 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS states that it's at 9-1/2 percent, while SPEAKER claims it is at 8-1/2 percent.


Passage number 597.
MS. TEETERS. Raise it to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 598.
MR. PARTEE. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply expresses agreement or acceptance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 599.
MS. TEETERS. If we raise the discount rate by a halfpercentage point, then it seems to me that the specifications shouldbe the federal funds rate at 10-1/2 percent and the borrowings at $800million. If we raise the discount rate, we want to offset the impactof that to some extent because if we don't we're going to get 11percent on the fed funds rate. If we don't raise the discount rate,then it seems to me that we can go with "B" and have borrowings of $1-64-3/26-27/84billion and have the fed funds rate fluctuating in the neighborhood of10-1/2 percent. But I don't think one can disconnect those twodecisions at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. MS. TEETERS is presenting two opposing options and discussing the potential consequences of each. The statements "If we raise the discount rate" and "If we don't raise the discount rate" present conflicting viewpoints, indicating disagreement or debate over which course of action to take.


Passage number 600.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage mentions Governor Wallich, but does not provide any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 601.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I think we are in a critical phase.There is some danger of the economy getting away from us on the upside in the mid-passage. If this is a long expansion, this is themiddle of it and the economy is accelerating when it ought to bemoderating. I think the market sees that and expects some kind ofaction. And unless we do something, we're going to lag behind ratherthan be with it. I'm not arguing that we ought to lead the parade butwe shouldn't be hanging back. Moreover, if we do less now, we have toanticipate the possibility that this economy will continue very strongand we may have to do more later on. So, we would be saving ourselvessome agony later if we take action now. I realize all this isn'ttargeting on the aggregates; it's targeting on the economy. I dothink the aggregates should be our focal point. I would not want togo back to automaticity of M1. The idea of having to chase after someblip, as we did at one time, is just too alarming. But then one hasto be a little firmer on the other means by which we steer. We'vealready allowed some tightening and if we now move up a second step, Idon't think the second step needs to be a very big one. We would betaking two steps in succession. We could at least afford for a whileto see if this doesn't work. Like Lyle, I feel that's somewherebetween B and C. I would say M1 at 6 percent, M2 at 7-1/2 percent, M3at 8 percent, and the funds rate range at 8 to 12 percent. I don'twant to discuss the discount rate but it's like the word"hippopotamus" in that once it is dropped into your mind it's veryhard not to think of it. So, I do make my borrowing assumption withsome thought about that; if we go to $1 billion on the borrowing, thatprobably would produce the right effect overall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own views and suggesting a course of action, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 602.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can go to lunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement expresses a personal opinion or suggestion without any conflicting ideas being presented.


Passage number 603.
[Lunch break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we are reassembled, we ought toproceed. What I would like to do is complete this general go-around.Then I think it might be appropriate to go into a more limited sessionof the kind we have had before. After we finish the comments bypeople generally, I would appreciate the staff leaving and we will gointo that kind of session. We will proceed with Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their plans for the continuation of the session and the order in which they will proceed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 604.
MS. HORN. For many of the reasons that have been stated, Iwould like to see the monetary aggregates closer to the middle of theranges. And I'd like to see that happen sooner than alternative Bwould bring it about, in part because I do have real concerns aboutthe strength of the economy. But I also think there are significantrisks in the future on the down side and that moves me more toward"B." While the other reason moves me away from "B" toward "C," thatmoves me back toward "B." I must say I like the Chairman's words onhis second option "help nature along." In my view a "B-" path doesthat. By a "B-" path I'm talking about a borrowing assumption ofabout $1.2 billion but I'd not quibble on decimal points there. Andthen just one comment on Henry's hippopotamus: When I say "B-" I amassuming no change in the discount rate; I'm assuming that we'd be-65-3/26-27/84moving with open market operations rather than with the discount rate.So, I would be for a "B-" path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Horn expresses the desire for monetary aggregates to be closer to the middle of the ranges and for that to happen sooner than alternative B. However, she also mentions concerns about the strength of the economy and significant risks in the future, which lead her to lean more towards alternative B. Overall, she appears to have conflicting views on which path to take, leaning towards both "B" and "C."


Passage number 605.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that imply, as a matter of curiosity,that you think that's better than changing the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is simply asking for clarification or a response based on the reader's opinion.


Passage number 606.
MS. HORN. Yes, it does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response simply acknowledges the statement made by Ms. Horn.


Passage number 607.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Your Bank] having proposed one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a fact and there is no indication of opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 608.
MS. HORN. It does. I feel, as someone who doesn't take partin that decision, that there are several reasons why one might want tochange the discount rate. It could be done to make a statement ordrive home a point or because of real difficulties at the window withtoo much of a gap between the fed funds rate and the discount rate. Iwould not be in favor of changing it to make a strong statement atthis time. The political situation is such that I'd like to see themove made on the open market side, presuming that the gap doesn'tbecome too big between the fed funds and discount rates and that maybewe could just live with leaning on the open market side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing her personal opinion and discussing potential reasons for changing the discount rate. There is no contradiction or opposition in the statements made.


Passage number 609.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. May I make a comment at this time.There's a danger in a discount rate rise in the sense that thepolitical critics in the developing countries in Latin America may beable to get somewhat more ammunition from the Federal Reserve activelyraising interest rates than from a posture of it being the market[raising rates]. But I think that's very marginal. From a purelydomestic point of view, I would say that it would be better to raisethe discount rate--if you're talking about alternatives. I'm givingmy personal view in response to your hypothetical question to Karen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal view on raising the discount rate and acknowledging that there may be some potential risks associated with it, but overall they believe it would be better to do so from a domestic standpoint.


Passage number 610.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without a specific passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 611.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I said yesterday that I thoughtthe risk to the economy was on the down side and I expressed somedisagreement with the staff's forecast for growth for the first andsecond quarters. Nevertheless, it seems to me that we definitely arelooking at a pretty strong year, and associated with that are theinflation dangers and the inflationary expectations that many of ustalked about yesterday. For that reason, I think we need to have somemovement even to validate what the market has been doing, but I don'tthink it ought to be very much at this time. I don't think we oughtto be overreacting to a few months' economic figures. So, mypreference would be something between alternative B and alternative A,and I'd call it "B+" or "A-." It seems to me that the specificationsfor that would be an M1 figure of around 7 percent with an associatedfederal funds rate of [around 10] percent and a borrowing number of$800 million. I think that kind of movement would give us enoughrestraint in the economy, along with what has happened in the shortterm, until we get additional data or some other indications of whatis actually going to happen in the economy. At the same time I'd keepthe monetary aggregates about where they are; they should be withinour targets but moving a little more toward the center of the range.Just a quick comment on the discount rate: I really don't get veryhung up on that, and in this particular meeting it seems to me thatthe Committee ought to be making its judgment based on the aggregatesand so on. I'd leave the decision on the discount rate to the Board.In other words, if you think that enough has been done, you don't move-66-3/26-27/84the discount rate. But if you don't think enough has been done, thenyou can do something with the discount rate. So, I'm not particularlyconcerned about that relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 612.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. However, without the full context of the passage, it is difficult to provide a definitive answer.


Passage number 613.
MR. ROBERTS. I agree that the economy is quite strong at themoment, although I wouldn't be surprised to see some moderation in itsgrowth by midyear. And I think that will be a function of thesecapacity constraints that have been mentioned, a slowdown in some ofthese high growth rates that are predicted on seasonals like housing,and the lagged effect [on economic activity] of the reduced moneygrowth the last half of last year. On the other hand--and I think weshould deal with these lags--the lagged effect of the very largegrowth in money in late '82 and the first half of '83 should beshowing up in higher prices by later this year, which fits into ourother discussion about the economy. So, it's important not toaggravate this higher inflation that I expect by raising the growth ofthe aggregates beyond the trend line. Therefore, I think our originalobjective of staying in the center of the 4 to 8 percent range, orabout 6 percent, is an appropriate policy at this time. I don't seewhy we should be concerned about the natural consequences of increasedcredit demand relating to a good and adequate supply of money. It'snormal that if activity is strong, interest rates will rise. Andthat's not something that is likely to kill the economy; it's simplyan evidence of the strength of the economy. I would prefer to see usoperate on alternative B, with perhaps a small minus on that, in orderto accomplish those objectives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 614.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 615.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I basically agree with GovernorGramley's description of the economy and what he thinks is likely tohappen. I agree that if the staff forecast is wrong, it's probably onthe conservative side. It seems to me that the increase in interestrates that has occurred recently is really a reflection of economicstrength rather than any policy actions. I remain quite concernedabout the long-run implications for inflation; I sense thatinflationary expectations are building. I think timing in terms of apolicy move is very critical. Intuitively, I would go to alternativeC. But I also agree that it would be quite a shock at this time andwould probably be a bit strong, so I would come out between "B" and"C." Mention has been made of the discount rate, so I'll go ahead andput in my two cents' worth. Frankly, I think there should be adiscount rate change. I could be persuaded to accept alternative B ifthere were some feeling that there would be a discount rate change,but I'd leave the alternative B specifications as specified, whicheffectively--as you said, Nancy--would take the fed funds rateprobably to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 616.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The provided passage, "Mr. Boehne," does not provide enough information for us to determine the presence of contention or disagreement. It appears to be just a name or a short phrase without any context or additional sentences. Thus, it is not possible to answer yes or no with the information given.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 617.
MR. BOEHNE. I think the risks in the economy have shiftedtoward too much growth. But that long list of vulnerabilities--whichyou started with, Mr. Chairman, and others have added to--is animpressive list as well. It is the time in the cycle, I think, forsome restraint. How I would do it at this point is to accept thegreater restraint that has become apparent in recent weeks but keep an-67-3/26-27/84open mind about whether additional restraint is needed in the comingweeks, depending on how economic activity comes in. I don't think Iwould load the dice or load the directive to tilt it more toward overt[restraint]. I would accept what we've done but not much more. Itseems to me that a move toward alternative C really would be too muchtoo soon. On the question of automaticity and additional reliance onM1, I'm not in favor of that. It seems to me that the crosscurrentsthat we're dealing with are just too complex to return to someautomaticity or to rely on a rule. Whether we like it or not, I thinkwe're just stuck with using a lot of judgment. On the discount rate,I'm lukewarm at best on raising the discount rate. One argument, if Iwere making one, would be that as we go through a cycle the longer wewait and don't move the discount rate the more we can't move it lateron. So, there is some argument for doing it, if only to keep theoption open in the future. If the Board in its wisdom should decideto raise the discount rate, I would be in the camp that says theborrowing figure ought to be reduced so as to offset pressure on thefunds rate. And since I only have one vote and not two as Nancy does,in order to get a little better coordination here and a little firmergrip on what we're voting for and its implications, I would feel morecomfortable with an 11 percent ceiling on the funds rate. That wouldseem to me to keep it more in the spirit of alternative B, given theuncertainty as to what the Board might do with the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of implementing additional restraint and returning to automaticity or relying on a rule. They also express lukewarm support for raising the discount rate.


Passage number 618.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the actual text of the passage, it is difficult to determine with certainty.


Passage number 619.
MR. KEEHN. For all the reasons that have been stated, Icertainly think it's an appropriate time to be taking some action.Inflationary pressures are clearly building, and I think it would bevery, very unfortunate to see these pressures and not do somethingabout them. So, it seems to me that the timing is appropriate despitethe risks--and there are many, and they are serious. I think we'd bebetter off taking some action now rather than waiting and perhapshaving to react a bit more vigorously. I certainly think that weshould be aiming toward alternative C over a period of time but, likeothers, I would find that a pretty abrupt step to be taking today. AsI was thinking about this earlier, I frankly wrote down the numbersthat Henry Wallich has suggested as a course between "B" and "C," withM1 at about 6 percent, M2 something under 8 percent, M3 under 8-1/2percent, borrowing about $1 billion or a little over and the fed fundsrate between 8 and 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees that it is an appropriate time to take action to address inflationary pressures. They also express a preference for alternative C over time but acknowledge that it would be a rather abrupt step to take immediately.


Passage number 620.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 621.
MR. PARTEE. As I said yesterday, I think that there is now adanger of an overheating of the economy in the foreseeable future.And that, of course, will materialize rather quickly if the staffprojection of a moderation in economic growth does not come about. Itmay well come about, but it's a risky business. I also am impressedby the extent to which debt expansion has played a role in this morerapid growth in activity. When we had to use a variant of Frank'sfavorite number--private domestic nonfinancial debt--at the meeting ofthis Committee on January 26 we were estimating for the fourth quarterthat it would increase at a 9.2 percent annual rate. The quarter wasalready over by 26 days. The revised estimate that we have this timeis 10.9 percent--an increase of 1.7 percentage points for the fourthquarter. For the first quarter, the estimate we were looking at lasttime was 8.4 percent. Now we are looking at 11.1 percent--an increase-68-3/26-27/84of 2.7 percentage points from the [previous estimate], some of whichis due to these oil company takeovers but not more than a point, Ithink. Clearly, it seems to me, there is an excessive rate ofexpansion in domestic debt that can't be attributed in a first effectsense at least to the deficit but to private borrowing. I have thesense--and I only look at the Washington papers and maybe to someextent New York--of a tremendous amount of momentum in the drive toextend consumer credit to the public on the part of the banks and ofthe drive to put out mortgage credit. There are radio ads and allkinds of ads--a lot of them deceptive--about the terms and conditionsof borrowing, and people are responding to those ads. Businesses aretoo. They have variable rate loans and whether people know what thatmeans I have no idea. But there has been too much debt expansion, Ithink.I wouldn't be as aggressive as Lyle in saying that it's timenot only to pull the punch bowl a little distance away but to turn itpartly over because I'm not that certain of the future. And I dothink there are some structural weaknesses of the kind that theChairman mentioned. I'm worried about the thrifts. The thrifts aregoing into a deficit situation very shortly now with this level ofrates. And the higher the rates, the greater the deficit. It mayturn out, as I told some of them, that 1980-81 was just a dressrehearsal to what is going to happen to them in future, in which casewe have a whole industry that will be very, very shaky in the economy.I'm worried about housing. Those are housing starts, not housingsales, and it's not customary for builders to line up their buyersbefore they start a house. I'm worried about the change in psychologyin the consumer market that would turn people off housing so that thehousing inventories would be sitting on the market as unsalable itemsthe way they are in Dallas. And I'm worried about the LDCs who Ithink will react quite adversely to a major increase in interest ratesin the United States economy and will be very, very sorely impacted.So, I just don't have the courage to move as aggressively as anaggressive fellow like Lyle Gramley would at this stage. Therefore, Icome down to alternative B as not being unreasonable. If we take thatin terms of the aggregates, that's not a modest ambition for thesecond quarter. The reason that M1 is as low as it is in alternativeB for the second quarter is that there's one relatively low month, andthat may or may not materialize. It's not a slow rate of expansion asyou look over the quarter as a whole; it's going to be a rather hardthing to accomplish. I'm particularly impressed by Steve's comment,which I happen to believe, that after a quarter where velocityincreases sharply it's more likely that in the next quarter velocitywon't increase so sharply because the money supply increases a lotmore than it did before. I think the danger is going to be thatwhatever of these alternatives we set, money is going to run higher.That's why I questioned Jerry on "strongly resist" because to resiststrongly, if we really mean that, could mean very high interest ratesby the end of the second quarter. I think we need to lean and leanpretty hard and look at the aggregates more seriously than we havebefore, but I don't want to lean all that hard.In sum, I would buy alternative B; I certainly wouldn't buyanything tighter than alternative B for the period to come.Considering what I think may happen, 11 percent on the funds rateseems to me too much of a near-term constraint that will require atelephone call and I would use the full funds rate range. On-69-3/26-27/84borrowings, $1 billion seems okay to me; $1.2 billion seems awfullyhigh. We're starting to move up toward the levels of borrowing thatare associated with fairly tight money periods as we get well above $1billion. And, what's that rate, Henry. I don't know what to do aboutthe hippopotamus rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee expresses concern about debt expansion and structural weaknesses in the economy, while also expressing hesitation to take aggressive action. He disagrees with Lyle Gramley's aggressive approach and instead supports alternative B as a more reasonable option.


Passage number 622.
MR. WALLICH. 50 basis points for $200 million on borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the interest rate of 50 basis points for borrowing $200 million.


Passage number 623.
MR. PARTEE. That's not a decision that can be made here orthat can be made readily. There are lots of strategy questionsinvolved in [the discount rate decision], so we shouldn't really talkabout it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 624.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are a couple of outliers or peoplenot heard from yet, anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The statement simply suggests that there may be a couple of individuals who have not expressed their opinions or thoughts on the matter yet.


Passage number 625.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, in order not to be repetitious,my bottom line is alternative B. I would strongly oppose recastingthe directive in the direction of automaticity. And I would assumethat the Board of Governors in its wisdom, if it did decide on adiscount rate hike, would lower the borrowing assumption somewhat. Ihave no problems with alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker clearly states their support for alternative B and expresses agreement with potential adjustments to the borrowing assumption.


Passage number 626.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 627.
MR. GUFFEY. I would select a "B+", which would be somethingwith the following specifications: 7 percent growth for M1; 8-1/2percent for both M2 and M3; and a borrowing level of about $900million. And if there were a discount rate increase, I would suggesta drop in the borrowing level to about $700 million to accommodatesome of that upward pressure on the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is merely a statement of suggestions and recommendations.


Passage number 628.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can go into [an executive]session now. I have some wording that Steve or Mr. Bernard mightdistribute. This is no great attempt to be radically different but itseemed a little more coherent to me than some of the others.It accepts the notion of putting the aggregates first. That may beducking a bit, but it reflects the comments made by a number of peoplethat this is probably a time when we don't want to be too preciseabout knowing where we want interest rates, within limits. I don'twant to prejudge where the limits are put. I'd start off with thatfoot rather than the other. It's fairly symmetrical. I put in amention that we would want to take some account of the rate of creditgrowth, which I think is of concern. A number of people havementioned it. So far as the numerology and assumptions are concerned,clearly the center of gravity and indeed the majority is toward "B"whether one takes the limited group or a wider group. But there arefeelings on both sides of that in varying degrees. I rather sharemany of the feelings that Governor Partee just expressed, includingthe possibility that if the economy is as strong or stronger than Mr.Kichline has suggested, there may be considerable difficulty whetherwe take "A," "B," or "C." We could run into a deviation in the realaggregates from the assumed aggregates that will overshadow any fine-tuning of whatever precise numbers we put down. And presumably wewould have to respond to it if the economy were all that strong andthe aggregates were all that high. But, based on past patterns, wecould get a high month or two. I have no projection of that sort butI just know that that could happen. Even if the economy goes toward-70-3/26-27/84the lower side of Mr. Kichline's projection, which I think is lesslikely, I still think it's possible that we could have a rather highmoney figure--or rather that we're much more likely to be faced withthat contingency than the opposite. But that remains for the future.As I say, I suspect that to a degree that will overshadow any halfpoint or one point differences in the numbers we put down here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily expresses the speaker's thoughts and considerations about different options without indicating disagreement with others.


Passage number 629.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, one comment: There might be some[complication] in April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a comment about potential complications in April.


Passage number 630.
 It looks as if there might be a seasonableadjustment problem on M1; that came in so weak last year and that wasmore than made up--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have a seasonal adjustment[problem] in M1 every month. I don't think you have to worry aboutApril. I trust that number about as much as--I was going to say mygrandmother, but I would trust her if she were alive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and doubts about the accuracy of the seasonal adjustment in M1.


Passage number 631.
MR. BLACK. That's precisely my point. I think we're goingto see a number we really can't trust in April--maybe even more sothan in most months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the speaker is stating their opinion about a future event, rather than engaging in a debate or contradicting someone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 632.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't trust them much in any month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement expressing a lack of trust in a particular group of individuals.


Passage number 633.
MS. TEETERS. If you don't trust M1, why are you putting itup front.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply questioning the reason behind someone's decision.


Passage number 634.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're not only putting it up frontbut also we have gone back to a monetary aggregates directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 635.
MR. RICE. It's not just M1; it's M2 and M3 as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that it is not just M1, but also M2 and M3. There is no opposing view or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 636.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no particular feeling about whereM1 is put in this list. We can put it the way it was before. I putit there because I think that's basically what we are concerned about.I'm talking about not trusting it in narrow one percents. I trust itif it shows a big increase or a big decrease. And it gives us thebest excuse in a real sense and in an excuse sense. But I think inthis particular situation if these aggregates continue to run high, weshould in substance react to them. I just don't think my judgment isso fine as to know what we should do when it gets down to the + or -one percent area [of differences in growth rates].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly conveys the speaker's own thoughts, preferences, and uncertainties about the topic.


Passage number 637.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the bigger problem is the realeconomy; that's what we're concerned about. It's not so much wherethe monetary aggregates stand that we are all concerned about in theend. I think you're leading us right back in the direction ofautomaticity in this directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their concern about the real economy and the focus on monetary aggregates. They also mention their disagreement with the direction of the directive. However, there is no mention of conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 638.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not talking about automaticity in thesense that I take it Mr. Black was talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply referring to a different sense or interpretation of the term "automaticity" than what Mr. Black was previously discussing. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 639.
MR. PARTEE. This is really reserve restraint. It isn't analgorithm of the amount of overage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is made by Mr. Partee without any opposition or contradictory opinions being expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 640.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I understand. You know, themarket tends to over-interpret, and I think the changes in the wordingof the directive are reinforced by putting M1 in front. Okay, we putM1 further back. But I think this will tend to awaken expectations-71-3/26-27/84that we may once again be on that roller coaster. Nobody is going tobelieve necessarily that this is the last ride, particularly if theeconomic data continue relatively strong. And then there would beexpectations of [rates] going to very high levels. I just think it'sdisturbing to move back in that direction. I realize we haven't movedback 100 percent in terms of the way the short run feeds back with thenonborrowed reserve paths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the changes in the directive and the potential consequences of moving back in the direction of high interest rates. This differs from someone who may hold the opposite view and believe that moving back in that direction is necessary or beneficial.


Passage number 641.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is the old directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence simply asks a question and does not present any conflicting or opposing views.


Passage number 642.
MR. MARTIN. The old directive also put the aggregates upfront.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement as it simply states a fact about the old directive.


Passage number 643.
MS. TEETERS. No, it didn't. It's the same as variant II onpage 13.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters simply states that something is the same as a specific variant on page 13.


Passage number 644.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 645.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a little technical problem, butit's a very great problem, in starting out with reserve pressures,which is partly what convinced me [to start with the aggregates]. Idon't know how we'd describe the current degree of reserve pressures.It's a meaningless concept. Well, the concept isn't meaningless butif you look at borrowings or if you look at net borrowed reserves orfree reserves, you're going to get entirely different answers for themonth of March. You get borrowings up to what--$1 billion.--with netborrowed reserves probably a minus. What does maintaining theexisting degree of reserve pressure or increasing it or decreasing itmean in that circumstance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker first says that the concept of reserve pressures is meaningless, but then acknowledges that it is not entirely meaningless when looking at certain factors such as borrowings, net borrowed reserves, and free reserves. This contradiction suggests a disagreement or lack of consensus on the significance and measurement of reserve pressures.


Passage number 646.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what does it mean then to haveyour second sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply poses a question and seeks clarification on the meaning of a particular sentence.


Passage number 647.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's precisely why I put the secondsentence in brackets. Maybe we can drop the whole thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is suggesting dropping a particular idea or topic, but there is no disagreement or opposing views expressed.


Passage number 648.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, I mean the third sentence whereyou have "greater reserve restraint." What does that mean then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and asking for an explanation.


Passage number 649.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Greater from wherever we start; we don'thave to describe where we start. The problem exists. But at leastone avoids it in the directive by dropping the second sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement without providing any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 650.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't think that is a strongenough reason to convey such a strong [unintelligible] impression,which is what I think will be conveyed by recasting it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 651.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, because of this problem of not knowinghow to interpret borrowing numbers, I'd like to hear--when we get tothe point of getting down to specifics--what we're going to mean withthis directive or any other in terms of how far we're willing to letinterest rates go up. I would not be shocked to contemplate a federalfunds rate of 11 percent. I take it that others would be. But if theidea is to run a monetary policy which in effect says that what we'vedone so far is let the federal funds rate and associated rates ofinterest go up in recent weeks and we will just hold them there, I'mnot going to be happy with that. I just don't think that's the way weought to go. But I'd like to have a translation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley expresses his disagreement with the idea of simply holding interest rates at their current level, stating that he does not think that is the way they should proceed.


Passage number 652.
-72-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm just looking over what peoplesaid here. I don't think anybody, except maybe Governor Teeters, hassaid that they wanted a lower upper limit--for whatever that means,since we waive it when the rate gets there--than 11 percent. I don'tknow about Governor Teeters. Nobody else who spoke to that pointdirectly--and there were some who did not--[said less than 11percent].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating what other people have said and expressing their uncertainty about Governor Teeters' stance on the issue.


Passage number 653.
MR. BOEHNE. I spoke to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is simply stating that he spoke to a certain topic.


Passage number 654.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage you are referring to, I am unable to determine if there is any contention or disagreement in it. Please provide the passage or context for a more accurate response.


Passage number 655.
 Yes, I didn't want to--MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they didn't want to do something without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 656.
 I don't think I spoke to it, but I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have you marked down as saying an 11percent ceiling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 657.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Boehne, simply responds with a one-word answer indicating agreement.


Passage number 658.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I just said. Nobody was belowan 11 percent ceiling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply restates what was previously mentioned.


Passage number 659.
MR. BOEHNE. Oh, below. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. The word "below" indicates a response or clarification but does not imply disagreement.


Passage number 660.
MS. TEETERS. I didn't speak to it, but I would accept an 11percent ceiling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters states that she didn't speak to the topic but would accept an 11 percent ceiling, indicating agreement.


Passage number 661.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is disagreement above that point,but nobody said less than 11 percent. Well, if it's nothing, we canget to the wording of the directive. Maybe we have the cart beforethe horse and people are going to want different emphases, which aregoing to have to be blended in the directive. That's the fact oflife. But in terms of the specifications, I'll take them up backwardsstarting with the funds rate. Apparently we have established thatnobody wants to put the upper limit below 11 percent. Some peoplewant to put it above that. Well, the limit is irrelevant, I guess.What we had before was 6 to 10 percent. If we keep the 4 point range,7 to 11 percent would be the minimum that anybody is talking about.And a lot of people are talking about [a higher range], but I don'tknow if those are outliers. Is that generally acceptable or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 662.
MS. TEETERS. Keep the 4 points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any points of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 663.
MR. PARTEE. I think it ought to be higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only includes the statement "I think it ought to be higher," which is an expression of personal opinion rather than indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 664.
MR. GRAMLEY. I do too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement of agreement.


Passage number 665.
MR. ROBERTS. So do I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses agreement.


Passage number 666.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information about any contention or disagreement involving him.


Passage number 667.
 Well, quite a few people have expressedthe opinion that it ought to be higher and the question is whether--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't feel strongly whether it's 7to 11 percent or 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent. I'm always bothered by 1/2points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different opinions and questioning the best range for a certain percentage, but there is no expressed disagreement or argument.


Passage number 668.
MR. BOYKIN. 8 to 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a written conversation fragment, and it only includes a statement without any context or further dialogue. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 669.
-73-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The markets may overread what thatnew ceiling is going to mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be disagreement or contention in the markets over the meaning of a new ceiling. This is indicated by the use of the word "overread," which implies that there may be differing interpretations or expectations regarding the impact of the new ceiling.


Passage number 670.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I myself would think 8 to 12 percent istoo high in the directive. We may be under pressure to release thisdirective early. You might have that in mind. I don't intend to doso, but--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 671.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What do you mean. What kind ofpressure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It consists of two short questions without any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 672.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Congressional pressure. I intend toresist that but I can't guarantee it. My own feeling is that puttingdown 8 to 12 percent and having this come out will be interpreted as amuch stronger step than we would want it interpreted. Knowing that ifwe use something less and get to that point and think the situationjustifies going higher, our record has been 100 percent, I'd say thatwe've never felt constrained when it came to that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 673.
MR. BOEHNE. What is the guide. What is the needle on thecompass here. I think Lyle has put his finger on a good point. Idon't think anybody--well, some people may--would put a lot of faithin M1 or M2 for any given month if we don't know what reserverestraint or ease means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement with Lyle's point and raising a question about the importance of understanding the terms "reserve restraint" or "ease."


Passage number 674.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we can define what it means for us,but it's a little hard to describe to the market simply [in terms] ofputting out the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 675.
MR. BOEHNE. What is the meaning of this. It seems to methat we have more or less been using the real economy with some senseof what reserve restraint means. That's pretty messy, but from mypoint of view at least I have some sense of what it means and whatcauses changes. But I don't really know what using M1, M2, and M3means. Is it a different ball game than we've been playing over thelast few months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing confusion and lack of understanding.


Passage number 676.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what ball game you thinkwe've been playing in the last few months, but I don't see muchdifference here, frankly. It says we're going to set a restraintlevel and we're going to stick to it depending upon how theseaggregates go, but we are going to look at what is going on in theeconomy before we change it. I think that's what we've been saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their perspective on the current situation and stating that they see consistency in the approach being taken.


Passage number 677.
MR. MORRIS. Except that you have promoted M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. The mention of promoting M1 is not followed by any conflicting statement or dissenting opinion.


Passage number 678.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a separate decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the statement "Well, that's a separate decision." It is a neutral response that suggests acknowledging a discussion topic as being distinct from another decision to be made.


Passage number 679.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there is a difference betweenstarting off the way the Chairman has been talking about on the degreeof reserve restraint and then saying the Committee believes these tobe consistent with intermeeting monetary targets of X and Y orwhatever, and putting it this way. The substance of what we do maynot be different, but I think it will be the impression in the marketsthat we are returning toward much more emphasis on the monetaryaggregates, and more volatility in interest rates then becomes apossibility. And I don't think that's a helpful thing at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and concerns, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 680.
-74-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're back at the wording of thedirective. Let me see whether we can sort this out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and suggesting they help to clarify things.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 681.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of "VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON" indicates that there may be a conflicting or opposing viewpoint from the vice chairman, suggesting a disagreement within the context.


Passage number 682.
 Well, in substance I said I couldlive with either 7 or 11--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand. I'm just trying to sortthis out. Let me try 8 to 12 percent. I sense that there's a lot ofresistance to that. Is that true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is trying to understand the situation and gauge the potential resistance to a certain range of percentages.


Passage number 683.
MR. MARTIN. I would not go along with 8 to 12.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any indication of disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Martin, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 684.
MS. TEETERS. I would not go along with 8 to 12.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is stating her own opinion or decision.


Passage number 685.
MR. BOEHNE. I wouldn't either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is agreeing with the previous speaker.


Passage number 686.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON & MS. TEETERS. Do you want a show ofhands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking whether the individuals want a show of hands.


Passage number 687.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we need a show of hands. Ithink as a practical matter we are between 7 to 11 percent and 7-1/2to 11-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion or belief, but there is no indication of any opposing viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 688.
MR. CORRIGAN. The way this directive is written, Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: . Corrigan is expressing disagreement or contention in the passage. 

Explanation: Mr. Corrigan is making a statement about the way a directive is written. This suggests that he disagrees with or has concerns about the specific wording or content of the directive. Therefore, there is a contention or disagreement.


Passage number 689.
Chairman--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's resolve the numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The Chairman suggests resolving the numbers, which implies finding a solution or agreement.


Passage number 690.
MR. PARTEE. I think [we should use] 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.Somehow 12 percent does sound awfully rich--doesn't it.--although itmay not be. It's just a culture shock.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing his opinion and uncertainty about the suggested percentage.


Passage number 691.
MR. BOEHNE. It's called rate shock.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. It simply states that rate shock is the term used to refer to something.


Passage number 692.
MR. MARTIN. We were at 9-1/2 percent a long time. There isa little arithmetic one can do vis-a-vis 11-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact and mentions a possible calculation based on that fact.


Passage number 693.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would go back to the comment the Chairmanmade earlier. We are living in a world in which interest rates havebecome the cutting edge of monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating a comment made by Mr. Gramley regarding the role of interest rates in monetary policy.


Passage number 694.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 695.
MR. GRAMLEY. In a world of deregulation, they have to move alot more. I know that causes potential damage here, there andelsewhere in terms of the LDCs, the thrifts, and so on. But the pointis that if we want to get any restraint on the economy we have to letinterest rates go up. And in this kind of world we have to let themgo up more than we used to. If we sit here and let these interestrates creep up by 1/4 percentage point per FOMC meeting, we are nevergoing to get the job done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear statements of contention or disagreement. It is one individual expressing their opinion on the need for higher interest rates in a deregulated world.


Passage number 696.
MR. PARTEE. A rate of 11-1/2 percent, though, Lyle, is areasonable amount above where we are at about 10-1/4 percent. And asthe Chairman points out, we never have let that stop us if in factsomething were going on that called for more restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that a rate of 11-1/2 percent is reasonable and agrees with the Chairman's perspective of not letting a higher rate stop them from exercising restraint in certain situations.


Passage number 697.
-75-3/26-27/84MR. BOEHNE. I don't think we're letting it go up 1/4 of apoint. Three weeks ago the funds rate was around 9-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about the funds rate.


Passage number 698.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It wasn't very long ago that it was 9-1/4percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the past interest rate being 9-1/4 percent.


Passage number 699.
MR. BOEHNE. It's not as if we're just moving along here at1/4 point [per FOMC meeting].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is making a statement about the progress being made.


Passage number 700.
MR. GRAMLEY. My point, Ed, was that the rate has been closeto 10-1/2 percent in recent days and if we have a ceiling of 11percent, that tends to leave no room to operate unless we say theceiling doesn't have any meaning. And if it doesn't have any meaning,then I don't know why we'd want to put that kind of ceiling on it. Itjust leaves almost no room to maneuver at all starting from where weare now, if we have a federal funds range with an upper limit of 11percent. If it's going to mean anything at all, then it's very, veryrestraining in terms of the amount of interest rate movement we willcontemplate. If it doesn't have any meaning, then it's just purelyfor publicity purposes, so then let's decide among ourselves what wereally think it ought to be and keep that a secret.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily presents the speaker's point of view and poses rhetorical questions to emphasize their argument.


Passage number 701.
MR. BOEHNE. I wouldn't consider 50 to 75 basis points ameaningless move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion that a 50 to 75 basis points move is not meaningless.


Passage number 702.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think Lyle is right that weprobably need a little more movement and, therefore, even though Icould live with either I would have a slight preference for 7-1/2 to11-1/2 percent myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's preference for a range of movement, without conflicting with Lyle's viewpoint.


Passage number 703.
MR. GRAMLEY. I could live with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that "MR. GRAMLEY could live with that."


Passage number 704.
MR. CORRIGAN. I'd join that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 705.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll go on to the next numbers. Assumingwe are somewhere in the neighborhood of "B," does anyone have a morefelicitous series of numbers than "B" pure and simple. And one thatthey also think will command wide support.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone has a better series of numbers than "B" and if they believe it will be widely accepted.


Passage number 706.
MR. GRAMLEY. I was going to offer a series of numbers, butnow with that stipulation--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The person speaking is simply stating their updated plan due to a stipulation.


Passage number 707.
MR. PARTEE. I think they look pretty good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses their opinion that the mentioned subject looks good, without any suggestion of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 708.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we don't take them too seriously,I think they're fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they think "they" (referring to something) are fine as long as they are not taken too seriously. This statement does not imply any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 709.
MR. PARTEE. If we could actually come out there, I'd bepretty happy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement by MR. PARTEE expresses a desire to visit a particular location, indicating personal happiness. There is no mention of any opposing views or disagreement.


Passage number 710.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there people who can't live with "B"as put down in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any information regarding the existence of people who cannot live with "B" as put down in the Bluebook. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 711.
MR. BOYKIN. I would prefer 6, 7-1/2, and 8 percent, Mr.Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Boykin's preference for specific percentages.


Passage number 712.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would go with Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing his agreement with someone named Bob. There is no indication of any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 713.
-76-3/26-27/84MS. HORN. I'll go with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the idea presented.


Passage number 714.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those in combination are awfully lownumbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact ("Those in combination are awfully low numbers") without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 715.
MS. HORN. Lead off with 7-1/2 and 8 percent, not 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of instruction or suggestion regarding how to begin a certain topic or argument.


Passage number 716.
MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of the numbers, could I ask myquestion now. Do you interpret the third sentence as a symmetrical orasymmetrical sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about how the third sentence should be interpreted.


Passage number 717.
MR. PARTEE. It's symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 718.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I interpret it as a symmetrical sentence.The reality I don't consider very symmetrical, but I consider thatsentence symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The author's interpretation of the sentence being symmetrical does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 719.
MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage, "MR," does not provide enough context or information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 720.
 BLACK & MS. HORN. Somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. The identities mentioned, "Black & Ms. Horn," do not suggest any conflicting opinions or views.


Passage number 721.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess it's slightly asymmetricalas written.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 722.
MR. MARTIN. Somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 723.
MR. CORRIGAN. This is the area where I have the greatestworry. Whether we use Mr. Boykin's numbers or those in alternative Bdoesn't matter all that much to me because I don't have the sameproblems with the numbers that everybody else has. But I must saythat I would really get scared if the outcome for money and creditgrowth in the second quarter were in any material way above thealternative B numbers. In other words, I really think of those "B"numbers as a ceiling. And if we got too far beyond them, I think we'dhave a very, very difficult problem on our hands--more difficult thanthe problem we have on our hands today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, expresses his concern and worry about the outcome for money and credit growth. He acknowledges that he doesn't have the same problems with the numbers as everyone else, and his main concern is if the outcome exceeds the alternative B numbers. He does not contradict or disagree with anyone else's opinion in the passage.


Passage number 724.
MS. TEETERS. What sort of velocity assumption are youmaking, Jerry. That's vital here to what you think the GNP is goingto be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is simply asking for clarification from Jerry.


Passage number 725.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, as I've said many times, Nancy, I thinkthe economy is likely to be stronger rather than weaker in the verynear term. Unfortunately, I also think if that's true, that thelonger-run implication is that the economy is going to be softerbecause we're going to get more interest rate pressure coming from thedemand side of the economy. So, by implication I am suggesting that Ithink the velocity factor in the second quarter could be larger thanwhat is implicitly built in here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion on the state of the economy and the potential implications of certain factors.


Passage number 726.
MS. TEETERS. But if you rigidly take these numbers, youbegin to get all sorts of volatility in interest rates. It's notworth the price.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by MS. TEETERS expressing her opinion about the volatility in interest rates.


Passage number 727.
MR. CORRIGAN. I don't want to do that, Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan simply states that he does not want to do something without any opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 728.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. When you say you want asymmetricalwording, what you are really saying is that you want a strongerinterest rate response if there is continuing excessive strength inthe economy and the monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a fact without presenting any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 729.
-77-3/26-27/84MR. CORRIGAN. That's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Corrigan is simply acknowledging the correctness of something without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 730.
MR. BOYKIN. In just a presentational sense, Jerry, if youaccepted the numbers that I'm suggesting, the asymmetry is lessimportant. You could get it more the way it is worded if you justreduced the numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 731.
MR. CORRIGAN. Again, I'm such an agnostic about thesenumbers that I don't get visibly moved by 1/2 point differences in thenumbers. The question that I'm concerned about, regardless of whetherwe use your numbers or the "B" numbers, is: What happens if we getinto the quarter and we're running ahead of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their lack of concern for small differences in numbers and is instead focused on a common question about what happens if they are ahead in the quarter.


Passage number 732.
MR. BOYKIN. Oh, you're talking substance now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It simply states that "Oh, you're talking substance now."


Passage number 733.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 734.
MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me that the gut issue here is howmuch you load the dice in terms of higher rates. When you startmoving the numbers toward "C" and when you have an asymmetricalpresentation and an 11-1/2 percent funds rate limit, you might as wellvote for moving the funds rate up to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehner, is stating his opinion on the issue of raising interest rates. He is expressing his view that increasing rates too much would be like "loading the dice" and suggests voting for a lower rate.


Passage number 735.
MR. PARTEE. It wouldn't load it, though, toward a higherrate. I understood Jerry to say he was more concerned about gettingindications of a significant overshoot of these targets than he isabout a significant undershoot. And I think I agree with him on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Partee and Jerry are in agreement about their concern regarding significant overshoot of the targets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 736.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but even if you're moreconcerned as I think we all are--that's where the risks are--why doesthat argue necessarily for an asymmetrical articulation in thedirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "why does that argue necessarily for an asymmetrical articulation in the directive" suggests that the speaker disagrees with an asymmetrical articulation in the directive. Therefore, there is disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 737.
MR. PARTEE. We've often used it before. I don't know why wewould throw it out now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing confusion as to why they would stop using something they have used in the past.


Passage number 738.
MR. GRAMLEY. There's good reason for asymmetry if the risksare stacked on the side of stronger growth and more inflation. Thatway we don't expose ourselves to a circumstance in which, even thoughthe economy is going along fairly strongly, we for some reason have adownward shift in money demand and overreact and let too much easetake place. An asymmetrical arrangement makes very good sense underpresent circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 739.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would agree with you if we weresimply going to react mechanically to an easing of money growth. ButI'm interpreting that there's not going to be a substantive change inour policy [approach]--that we're still going to be looking at moneyin the context of the business expansion and inflationary pressures.But I would agree: If we were going to be reacting more to moneygrowth in the future, then we have to word it asymmetrically for thereasons that you just indicated, Lyle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 740.
MR. BOEHNE. I think there is a subtle difference in how wephrase this. We can be quicker on the trigger on the up side or wecan be slower on the trigger on the down side. Where I come out isthat I can't imagine a situation in the next month where one wouldwant to lower rates. Well, I guess I could imagine it. But at the-78-3/26-27/84same time, I don't want to build in some automatic forces that aregoing to push rates up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there is a discussion about the timing and decision-making process of lowering or raising rates, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 741.
MR. PARTEE. I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states their agreement with the statement.


Passage number 742.
MR. CORRIGAN. I don't want the automaticity either. But Idon't want to be sitting here in June looking at a second quarter inwhich money, the economy, and everything else are stronger than wethink they are going to be--stronger than we know they should be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan simply expresses his desire to not have automaticity and his concern about the possibility of a stronger economy and financial situation in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 743.
MR. PARTEE. You may well have to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: There is potential for contention or disagreement in this passage because it suggests that the speaker, Mr. Party, is implying that the person he is speaking to will have a difficult time performing a certain task. This could potentially lead to disagreement or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 744.
 We can't really--MR. CORRIGAN. I think we can try to minimize the risk of it.We would really be in the soup then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker says "We can't really" while Mr. Corrigan disagrees and says "I think we can try to minimize the risk of it." This shows a disagreement or difference of opinion between the two speakers.


Passage number 745.
MR. PARTEE. If that were the case, then I think we shouldhave moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The person speaking is expressing their opinion and suggesting a course of action.


Passage number 746.
 But you could have a stronger money quarter, a strongerGNP quarter, and everything, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's get back to these numbers. Iwould feel a bit reluctant, to say the least, to lower the M2 and M3numbers any further. We have said all along that we expected to be inthe top part of those ranges. I think on M1 we can horse aroundbetween 6-1/2 and 6 percent, but it makes little difference. I thinkit will make no practical difference in the way we operate, but thisgets to be a visual point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing different monetary measures and expressing a preference for keeping certain numbers within a specific range.


Passage number 747.
MR. BOEHNE. What if for M1 we said something like "around 6to 7 percent". That [includes] the 6 and the 6-1/2 but it doesn'tmake it sound quite as precise as 6-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MR. BOEHNE is suggesting a slight change in wording to make the statement sound less precise. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 748.
MR. GRAMLEY. Do we mean 6-1/2 percent by that. Would weaccept up to 7 percent before we would react.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a direct question seeking clarification on whether "we" would accept up to 7 percent before reacting.


Passage number 749.
 Then what do we dowith--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That doesn't worry me terribly, but Idon't know whether other people like it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing uncertainty or lack of knowledge about other people's preferences.


Passage number 750.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I wouldn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage "I wouldn't" does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement without much context provided.


Passage number 751.
MS. TEETERS. Just as a point of information: Have we everhit a target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply asks for information.


Passage number 752.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We came pretty close this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The statement "We came pretty close this time" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses that the subject or group was close to achieving something.


Passage number 753.
MS. TEETERS. Have we ever hit a target on a short-termbasis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking whether a target has been hit on a short-term basis, without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints being expressed.


Passage number 754.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Within 1/2 of a percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement within the passage. The statement "Within 1/2 of a percent" is a specific measurement or value, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 755.
MR. AXILROD. On M1 do you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any direct statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple question and does not display any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 756.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is "Yes" because "MS. TEETERS" indicates that there is an explicit dialogue or conversation happening, which often suggests the possibility of disagreement or contention. However, without further context, it is not possible to determine the specific nature or extent of the disagreement.


Passage number 757.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it's about 8 percent over the 3 months asagainst [a projection of about] 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents a comparison between the actual rate of 8 percent and a projected rate of 7 percent.


Passage number 758.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The text does not provide any information about Mr. Corrigan, so there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 759.
 Well, the fourth quarter M3 has been---79-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there probably is a majorityfor these numbers. Maybe you ought to get an informal showing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that they think there is a majority for the given numbers, indicating a consensus rather than disagreement. They also suggest getting an informal showing, implying a desire for confirmation or agreement.


Passage number 760.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was going to suggest that. It seemsvery close to that. Let's assume that for the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement and suggesting a similar course of action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 761.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, maybe I answered Governor Teeterswrong. We are within the long-run cone. The weekly figures we'regoing to publish will be below the weekly figure consistent with the[target]. If the number that we're not publishing--the one we have atentative estimate for at the end of March--holds up, it will be abovethe long-run cone. But month-to-month, on average it's just below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is stating that they answered Governor Teeters incorrectly and that the weekly figures they are going to publish will be below the target. However, he also mentions that the tentative estimate for the end of March may be above the long-run cone. This implies that there is disagreement or uncertainty about the future numbers and their alignment with the target.


Passage number 762.
MR. MARTIN. The 7 percent that you're estimating would takeus above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 763.
MR. AXILROD. No, it's all right on the month; the end of themonth is ticking up, if that number holds up. It's just another wayof saying that it's very near the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that if the number at the end of the month holds up, it would indicate that it is very close to the peak or highest point.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 764.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me move to the borrowing level where Ithink there is, in fact, a bigger range of opinion. I suspect thatreflects in part that we don't know whether where we are is because ofcontemporaneous reserve requirements or other expectational factors.We have a classic case in this two-week period of the way one wouldthink things might happen frequently with a two-week reserveadjustment period. Everybody thought that perhaps [markets] weregetting tighter earlier in the period and they borrowed a lot. Theybuilt up excess reserves and now they end up the period with bigexcess reserves and the market is getting easy. In previous weeks, Iguess the opposite happened. This used to happen with the weeklyreserve pattern and now it can happen with considerably more amplitudebecause [banks] have a two-week period before they get caught upshort. So, those who would like to calibrate the federal funds ratein their thinking down to a gnat's eyelash have a bit of a problem. Idon't know what this means for the level of borrowings this week andfor the federal funds rate, particularly during a period when it mightbe higher [initially] and then turn out to be lower at the end or viceversa, depending upon the pattern during the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that there is a "bigger range of opinion" regarding the borrowing level, suggesting that there are varying views on the matter. Additionally, the speaker mentions that those who want to "calibrate the federal funds rate" have a problem, implying that there is disagreement or uncertainty surrounding the appropriate rate.


Passage number 765.
MR. MORRIS. Isn't what we're seeking a borrowing level thatwill be compatible with a 10-1/2 percent funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Morris.


Passage number 766.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure. Let's assume that'sthe case just to get an analytic [framework].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and suggesting to make an assumption for the purpose of analysis.


Passage number 767.
MR. GRAMLEY. Could we just expand the range of estimation.What is the borrowing level for 11 percent, too, so I know whereanother option might be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply requesting more information to consider additional options.


Passage number 768.
MR. PARTEE. These are educated guesses of the staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the staff's guesses are educated.


Passage number 769.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. The presence of the word "yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage, but since the passage is not provided, it is not possible to give a specific explanation.


Passage number 770.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I'm about to ask. I'm notsure I have a great deal of faith in them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses uncertainty or doubt about having faith in something.


Passage number 771.
3/26-27/84MR. AXILROD. We think a billion and a half will get a fundsrate close to 11 percent, with all the uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a belief or prediction about a potential outcome.


Passage number 772.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without any change in the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 773.
MR. AXILROD. Without a change in the discount rate. In theBluebook, we said borrowings of $1 billion or a little more get afunds rate of 10-1/2 percent. If you look at the experience in thelast couple of days, with the funds rate dropping off fairlysubstantially, that will change market attitudes a little and I wouldbe inclined to say--Peter may disagree--that it might take a littleover $1 billion to get 10-1/2 percent. And if you used $1 billion inborrowings, I would feel safe in thinking of a wider range in thefunds rate--10-1/8 to 10-1/2 percent or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is simply discussing his perspective on the potential change in market attitudes and the potential impact on the funds rate. He mentions that Peter may have a different opinion, but there is no direct contradiction or disagreement presented.


Passage number 774.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I agree with a little over $1 billion--say,$1.1 billion--for 10-1/2 percent. I think borrowings of $1-1/2billion would produce more than 11 percent [on the funds rate].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 775.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's what we said: 11 percent or over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply restates a previous figure mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 776.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would take just the opposite pointof view. The federal funds rate, with a billion dollars of excessreserves--though not during the early part of the period and I don'tknow what it will average--averaged well over 10 percent. And we willhave a billion dollars or slightly more borrowings and we happen tohave a billion dollars worth of excess reserves. If we have $650million of excess reserves, I don't know what we will get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker begins by stating they have the opposite point of view, suggesting disagreement with the previous statement. They then mention different figures and express uncertainty about the outcome, indicating a lack of agreement or consensus.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 777.
MS. TEETERS. What role do we see excess reserves playing.Are they precautionary. Or are they an accident because of CRR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker is posing two different possibilities for the role of excess reserves: whether they are precautionary or an accident due to the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR).


Passage number 778.
MR. AXILROD. In this two-week period I think the marketcreated them on its own, not knowing they were doing it in effect.That is, they borrowed. We were somewhat behind the NBR path much ofthe time. Now we're actually slightly over it and the market borrowedand generated excess reserves in addition to the nonborrowed reserves;and now if they end up with excess reserves they don't want, thosereserves have to come out. Before, the level of excess reserves ofaround $600 to $650 million was probably fairly close to what theywanted, given the prevailing market conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply explaining the market dynamics and actions taken by the market participants.


Passage number 779.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. During the introductory period of CRR--wecan go back before that because we had a little change in reserverequirements there--the average level of excess reserves was around$400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact regarding the average level of excess reserves during the introductory period of CRR.


Passage number 780.
MR. AXILROD. I think it was a little higher than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion that the value being discussed was slightly higher than what was previously mentioned.


Passage number 781.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It was $600 million in January and $500million in November and December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states two different amounts of money in two different time periods. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention surrounding these numbers.


Passage number 782.
MR. MORRIS. So we could see a low funds rate tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Morris about a potential low funds rate tomorrow. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 783.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I think it will be lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker believes that something will be lower, but it is not clear what they are referring to.


Passage number 784.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But won't they be influenced by thecarryover. If they see that they have run very large excess reserves,-81-3/26-27/84won't they be inclined to avoid such high excess reserves thefollowing period because of the carryover.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 785.
MR. AXILROD. That's the idea, but we haven't seen mucheffect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions that "we haven't seen much effect," without indicating any disagreement or contention among the individuals involved.


Passage number 786.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We don't have experience with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "We don't have experience with that."


Passage number 787.
MS. TEETERS. Well, excess reserves ever since October of1979 have been trending upward and I interpret that as securityagainst erratic Federal Reserve behavior.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, MS. TEETERS, is expressing her interpretation of a trend in excess reserves as a form of security.


Passage number 788.
MR. AXILROD. No. It seem to have more to do, GovernorTeeters, with the fact that country banks now don't have with us therequired reserves that they need to hold. They leave their reservebalances in there for a while for whatever reason. Some even holdexcess clearing balances, which get into our excess. All that is alittle irrational, but we can account for $50 to $100 million dollarsof those sorts of things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating facts and explaining a situation.


Passage number 789.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Weren't they also influenced bywidespread expectations that rates would rise or the possibility of adiscount rate rise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 790.
MR. STERNLIGHT. That probably induced some of the borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral observation about the possible cause of borrowing.


Passage number 791.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And I think that influenced the levelof excess reserves. I don't think we should assume, Paul, that it'sgoing to continue at these levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a personal opinion and there is no indication of conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 792.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't assume that it is going tocontinue at these levels; I don't know all the reasons thatcontributed to it but I certainly would not assume that it willcontinue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that they do not know all the reasons for something to continue at its current levels, and they express not assuming that it will continue. There is no conflicting opinion or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 793.
MR. AXILROD. I should be clear, Mr. Chairman, when we said abillion dollars or more borrowing gets you a 10-1/2 percent funds ratethat we were, of course, assuming excess reserves on the order of $550to $600 million. That was the assumption within that. We wereassuming net borrowed reserves of $400 to $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the assumptions made regarding borrowing and funds rate.


Passage number 794.
MR. GUFFEY. And that's consistent with the last two-weekperiod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the mentioned statement is consistent with the last two-week period.


Passage number 795.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. Actually, I'm assuming it could even belower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 796.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would guess that as well as people canunderstand this--and I don't think any of us can be very sure--thatwhat many people are talking about as a center point is a billiondollar level of borrowing with that much lower excess reserveassumption. I'll say $500 million just to put a round number down,which [unintelligible] for this past week in a total reserve positionsense is tighter than anything we have had by a considerable margin.Let me take out the adjective: tighter than what we've had. You caninterpret the adjective yourself. I assume that's more or less whatpeople are talking about but I don't have any great judgment as towhether that means a 10-1/4 percent funds rate or 10-1/2 percent or-82-3/26-27/8410-3/4 percent. To some degree I care, but if it meant a greatlyeasier federal funds rate, I don't think it is consistent with thesubstance of what we're talking about and it would be inappropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their uncertainty and lack of judgment regarding the specific level of borrowing and its impact on the federal funds rate.


Passage number 797.
MR. AXILROD. As a technical point, I should mention thatquarter-end and mid-April we could get some fairly high rates relativeto even this average. That's just in passing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing a technical point without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 798.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just try this: With all theuncertainties associated with it and subject to the risk that we mayfind out we're crazy but within limits, we're talking a billiondollars worth of borrowing and assuming something like $500 million inexcess reserves, which is less than we've had at any time sincecontemporaneous reserves. That number may be too low.[Unintelligible] Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 799.
MR. AXILROD. It is less than we've had in quite a while.That's a shade below the October-to-December average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 800.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say $1 billion of borrowing, and$600 million of excess reserves and see how that goes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is stating a hypothetical scenario without expressing any disagreement or contention. It is discussing potential outcomes of a specific amount of borrowing and excess reserves.


Passage number 801.
MR. MARTIN. Isn't the federal funds rate under 11 percentthen. You quoted 10-3/4 and 10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a statement made by Mr. Martin about the federal funds rate.


Passage number 802.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I assume. But it's nothing morethan an assumption. I'll accept the notion just hypothetically thatif one had to guess, it means a federal funds rate in the 10-1/4 to10-1/2 percent area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their assumption about the federal funds rate without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 803.
MR. MORRIS. And this would be revised to reflect anydiscount rate changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement about revising something to reflect any discount rate changes.


Passage number 804.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll get to that question. Let's assumejust for purposes of discussion that it's in the absence of that.Well, let me get to that. I'll just raise a question: If thediscount rate went to 9 percent, is that assumption still good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a scenario for discussion and poses a question.


Passage number 805.
MR. GUFFEY. Not if you've mentioned borrowing at $1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 806.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Different people may have differentopinions about things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, it is implied that there can be disagreement or contention among individuals due to their varying opinions about things. Different opinions suggest the potential for conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 807.
MR. WALLICH. Only on the condition it seems to me that onebillion dollars borrowing is right. For that reason I like yourparagraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing agreement and support for the borrowing of one billion dollars.


Passage number 808.
MR. PARTEE. You were asking a technical question, weren'tyou. I don't know. The funds rate has gone up a bit relative to thediscount rate. Technically, there would be room for it to move a halfpoint and not have a much different funds rate, I should think. Butof course, there is the expectational [element]. We have an 8-1/2percent discount rate as against a 10-1/4 to 10-1/2 percent fundsrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 809.
 I would submit that a 9 percent discount rate would not--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's not going to change the fedfunds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents a viewpoint or suggestion without contradicting any previous information or argument.


Passage number 810.
-83-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage given. It appears to be a numerical sequence or notation of some sort.


Passage number 811.
 It would not have to, except the expectational--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think it will. Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "It would not have to, except the expectational" is followed by "Well, I think it will," which suggests that there is agreement between the speakers.


Passage number 812.
MR. PARTEE. Let's get some views.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply suggesting to get some views, indicating a desire for multiple perspectives or opinions.


Passage number 813.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that the funds rate did have some ofthat expectational element. But I still think that much of thediscount rate would be translated into a higher funds rate unless youdid something to borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is expressing his opinion and stating his thoughts on the relationship between the funds rate and the discount rate. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 814.
MR. PARTEE. Do you agree with that, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is asking Steve whether he agrees with a certain statement, indicating differing opinions between them.


Passage number 815.
MR. AXILROD. Given the gap we now have [between the tworates], I would think it might have less effect than maybe Peter isinclined to believe, but we will find out if the change occurs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their opinion on the potential effect of the rate change, acknowledging that it is a possibility to find out the actual outcome in the future.


Passage number 816.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the answer is: We don't know howmuch of that expectational influence is in the funds rate already.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The statement is expressing uncertainty about the level of expectational influence in the funds rate.


Passage number 817.
MR. AXILROD. I think it got to 10-1/2 percent on theexpectation of a 9 percent discount rate. So it may be that you willhave 10-1/4 percent and it will move a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and acknowledging the possibility of a slight change.


Passage number 818.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't quantify this but I think it isfair to say that at the minimum everybody around this table is nottalking about giving the market some false sense of easing at thisstage and that, whatever this [borrowing] number is, it ought to workout that way. Maybe there will need to be a little flexibility toassure that result.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's opinion or perspective on the matter without contradicting or refuting any other view.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 819.
MR. MARTIN. I think you're right, Chairman. But isn't theresome difference of view here as to how much tighter or lessaccommodative [we should be].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But isn't there some difference of view here as to how much tighter or less accommodative" suggests that there are differing opinions or perspectives on the matter being discussed.


Passage number 820.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I made the minimum statement that I don'tthink anybody wants to misspecify here in the sense that it gives themarket some notion that, in the newspaper parlance, there is an easingof policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the market and stating that no one wants to misspecify or misinterpret the easing of policy.


Passage number 821.
MR. WALLICH. That would be contrary to expectations and veryconfusing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply acknowledging that the mentioned scenario would go against expectations and cause confusion.


Passage number 822.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say that whatever [borrowing]number we arrive at here, I think we need some flexibility to managethings so that at the minimum that impression is not created.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing the need for flexibility in order to manage things and prevent a certain impression from being created.


Passage number 823.
MS. TEETERS. On the other hand, with some exceptions, Idon't think there's strong sentiment to ratchet the rate rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the opinion of Ms. Teeters about the sentiment towards rapidly increasing the rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 824.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is an entirely different question. Idon't want to disagree. But could I at least assume by my very modeststatement that if by some development the borrowing turned out to bequite consistent with a 9-3/4 percent federal funds rate, that wehaven't got enough borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The phrase "But could I at least assume" suggests that there is a disagreement or discrepancy in opinion.


Passage number 825.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think the market is expecting more thanthis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing his personal opinion that the market is expecting more than what is currently happening.


Passage number 826.
-84-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, that's the other question--how muchto go beyond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a mathematical expression.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 827.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think we're in very serious danger of losingcredibility as an agency that is trying to hold down inflation. Itseems to me that the numbers have been coming in very strong on thereal economy. We have been looking at money and credit numbers thatare very large in any kind of historical perspective. We are doing soin the second year of a recovery when expectations have been greatlyexceeded. We are doing so in the context of a fiscal policy that isthe most stimulative we've ever seen. I just don't know how we cantalk about making sure we don't ease. The situation calls for morethan that. It calls for more, in my judgment, than just confirmingfor the market the fact that interest rates have gone up in recentweeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, expresses concerns about losing credibility as an agency trying to control inflation and believes that the current economic numbers and fiscal policy call for more action than just maintaining interest rates. This suggests that there is disagreement or contention regarding the appropriate response and actions to be taken in the current economic situation.


Passage number 828.
MR. MORRIS. Also, Mr. Chairman, with a 2 percentage pointspread between the discount rate and the funds rate, I think adiscount rate increase of only a half point would be interpreted bythe market as acting a little tentatively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply expressing his opinion about the potential interpretation of a discount rate increase by the market.


Passage number 829.
MR. PARTEE. How about a quarter point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 830.
MR. MORRIS. I'm talking about 1 point. We have a 2 pointspread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply stating that he is talking about one specific point, the two-point spread.


Passage number 831.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 832.
 A half point iswhat the market is going to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will tell you: In this particular city ahalf point will be an explosion. It will carry a certain message.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that a half point will have a significant impact in a particular city.


Passage number 833.
MR. MARTIN. And in some foreign capitals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the existence of foreign capitals.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 834.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In fact, a quarter point move wouldcarry an interesting message. If we went back to quarter point moves,it would be interpreted as meaning that we're not going to have a lotof volatility in the next year--that basically we are thinking interms of more cautious moves and that that will be the likely patternover the next year. I don't think we want that interpretation either,for the reasons that Lyle has pressed so strongly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
The passage indicates disagreement as the speaker opposes the interpretation that a quarter point move would convey a message of caution and predicts that it is not the desired interpretation. The mention of Lyle pressing strongly on certain reasons further suggests a divergence of opinions.


Passage number 835.
 I think a halfpoint is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I have established a bare minimumon the substantive objective for the borrowing, but the question iswhether we start with this. We certainly [can] raise it. This maywell be consistent with a tightening. It is the strongest netborrowed reserve position we will have had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and considerations, discussing the potential for raising a certain point and its implications without mentioning any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 836.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And you do have the flexibilityyou're going to need in case we are wrong on the borrowing and forsome reason the fed funds rate that falls out of the borrowingassumption is on the down side. I think that's pretty clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a belief that the flexibility being discussed is clear.


Passage number 837.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right. And [the Board] obviouslyhas the flexibility to raise the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact and an opinion.


Passage number 838.
-85-3/26-27/84MR. WALLICH. Some tightening I think has to come or [thefunds rate will] fall below expectations. It doesn't have to be avery large one, and I could see that there would be another step sometime in the future. But I don't think we can just stabilize thingsbecause the rates have gone up somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that some tightening needs to occur in order to prevent the funds rate from falling below expectations. They also suggest that another step may need to be taken in the future. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 839.
MR. MARTIN. I don't think anybody is arguing that we shoulddo that, Henry. And that may be the bare minimum. I remind the groupthat the staff forecast is still geared around a statement that therisk of error is on the down side not on the up side, and there isconsiderable merit in my view in that position. So, we do needflexibility in both directions. I haven't any problem with adirective--either draft of the statement--that emphasizes thetightening side and not the more accommodative side, but I think bothsides need to be in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees that there is merit in the staff forecast's position and emphasizes the need for flexibility in both directions. They express no problem with a directive that emphasizes the tightening side.


Passage number 840.
MR. PARTEE. I would agree with Pres. I think this istending to go too far. Who is it that we are trying to satisfy. Thegnomes of Zurich. There are a lot of people who don't want to see atightening. As a matter of fact if you went out and took a poll, youwould find that a vast majority of the American public would beopposed to a tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the President and expresses their own opinion about not wanting to tighten something.


Passage number 841.
MR. WALLICH. But they expect it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement by Mr. Wallich is presented as a fact or observation.


Passage number 842.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck, I was telling Paul that myboard of directors had indicated already that we should not tighten --not raise the discount rate--in their view until we actually seeincreased inflation. They argue that at this point it's too early totake away the punch bowl. They want us to wait until we actually seeit; I say we may be too late then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply relaying a conversation they had with someone else and stating the differing views of their board of directors.


Passage number 843.
MR. PARTEE. We heard a lot of expressions like that as wewent around the table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that "We heard a lot of expressions like that," indicating that there were multiple expressions discussed. However, it does not imply any contention or disagreement among the participants.


Passage number 844.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just suggest that there is going tobe no formulation that is going to take care of all the contingenciesthat I see in the next two weeks much less in the period until we meetagain in 8 weeks. In the interest of testing: The minimum sense thatI have is that we don't want to convey any chance of easing. We startoff with $1 billion on the borrowing assumption and something like$600 million more or less as the excess reserve number. That couldbring some tightening in and of itself but I'm sure it doesn't bringany easing. We have the discount rate issue. I don't know what [theBoard is] going to do but it is clearly an option and we don't makeany automatic decision here that we will reduce the borrowing simplybecause we raise the discount rate. If things come in such that wewant to reassess this in the next couple of weeks, we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no apparent contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different factors and options, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 845.
MR. BALLES. I think that makes eminent sense, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Balles is agreeing with the suggestion made by the Chairman.


Passage number 846.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Presumably, there is some sense of anupward limit. If the Board raised the discount rate and we found outby not reducing the borrowing assumption that fed funds were tradingin the neighborhood of 11 percent--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention, it simply highlights a hypothetical scenario and raises a possibility without stating any conflicting views.


Passage number 847.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd be a little concerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses a personal concern or worry, without taking a definitive position or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 848.
-86-3/26-27/84MR. BOYKIN. Technically, Mr. Chairman, can the borrowingassumption be changed other than by the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is a technical question about whether the borrowing assumption can be changed by someone other than the Committee.


Passage number 849.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We change it all the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "We change it all the time" does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that "it" is subject to frequent modification or alteration without implying any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 850.
MR. BOYKIN. All the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes the statement "All the time" without any additional information, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 851.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I say we change it all the time. We don'tfiddle around with it from week to week, but we get a sense of whatthe directive says. This time we would change it if the money supplywere coming in stronger and business remained strong or whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about changing "it" (presumably referring to a directive or policy) if certain conditions are met. There is no conflicting point of view presented.


Passage number 852.
MR. BOYKIN. My point is that those of us who don't vote onthe discount rate would have nothing to say about what was done withthe borrowing assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that does not imply any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 853.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless there were a consultation. Ifsomething drastic happened, presumably there would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is conditional and suggests that a consultation would be necessary if something drastic occurred.


Passage number 854.
MR. BOEHNE. I think what you're saying is that you are goingto look through the borrowings to the funds rate--not that you wouldbe fixing the funds rate, but that with all this uncertainty one isnot oblivious to what happens to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying the point being made by the other person and agreeing with it.


Passage number 855.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not oblivious, that's right. If I had asense that we were getting a lot more tightness out of this than Ijudge we were really looking for, we would redo it. That I can assureyou. You may certainly take it for granted that if there were alittle easing out of it, we would adjust it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply explaining that if they believe there is too much tightness or not enough easing in a situation, they would take steps to fix it.


Passage number 856.
MR. GUFFEY. And that's starting from the benchmark ofaccepting "B" with borrowing of a billion dollars and $600 million inexcess reserves and someplace between 10-1/4 and 10-1/2 percent on thefunds rate, as indicated in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement that describes certain conditions or benchmarks without any conflicting views or opinions being expressed.


Passage number 857.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, excepting your last statement. Iwould accept the others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is only saying that they agree with all the statements except for the last one.


Passage number 858.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It could easily be between 10-1/4 and10-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a range of numbers between 10-1/4 and 10-3/4 percent.


Passage number 859.
MR. GUFFEY. No, I'm talking about [the funds rate] without adiscount rate [increase].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement by Mr. Guffey.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 860.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No. Without a discount rateincrease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without a discount rate increase" suggests that there is a disagreement or opposing viewpoint regarding the need for a discount rate increase. This implies that there are different opinions about whether or not a discount rate increase is necessary.


Passage number 861.
MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage about Mr. Guffey.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 862.
 If you accept the commentary in the Bluebook,it's 10-1/4 percent with $1 billion borrowing and some possibilityof--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not going to accept a federal fundstarget that narrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they are not going to accept a federal funds target that narrow, which implies that they disagree with the suggested target mentioned in the Bluebook commentary.


Passage number 863.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, no. I'm just trying to get a benchmark,though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. 
In the passage, Mr. Guffey is simply stating that he is not trying to argue or create disagreement. He clarifies that he just wants to establish a benchmark, indicating that his intention is not to cause any contention.


Passage number 864.
-87-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we are told is the most likelyoutcome. If we get less than that, I think the discussion sayssomething is the matter. If we have a sense of easing, somethingought to be tightened up; if we get a little above that, I'm not sureI would have that sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the potential outcome and their uncertainty about the implications.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 865.
MR. GUFFEY. I agree on the easing, but I guess I'm concernedabout approaching that 11 percent rate--whether with $1 billionborrowing without a discount rate increase or some other level with adiscount rate increase. That 11 percent triggers some real concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "but I guess I'm concerned about approaching that 11 percent rate--whether with $1 billion borrowing without a discount rate increase or some other level with a discount rate increase" suggests that Mr. Guffey has concerns about the approach to reaching an 11 percent rate and is unsure whether to borrow $1 billion without a discount rate increase or increase the discount rate at a different level.


Passage number 866.
MS. TEETERS. Let me see if I can restate it, Roger. The "B"specification with the $600 million excess reserves, in my mind, has afederal funds rate that fluctuates between 10 and 11 percent. And ifit were persistently at 11 percent, you would adjust to bring it down.If it were persistently at 10 percent or below, you would adjust tobring it up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 867.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would modify that. If I assess thisdiscussion correctly, I would wait for it to be [persistent]. I'm nottalking about [the funds rate on] a particular day but some judgmentabout the whole atmosphere. It wouldn't be below 10 percent and Idon't think it would be down to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own opinion and perspective on the situation, without contradicting or challenging any previous statements.


Passage number 868.
MS. TEETERS. But I don't want to see it go above 11 percentand stay there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a personal preference or desire for something to not go above a certain percentage. There is no indication of opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 869.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not talking about getting upabove 11 percent either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and clarifying that they are not discussing percentages above 11.


Passage number 870.
MR. MARTIN. I join Roger if Roger is still where Roger wasafter this discussion--no offense, Roger. To have 11 percent afterthe number of weeks we were at 9-1/4 to 9-1/2 percent and to have ithold any length of time at all I think would be an undue [increase].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is expressing agreement with Roger's previous statement.


Passage number 871.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the very short run if nothing elsehappens, I'm talking about misspecifying on the low side. I wouldinterpret that in the very short run as misspecification on the highside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply presents a hypothetical scenario regarding misspecification.


Passage number 872.
MR. WALLICH. You said, Mr. Chairman, that in the case of adiscount rate increase [there would be] no automatic change inborrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states the perspective of Mr. Wallich regarding the lack of an automatic change in borrowing.


Passage number 873.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Depending on where the fed funds rateis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only mentions that the fed funds rate depends on location, without presenting any conflicting views or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 874.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Obviously, it's consistent with whatwas just said. If things were very tight, we would take that intoaccount in changing the discount rate. We may want to change thediscount rate but we might not want to do it without some offsettingadjustment, and we could consider that at the time if it appearednecessary. But I don't think there's any presumption that that'sgoing to appear necessary. If it seemed to be a little too easy, inthe wisdom of the Board we can raise the discount rate and that wouldbe one factor bearing upon that decision. Let's come back to thatfunds rate question we left dangling--this 1/2 percentage pointquestion. My own preference, knowing that this presumably isn't going-88-3/26-27/84to be published for a month or more, is to raise the funds rate rangea full percentage point to [7 to] 11 percent in the comfort that if wewanted to go higher, we would. But I'm not sure I want the largerheadline implied unnecessarily, on the order of [another] 1/2percentage point on the range [by going to 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent].I might well want to go there, but I can go there without the extraheadline of saying we had that [in the directive but didn't implementit.] It's like that very asymmetrical directive that we had workedout all right in December. Nothing happened; it never was triggered.But it became a fact of life that the directive was written that way.If, contrary to expectations, the economy began levelling off and wenever got to the 11-1/2 percent, I'd just as soon not have it in therecord.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their preference to raise the funds rate range by a full percentage point, but they are unsure about including an additional half percentage point in the range. They do not want the larger headline to be implied unnecessarily and would prefer to not have it in the record if it is not necessary.


Passage number 875.
MR. GUFFEY. I would agree that 7 to 11 percent makes moresense. It has never constrained us in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, agrees with the statement that 7 to 11 percent makes more sense, and further adds that it has never constrained them in the past. There is a consensus in the statement.


Passage number 876.
MR. PARTEE. Are we back to talking about the funds rate. Ithought we had decided that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of the speaker's understanding or recollection.


Passage number 877.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we left [open] this 1/2 percentagepoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 878.
MR. BOEHNE. Things have a way of coming back to the front.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement simply suggests that things have a tendency to resurface or become relevant again. It does not indicate any disagreement or dispute.


Passage number 879.
MR. MARTIN. And for those who feel there isn't room foraction, there is some some distance between 11 percent and 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting a statement or fact about the difference in percentages.


Passage number 880.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a preference. It's not anoverwhelming one, but it is very relevant. My preference is purelyhow it plays in the press. If we exceed the 11 percent before thenext meeting, it won't make any difference. We will have exceeded itby the time [the directive is published].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their preference and stating that it is relevant in terms of how it will be portrayed in the press. There is no conflicting view or opposing argument presented.


Passage number 881.
MS. TEETERS. You are proposing alternative B with the fedfunds rate range of 7 to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Ms. Teeters is proposing alternative B with a fedfunds rate range of 7 to 11 percent. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 882.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I could probably live with M1 at6 percent as a round number. But that's visual, too; it's not goingto affect operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their willingness to compromise and accept a certain percentage, stating that it won't have a significant impact on operations.


Passage number 883.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. As I said earlier, I can live witheither 7 to 11 percent or 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent. I don't feel thatstrongly about it. And I think you have a majority for the numbers onthe three Ms as they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they can live with either range of percentages and does not feel strongly about it. They also believe that there is a majority in agreement with the numbers mentioned.


Passage number 884.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can live with any of them, but I amexpressing this vague cosmetic preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they can live with any option, indicating their flexibility and lack of strong opinions. They then mention having a vague cosmetic preference, but there is no disagreement or contention involved in expressing this


Passage number 885.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And we have $1 billion on borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact without any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 886.
MR. PARTEE. I'd be inclined to vote against this 7 to 11percent. I just don't think there's enough room from where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses his inclination to vote against something, indicating disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 887.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, what you're trying to do is to hold thefunds rate in the 10-1/4 to 10-3/4 percent range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing disagreement with the proposed action of holding the funds rate in the 10-1/4 to 10-3/4 percent range.


Passage number 888.
-89-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE. Well, I understood all that conversation to beonly the initial word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage does not include any conflicting opinions or arguments. It simply describes the understanding of a person regarding a conversation.


Passage number 889.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement stated in the passage.


Passage number 890.
MR. PARTEE. And the question is: What do we do if theaggregates come in stronger. I think we have to have some room tomove the rates and ought to have enough room to move the funds rate upabove 11--in the 11-1/4 to 11-1/2 percent range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is suggesting that if the aggregates come in stronger, they should have some room to move the rates and potentially increase the funds rate to a range of 11-1/4 to 11-1/2 percent.


Passage number 891.
MR. CORRIGAN. I don't care about the numbers, but I surelycare about having a clear understanding--whether it's in the directiveor not--of a willingness to move in that direction if we have to move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It expresses a personal preference and a desire for clarity.


Passage number 892.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But arguing the other side, if wehave a range of 7 to 11 percent and the funds rate persistently for aweek or longer goes above the 11 percent, then we'll have aconsultation. So, I don't know that we're really blocking any action,Jerry, if we use 7 to 11 percent. Do you think there would be asignificant public relations impact of having 11-1/2 percent as theupper bound when it comes out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 893.
MR. PARTEE. It depends on what the rates are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the outcome depends on the rates, without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 894.
MR. RICE. Only if we don't have to go that far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Rice is stating that they would only go that far if a certain condition is met.


Passage number 895.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Significant, I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 896.
MR. CORRIGAN. The only problem I see, Tony, with stayingwith the 7 to 11 percent is that if we run into the [situation] wherewe have to move and operate above 11 percent persistently, then we'releft with the decision of having to change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 897.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, the last time the range was 6 to 10percent and that didn't in any way interfere with going over the 10percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is stating a fact about the previous range and indicating that it did not interfere with surpassing the 10% mark.


Passage number 898.
MR. CORRIGAN. No, but we suspended it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Corrigan states that they suspended something but does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 899.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In some sense, the only difference itmakes is if we don't get up there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the only difference is whether or not someone gets up there.


Passage number 900.
MR. BOEHNE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage only includes one person speaking and there is no indication of any disagreement or contention between multiple parties.


Passage number 901.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because when we get up there I assumewe're going to exceed it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing an assumption or expectation about exceeding a certain expectation or limit.


Passage number 902.
MS. TEETERS. There has never been any press comment when wehave exceeded the ceilings, at least as I [recall].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of disagreement or contention. It is simply stating a fact or personal recollection about press comment related to exceeding ceilings.


Passage number 903.
MR. ROBERTS. No, there was this last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 904.
MR. CORRIGAN. You may see some on Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Corrigan is simply informing someone that there may be something to see on Friday.


Passage number 905.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states that Mr. Boehne agrees or confirms something without any conflicting opinions or disagreements presented.


Passage number 906.
-90-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, They are going to see that wesuspended the ceiling a week before. I had not noticed the marketpaying a lot of attention to these changes in the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about suspending the ceiling a week before and the speaker's observation about the market not paying attention to these changes.


Passage number 907.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only thing I am reacting to is thatwhen they get the directive the press will say "Federal Reservetightens because they raised the federal funds rate range. And thissays they would tighten a little more." The only contingency I'mguarding against is that we never get there and some article says,"Oh, they were all prepared to go up; what they wanted to go to was11-1/2 percent"--or whatever interpretation they put on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing caution and a concern about a potential misinterpretation or misunderstanding by the press.


Passage number 908.
 Theydon't know whether that's--MR. FORRESTAL. There is the risk of the press reacting tothat 11-1/2 percent if we don't get to it. If we have 7 to 11percent, we still have the freedom within two weeks to have aconsultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 909.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's why my preference is not all thatstrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
In the passage, the author simply states their preference without mentioning any conflicting opinions or presenting a differing point of view.


Passage number 910.
MR. FORRESTAL. To me, 7 to 11 percent really makes a lot ofsense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting opinions or arguments. It simply states that the speaker, Mr. Forrestal, finds 7 to 11 percent to be logical or reasonable.


Passage number 911.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It really depends I suppose in substance--forgetting about my point--on whether the Committee wants to have aconsultation if the rate gets there. That's what it mechanicallydoes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a conditional statement and discussing the potential actions of a committee.


Passage number 912.
MR. FORRESTAL. It's a long time between meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the time between meetings.


Passage number 913.
MR. PARTEE. Well, this seems to me an entirely differentmatter than the December meeting vote, as I interpreted that. Themarket was surprised to read that we would have been prepared totighten if business had been strong. And, of course, they werereading this at a time when business was strengthening. Therefore,it's not so unreasonable to assume that if we were prepared then, wemust be prepared now. That's quite different from a technical top toa range before we have a consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is describing an individual's interpretation and reasoning about a topic.


Passage number 914.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Based upon all the experience, I don'tinterpret it as a barrier anyway. But it is a mechanical point thatmeans we have a consultation. So, where do you want the consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the need for a consultation without any conflicting ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 915.
MR. GUFFEY. At 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker's statement, "At 11 percent," is likely in response to a previous argument or claim, indicating a difference of opinion or contention regarding the topic being discussed.


Passage number 916.
MS. TEETERS. At 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or further information. The passage provided is too short and does not contain any specific information or statement that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 917.
MR. MARTIN. At 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Martin about a specific percentage.


Passage number 918.
MR. PARTEE. At 11-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a percentage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 919.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'd rather have the consultation now. I don'tthink we will see anything in the next two weeks that is going to beconvincing on where the economy is going to go. And two weeks more onthe money numbers is not going to tell us anything about longer-termtrends of money, which is what really matters. I think we're pussy-footing. I think we've been sitting here for some months now looking-91-3/26-27/84at an economy that continues to exceed everybody's expectations. Thisis going to come back to haunt us if we don't decide to act. And wecan't act by just confirming what happened in the market in the pastcouple of weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses his disagreement with the current approach of waiting and believes that action needs to be taken.


Passage number 920.
MR. FORRESTAL. Do you interpret alternative B as justvalidating that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage provided is a partial statement and does not contain any context or information that suggests contention or disagreement. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement based on this limited information.


Passage number 921.
MR. GRAMLEY. I do indeed. That's what we're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, Mr. Gramley expresses agreement by saying "I do indeed." This indicates that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 922.
MR. BOYKIN. That was the question I wanted to ask: If wetake "B" as specified and say 7 to 11 percent, have we done anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It simply states a question that the speaker wants to ask.


Passage number 923.
MR. GRAMLEY. Not in my judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply states Mr. Gramley's judgment without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 924.
MR. BOYKIN. That's the way I'm reading it.SPEAKER(.). That's a matter of opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers are expressing their own interpretations or opinions without conflicting with each other.


Passage number 925.
MS. TEETERS. We haven't done anything today, but the rateshave gone up 3/4 of a point in the past two weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the increase in rates over the past two weeks.


Passage number 926.
MR. BOYKIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 927.
 Yes, I know, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, I think we've done something today--depending upon how one looks at it. You keep looking at the federalfunds rate. We are now operating on a directive that says we are notthat far over it; it says no free reserves and no net borrowedreserves, basically. And we just changed that. We now say we areoperating on a net borrowed reserve directive. Whether the marketreally has anticipated that in its movement is the real question. ButI don't think there's any question that we have tighter specificationsthan we are now operating under.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 928.
MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided.


Passage number 929.
 MARTIN & MR. GUFFEY. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states two names without any indication of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 930.
MR. GRAMLEY. I just don't translate net borrowed reserves asrestraint on the economy. I think the more relevant consideration iswhat happens to interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It only presents the perspective of Mr. Gramley regarding the translation of net borrowed reserves and the relevance of interest rates.


Passage number 931.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you can argue that interest rateshave already anticipated that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply presents an argument or viewpoint.


Passage number 932.
MR. GRAMLEY. That's my view. What I want is a largermovement in interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That's my view" indicates that Mr. Gramley is expressing his personal opinion and there is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 933.
MR. WALLICH. I agree. We need some move and the onlyvisible thing is interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, agrees with the statement that there needs to be some action taken, and suggests that adjusting interest rates is the visible and possible solution.


Passage number 934.
MR. MARTIN. But it has only been six weeks and rates havegone up 125 points. How fast do you want to move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 935.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm assuming that the direction we'removing, with alternative B, is going to give us at least a 25 basispoint further move, in addition to what the market has done ininterest rates. And I think the Chairman is going to make darn surethat it comes out that way. In other words, there is going to be an-92-3/26-27/84impression in the market that we have tightened if we come out withalternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their assumption and belief about the direction and outcome of a decision.


Passage number 936.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By no means would I say that it's not avalid view that we should be tightening and that one might just wantto get interest rates up--period. But I don't think we can be in aconceptual position of saying that every time the markets anticipate amove we have to ratchet it up one step further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 937.
MR. GRAMLEY. I agree with that, certainly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker clearly states that they agree with the statement, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 938.
MR. MARTIN. I would agree with Tony, but I don't think it's25 basis points; it's more likely 50. I think we're talking [aboutgoing from] 10-1/4 percent to 10-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Though Mr. Martin agrees with Tony's general point, there is disagreement or contention about the specific number of basis points. Mr. Martin believes it is more likely to be 50 basis points instead of 25 basis points.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 939.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay, we can't pin it down that much.But I'm assuming that there will be some upward movement if we go inthis direction. Are you saying that you don't believe that or are yousaying that's too little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The first person is assuming that there will be some upward movement if they go in a certain direction, while the second person is questioning or challenging this belief.


Passage number 940.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, if I interpret the Chairman's commentscorrectly, he doesn't want to see the fed funds rate get down toward10 percent and he would be uncomfortable with it getting up to 11percent. And he's thinking about playing the net borrowed reserveobjective so that the federal funds rate stays in a 10-1/4 to 10-3/4percent range. Now, that has a midpoint of 10-1/2 percent and we'renot far from that now, which means that I don't see much change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is simply explaining his interpretation of the Chairman's comments and stating his observation that there is not much change needed in the current situation.


Passage number 941.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the federal funds rate stayed at10-1/2 percent, just to put it there [unintelligible]. A perfectlygood example: I don't think it would be long before the prime ratewent up another half point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario regarding the federal funds rate and potential consequences on the prime rate.


Passage number 942.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the funds rate in this two-weekperiod so far is averaging just over 10 percent. That's how it'sgoing to come out tomorrow--say, 10-1/8 percent or somewhere aroundthere. We only had a 10-1/2 percent rate in passing for a couple ofdays. I think if borrowing of $1 billion with normal excess reservesgets you a funds rate of 10-1/2 percent, that will be viewed as asignificant tightening because it's sustained.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the funds rate and the potential impact of borrowing $1 billion.


Passage number 943.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it will be too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their personal opinion without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 944.
MR. MARTIN. Of course it will.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin's statement is straightforward and does not involve any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 945.
MR. GUFFEY. Just to reinforce that, last week the rate wasjust about at 10 percent; it was 10.04 percent. And it has gone upthis week if it comes out to 10-1/8 percent. Now you're talking about10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as there is only a mention of the interest rate increasing. It is a statement of fact rather than a discussion or argument.


Passage number 946.
 That's where you're going to get some--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think Steve is absolutely rightabout this thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with Steve and believes he is correct about something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 947.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's just that I'm not trying to hide the move,you see. I think the economy needs to be told that monetary policyhas tightened because the economy is growing much too fast forcomfort. I think we need to do something that's rather obvious anddecisive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is stating his opinion that the economy needs to be informed about the tightening of monetary policy because it is growing too fast. However, it is possible that others may disagree with his belief that this action is necessary.


Passage number 948.
-93-3/26-27/84MR. GUFFEY. As recently as two weeks ago it was at 9-3/4percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a numerical percentage.


Passage number 949.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think maybe you have the wronginstrument in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that the person may be considering the wrong instrument.


Passage number 950.
MR. GRAMLEY. Oh no, I have both instruments in my mind. Ijust haven't got the right forum to talk [about the discount rate].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley mentions that he has both instruments in mind but lacks the appropriate platform to discuss the discount rate.


Passage number 951.
MR. MARTIN. It's way too fast for one quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that something is moving too fast for a specific time period.


Passage number 952.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 953.
 Well, why don't we presidents walkout of the room while you fellows--MR. PARTEE. If we were to have a discussion, I don't thinkyou'd get an immediate decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests a possible solution or suggestion in a polite manner.


Passage number 954.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we used to time these matters in three orfour weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about timing matters in a neutral manner.


Passage number 955.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're all going to be at the WyePlantation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 956.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For these purposes, you are discussing thewrong instrument, I think. I would reinforce what Steve said; I don'thave much question about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement reinforces the previous person's opinion without expressing any form of disagreement.


Passage number 957.
MR. CORRIGAN. I agree with Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker states that they agree with Governor Gramley, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 958.
 I still thinkthat when the decision of last week to suspend the federal funds raterange is publicized this Friday, that in itself is going to be seen bythe market as--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. As confirmation of what they suspect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states the opinion that when the decision to suspend federal funds rate range is publicized, the market will see it as confirmation of their suspicions.


Passage number 959.
MR. CORRIGAN. --symptomatic of the kind of thing they'relooking for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents someone's opinion or observation about the situation.


Passage number 960.
MR. PARTEE. Why don't we leave it suspended.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement providing a suggestion.


Passage number 961.
MR. BLACK. That makes sense to me, but I didn't want to sayit again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 962.
MS. TEETERS. Alternatively, we can take out thespecifications for M1, M2, and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply presenting an alternative option.


Passage number 963.
MS. HORN. Maybe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 964.
MR. BLACK. No, that would be very bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It is a straightforward statement expressing a negative outcome.


Passage number 965.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, as I think you know, there is notmuch in this difference between 7 to 11 and 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.Which way do you want to make it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question, asking the reader to choose between two options without stating a preference or expressing disagreement.


Passage number 966.
MR. MARTIN. 7 to 11.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states "MR. MARTIN." and the numbers 7 to 11.


Passage number 967.
MR. GUFFEY. 7 to 11.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The excerpt does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 968.
MR. BOEHNE. 7 to 11.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 969.
-94-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE. 7-1/2 to 11-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply provides a range of numbers from 7-1/2 to 11-1/2.


Passage number 970.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just Committee members: How many want it 7to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply asking members of the committee to indicate their preference for a percentage range. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 971.
MR. BERNARD. Five.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provided, "MR. BERNARD. Five," does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states an answer or response without any indication of conflicting opinions or conflicting interests.


Passage number 972.
MR. GRAMLEY. I currently get seven.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 973.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Hold up your hands again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Hold up your hands again" as it is a straightforward and clear instruction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 974.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm going to vote for both sides.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "I'm going to vote for both sides" suggests that the speaker intends to support conflicting viewpoints or options, which indicates a disagreement or lack of decision.


Passage number 975.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many want it 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.It can't be much closer. Can we live with 7-1/2 to 11-1/2. Let'shope we can. Now, we have this other number to worry about. I thinkthe only one that's relevant to worry about there is M1. How many canlive with or want it just the way it is: 6-1/2, 8, and 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different percentage options and whether they are acceptable or desirable.


Passage number 976.
MR. BERNARD. Five.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 977.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're only going to get two choices here.The other side is: How many want 6, 8, and 8-1/2 percent. I came outthat it goes the other way--6-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents two opposing sides or choices, one side wanting 6, 8, and 8-1/2 percent, and the other side wanting 6-1/2 percent.


Passage number 978.
MR. PARTEE. Let's try again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 979.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the 6-1/2, 8, and 8-1/2 percenthad the majority. It's a perfect balance. Those who wanted thehigher federal funds rate won, and those who wanted the higher M1 won.How can we get a better consensus than that. Now we can return to thelanguage of the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing satisfaction with the outcome of a decision, stating that it is a perfect balance and a better consensus.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 980.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The trouble with this whole processis that there's no quid-pro-quo bargain. I would trade my vote onsome of those last votes for the wording of the directive you'resaving. The way you're slicing us off, it's a salami tactic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing frustration with the process and criticizing the way they feel they are being treated. They believe there is no fair exchange or compromise happening and accuse the other party of using a manipulative tactic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 981.
MR. PARTEE. Paul's saying no salami goes with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Paul is saying that no salami goes with it, which implies that someone else believes that salami does go with it.


Passage number 982.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how to word this directivewith reserve pressures [unintelligible]. I'm not opposed to it inprinciple; after listening to this other discussion, I just don't knowhow to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The speaker expresses uncertainty and lack of knowledge about how to word a directive, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 983.
MR. BOEHNE. I'd like to suggest that we use Variant II onpage 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a suggestion for using a specific variant.


Passage number 984.
MR. PARTEE. Variant II on page 4 of the draft directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 985.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not show any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Boehne agrees or is in agreement with something that was previously mentioned or asked.


Passage number 986.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, that's misleading to begin with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement made by Mr. Guffey is presented as his opinion or observation, without any explicit disagreement or contention mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 987.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what it means. I literallydo not know what that means. If I had to explain that in public, Iwould be absolutely lost.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing a lack of understanding or knowledge about a particular subject, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 988.
-95-3/26-27/84MR. GUFFEY. It's misleading.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 989.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My only problem with it is that I justdon't understand it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a personal difficulty or lack of comprehension without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 990.
MR. MORRIS. We've been using this language for quite sometime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states that "We've been using this language for quite some time."


Passage number 991.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I didn't have this problem whenexcess reserves were going up and borrowings were going up at the sametime. That's why I say it's just a little technical problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a personal experience or observation without contradicting any other argument or viewpoint.


Passage number 992.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if you thought of it that we areunder net borrowed reserves--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it is stating a fact or a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 993.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're not talking about that. We'resaying there's a significant increase in net borrowed reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 994.
MR. PARTEE. It goes from 0 to $400 million, so we have tosay that we're going to tighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply explaining a range of values.


Passage number 995.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We'd have to say Variant I, then.Would you have the same problem with not knowing what Variant I means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 996.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the actual passage, it is not possible to determine the presence of contention or disagreement in the text.


Passage number 997.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. "To increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: no 

Explanation: The passage does not present any differing opinions or opposing views. It simply states that the goal is to increase something without any conflict or disagreement being mentioned.


Passage number 998.
"MR. MARTIN. "Increase somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Mr. Martin wants to increase something to a certain extent.


Passage number 999.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's a little better, butI obviously interpreted it in terms of net borrowed reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply providing their interpretation of a topic.


Passage number 1000.
MR. WALLICH. I think there's some merit in referring to theincrease in reserve positions that has recently emerged. But itdoesn't swear that we'd maintain that. I think it should be increasedabove that recently emerged level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and considering the possibility of increasing reserve positions.


Passage number 1001.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what has emerged recently in the netborrowed reserve sense is no different than what it was beforehand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that what has emerged recently in terms of netborrowed reserve sense is the same as it was before.


Passage number 1002.
MS. TEETERS. "Emerged" is the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, identifies "emerged" as the problem, suggesting that it might not be the most suitable word choice for the context.


Passage number 1003.
MR. PARTEE. That's the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that there is a problem without explicitly expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 1004.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the problem, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "That is the problem, I think" does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states the sentiment that there is a problem, according to the speaker's perspective.


Passage number 1005.
MR. MARTIN. Because it moved from 0.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement or response without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 1006.
MS. TEETERS. Well, no. Actually, it has been fluctuatingbetween plus and minus $200 million; it averages out to 0.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides information about the fluctuation of a certain amount of money but does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1007.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any context or information about any disagreement or contention related to him.


Passage number 1008.
 That's because we don't hit the--MS. TEETERS. I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by the speaker, and there is no indication of any opposition or conflicting opinion.


Passage number 1009.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In a borrowing sense it's going up, if itis interpreted as borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1010.
-96-3/26-27/84MS. TEETERS. In a net borrowed reserve sense it is going up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a statement about the net borrowed reserve sense, indicating that it is going up. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1011.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Since you can live with Variant I,then the real issue, it seems to me is: Do we stay with that kind ofwording in the directive or do we go to the new wording. What I'mconcerned about is that this new wording leads us in a direction ofmore automaticity in the monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply discussing two options and expressing their concern about the potential consequences of choosing the new wording.


Passage number 1012.
MR. MARTIN. I would share that concern. I think we need tomove up front the language with regard to the economy. That's whatwe've been discussing here--the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. Mr. Martin expresses agreement and reinforces the topic of discussion, which is the economy.


Passage number 1013.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we certainly ought not to keep M1 at theend of the list, as M2, M3, and then M1. I would buy your proposalthat we can make it M1, M2, and M3 as just a more logical way toexpress it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing agreement with the proposal to rearrange the list in a more logical manner.


Passage number 1014.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is to me almost a purely cosmeticpoint, but I think we're walking into difficulties. The whole attackon the Federal Reserve is that we're trying to manage a good growthsituation and that leaves us extremely exposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own perspective, stating that they personally view the point as almost purely cosmetic. However, they do acknowledge potential difficulties in attacking the Federal Reserve and managing a good growth situation.


Passage number 1015.
MR. PARTEE. Because we've tightened. We say here "toretain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 1016.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We say we're tightening because theeconomy is growing too fast. I'm not talking substance now; I'msaying that we are walking into--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage states a statement without any indication of contention or disagreement. It presents a simple statement about tightening economic policy due to a growing economy.


Passage number 1017.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot provide an answer without the passage being provided. Please provide the passage in question.


Passage number 1018.
 I'm very sensitive, Tony, to your concernsabout--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, he may have this great concern aboutthe market; I have a very considerable concern that we are walkingdirectly into the trap of our most vociferous critics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging Tony's concerns and expressing their own concerns about a different aspect.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1019.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But there's also going to be a heckof a lot of concern if people think that we are going back to the kindof volatility we had in interest rates, which I think is damaging bothsubstantively and perception-wise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, the author expresses concern regarding the potential return of volatility in interest rates. This indicates disagreement or contention regarding the desirability of such volatility.


Passage number 1020.
MR. MARTIN. And may have interest rate effects itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Martin, indicating that there may be interest rate effects.


Passage number 1021.
MR. ROBERTS. I think it's a very great leap to say we'regoing back to volatility. My impression of the market is that itwould receive this favorably, Tony. In fact, the market has alreadydiscounted an increased emphasis on M1, which it monitors very, veryclosely, as you know. I think all these arcane issues of theplacement of one thing somewhere else are viewed by the market asrather silly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Roberts is expressing his opinion and impression of the market, stating that he believes the market would receive the mentioned favorably and has already accounted for it. He also suggests that the market views certain issues as "silly." However, there is no opposing view or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 1022.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we follow the Chairman'ssuggestion on the directive as shown on the paper he passed out, wewould be encouraging an increased emphasis on weekly volatility.Moreover, I think the impression that we are going to be moreinfluenced than we have been by money growth is going to lead toexpectations that maybe by the end of the year we won't have seen just-97-3/26-27/84a point or point and a half move, but something significantly largerthan that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their thoughts and expectations about following the Chairman's suggestion and the potential consequences of it.


Passage number 1023.
MR. ROBERTS. Of course, the real question is: Suppose wehave 10 percent money growth--pick your own aggregate--for a while.What would we do except to let interest rates go up if the market wasdemanding that level of credit. Since that's all we can do, why isthat such a concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. Roberts is stating a hypothetical situation and asking a question about it. There is no explicit contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1024.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I feel that we did a lot of damage tothe economy by the enormous swings [in interest rates] from 8 percentto 20 percent and then down again. I think if we had stayed longer attighter levels, we wouldn't have had to go up to 20 percent. Now, Iunderstand the rationale, but I think the notion that we don'tinfluence interest rates--that all we are doing is targeting moneygrowth--has gotten very thin in the country. We moved away from thatand we used the excuse that the velocity of circulation was no longerin a typical traditional relationship. What would you say. You haveto say that we're back again in a period where the velocity ofcirculation is a little more dependable. And this all fits in withthe feeling that we would get in the market that we're returning tothe pre-summer of 1982 [approach to policy].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their belief that the swings in interest rates caused damage to the economy and suggests that if tighter levels were maintained, the rate wouldn't have gone up to 20 percent. They also argue against the notion that the Federal Reserve does not influence interest rates, saying it has become thin in the country. This implies a disagreement with the prevailing belief or consensus on interest rate influence.


Passage number 1025.
MR. ROBERTS. Well, in fact our language has been suggestingjust that: that we have been assuming we would get a more normalpattern of velocity. It does appear to be emerging. We are chargedlegislatively with managing the aggregates. This takes us away fromthis accusation that we're trying to downplay the growth in the realeconomy. I think this is an excellent statement in the rightdirection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roberts is stating that their language has suggested they were assuming a normal pattern of velocity and it appears to be emerging. He also mentions that they are charged legislatively with managing the aggregates and that this accusation of downplaying growth is not accurate. He concludes by stating that he believes the statement is in the right direction.


Passage number 1026.
MR. BOEHNE. I think Tony is right that it is wearing thin inthe country. I don't think the rationale that interest rates aregoing up because of the money supply cuts much ice anymore. It serveda useful purpose in the late '70s and early '80s, but I don't think itwill fly to try to go back to using that as a rationale.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne agrees with Tony that the rationale that interest rates are going up because of the money supply is no longer convincing to the public.


Passage number 1027.
MR. ROBERTS. We don't in fact use it as a rationale. We saythat is our policy--that what we control is the money supply and ifdemand rises, the effect of that is that interest rates move--insteadof saying that we set an interest rate independent of its response onthe aggregates. [The latter] doesn't seem to be very rational in aperiod when we all agree that the inflationary danger is rising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. Roberts is explaining the policy on controlling the money supply and the response to changes in demand. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage.


Passage number 1028.
MS. TEETERS. We were legislatively instructed not only towatch the aggregates but interest rates, real growth, inflation, andunemployment. And the sentiment on the Hill is toward managing thereal economy, not the monetary aggregates, at the present time. Iagree with Tony. If we go back to emphasis on M1 and put it up frontand at the beginning of the road, we could create very unstableconditions in the economy. And interest rates will be transferredinto the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MS. TEETERS agrees with Tony and expresses concerns about the emphasis on M1 and its potential impact on the stability of the economy.


Passage number 1029.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only contains the name "MR. GRAMLEY" without any additional information or context.


Passage number 1030.
 I don't think anybody's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think our theology is in full swing onboth sides.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It states that the speaker believes that both sides of their theology are in full swing.


Passage number 1031.
-98-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE. Everybody so far has taken a predictable pointof view--100 percent predictable. I was wondering whether we couldfuzz this up a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the desire to introduce some ambiguity or uncertainty in the discussion.


Passage number 1032.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's fuzz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the phrase "Let's fuzz" as it does not present any contrasting or conflicting ideas. It simply suggests engaging in a certain activity without any indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 1033.
MR. PARTEE. In the first place, we could make it "broadlyconsistent" as a way to fuzz the annual rates of growth in M1, M2, andM3. That's what has to be done--make it broadly consistent--becausewe don't know what those multiplier changes are or what excessreserves are going to be and all that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee suggests a solution and acknowledges the uncertainty surrounding the multiplier changes and excess reserves.


Passage number 1034.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could take the radical step of puttinga range around all the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement proposes a radical step without presenting any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1035.
MR. PARTEE. I was thinking we could say annual rates of"around." That would be one other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The phrase "around" suggests that there is some level of uncertainty or flexibility in determining the annual rates. This could potentially lead to disagreement or differing opinions on what exactly the "around" range should be.


Passage number 1036.
MR. MARTIN. We could actually use ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement suggesting a practical use for ranges. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1037.
MR. PARTEE. The trouble with that is that it makes the edgepoints of the ranges pretty sensitive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement given by Mr. Partee does not express any disagreement or contention. He is simply stating a concern about the sensitivity of the edgepoints of the ranges.


Passage number 1038.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You know, we're really exaggerating thedifference between these two languages. The first says "maintain/increase somewhat/ decrease" and that gets into this problem of whatit is now. It is possible to say in variant I "anticipating that thisapproach will be consistent." This says "consistent".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the difference between the two languages and explaining the interpretation of a specific phrase.


Passage number 1039.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, apart from the possibility thatyou may for some reason I didn't understand release this prior to thenormal time, I don't understand what all the fuss is about. By thetime the directive comes out at the normal time it is all history.The next meeting has already been held. The May meeting would havebeen over by a week. Am I missing something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing confusion and a lack of understanding about the situation.


Passage number 1040.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The argument is what people will read intothat for the next meeting. But there must be some language thatdoesn't raise the sharpness of the concerns on both sides.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply explains that there is an argument or discussion about what people will interpret or understand from something for a future meeting. It also suggests that there should be some language used that doesn't exacerbate or increase the intensity of concerns from both sides.


Passage number 1041.
MR. WALLICH. Well, putting a range around these short-termmoney aggregates I think would make sense. I'm not very happy withgoing back to M1 in first place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is expressing the speaker's personal opinion about the matter.


Passage number 1042.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no feeling about that one way orthe other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the person has no feeling or preference, indicating a lack of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1043.
MR. PARTEE. I don't know, Henry. I think the range makes itsomewhat more difficult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only includes a statement by Mr. Partee expressing his uncertainty about a certain topic.


Passage number 1044.
MR. WALLICH. Because we might miss it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1045.
MR. PARTEE. Yes. There's a pretty fair chance that M1 isgoing to be at 10 percent or something like that. And if we set arange of 5 to 7 percent, 10 percent is way above the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that there is a possibility of M1 being at 10 percent, which is above the previously mentioned range of 5 to 7 percent.


Passage number 1046.
MS. TEETERS. It's going to be above 6-1/2 too, if it's 10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement made by someone named Ms. Teeters about a numerical value.


Passage number 1047.
-99-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given text "-99-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE" does not provide any information or context to indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It appears to be an isolated sequence of characters without clear meaning or context.


Passage number 1048.
 I know, but the range makes it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does it help anybody to say "In the shortrun the Committee seeks a degree of pressure on bank reserve positionsconsistent with...".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement of fact or opinion without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 1049.
MR. GRAMLEY. I was just hunting for something like that too:"The Committee seeks to maintain pressures on reserve positionsconsistent with...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Gramley.


Passage number 1050.
"MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think that has a lot of merit towardfuzziness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1051.
MR. PARTEE. It even has the great word "maintain" in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the word "maintain" without indicating any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 1052.
MR. WALLICH. "Maintain" suggests that there was no change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states an observation made by Mr. Wallich.


Passage number 1053.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Unintelligible] the plural:"maintains.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is unintelligible, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1054.
"MR. PARTEE. I really think "seeks a degree of" is betterthan "maintain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion about the phrase "seeks a degree of" being better than "maintain".


Passage number 1055.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Seeks a degree of pressure".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "seeks a degree of pressure" simply indicates that there is a desire for a certain level of pressure, without stating whether there is any disagreement or discord involved.


Passage number 1056.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, because we have to test, to probe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that testing and probing are necessary actions.


Passage number 1057.
MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This is not possible to determine as the passage only contains the statement "MR. BOEHNE." Without any additional information or context, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1058.
 And then if we put in "broadly consistent"--MR. PARTEE. And "over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The language used suggests agreement and collaboration between the speaker and Mr. Partee.


Passage number 1059.
"MR. GUFFEY. "As may be modified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "As may be modified" suggests that there could be potential changes or adjustments, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1060.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Over time" sounds a little funny when wetalk about--SPEAKER(.). "Broadly consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the phrase "over time" and how it sounds in a particular context.


Passage number 1061.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Broadly consistent" is all right but thatmakes it [a change]. Last month we were consistent. This month wewill be broadly consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that being "broadly consistent" is acceptable, but notes that it represents a change compared to the previous month when they were consistent.


Passage number 1062.
MR. PARTEE. "At annual rates of around...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or contrasting viewpoints. It is simply stating a fact or statistic.


Passage number 1063.
"MR. GRAMLEY. Or we could go even so far as to say "duringthe period from March to June." We don't hit it from June to July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is suggesting an alternative or additional option without any disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 1064.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to leave out the "broadly" and putin the "around 6-1/2, 8, and 8-1/2 percent." Is that what we have.In the next sentence, though, do we want to clarify precisely whatwe're doing initially on borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is discussing a decision or clarification being made about percentages and borrowings.


Passage number 1065.
MR. GUFFEY. The sentence in parenthesis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1066.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I think it reads all right withoutthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1067.
-100-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE. I have trouble understanding just what thatmeans when I read it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This passage appears to be a math equation or expression, and there is no presence of any conflicting ideas, opinions, or opposing viewpoints that would indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1068.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't have any troubleunderstanding it in view of our discussion. I think it is going tolook a little strange because, after all, it's not unusual for thereto be fluctuations of borrowing in one direction somewhatunexpectedly. And yet I don't think we have noted that before indirectives, have we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement about the speaker's understanding and observations.


Passage number 1069.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we have used reservepressure or reserve restraint as a synonym for borrowing. This justsays borrowings because of the confusion about what the heck we mean.It raises questions, I suppose, but it depends upon how fully we wantto describe what we decided. It reads perfectly well without it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing the use of terminology and the potential confusion it may cause. There is no clear disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 1070.
MR. CORRIGAN. I'd just as soon take it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan simply expresses his preference to remove something without any opposing views or conflict mentioned.


Passage number 1071.
MR. BOEHNE. So would I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses agreement between the speaker (Mr. Boehne) and another person.


Passage number 1072.
MR. CORRIGAN. It gives us more flexibility without it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement made by Mr. Corrigan. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1073.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can leave it out and point out allthese problems in the text [of the policy record]. That's one way ofhandling it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests the possibility of leaving certain information out of the policy record and pointing out the problems with the text. This implies a potential disagreement or contention about whether or not to include all the information in the policy record and how to handle any issues it may present.


Passage number 1074.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. In the given passage, "Mr. Partee" is in agreement with or confirming something that was previously mentioned or asked.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1075.
 It's just that when we say we're seekingthe degree that allows for changing that pressure--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but it's kind of funny when you lookat it. Maybe it will have to be changed. We say "The Committee seeksa degree of pressure." That's a perfectly general statement. Then itsays "greater reserve restraint." Well, that's implied already.There is something logically lacking when you leave out the secondsentence. I have no great desire to leave the second sentence in, butit raises a question about the next sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses doubt and suggests that leaving out the second sentence raises a logical question.


Passage number 1076.
MR. CORRIGAN. Could we change the parenthetical statement toread "should take account of" rather than "be consistent with". Itsays "initially the reserve path and the associated ranges should beconsistent with." Instead of that say "would take account of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan is suggesting a different wording for a parenthetical statement for clarification or improvement, but there is no conflict or disagreement involved.


Passage number 1077.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what that means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their lack of knowledge about the meaning of something, without expressing any conflicting opinions or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 1078.
MR. PARTEE. I don't know either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states a lack of knowledge or uncertainty from Mr. Partee. There is no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1079.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I'm concerned with the way the sentencereads now. It's subject to the interpretation, indeed the meaning,that all we are doing and are prepared to do is ratify what hasalready happened. And I understand this discussion to say somethingmore than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention in this passage because Mr. Corrigan expresses his concern and disagreement with the way the sentence reads currently. He believes that it implies that they are only ratifying what has already happened, whereas he believes the discussion should indicate something more than that.


Passage number 1080.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What it's saying is that all these peoplehave raised questions. I think what we understand it to mean is quiteclear: a billion dollar borrowing assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not expressing disagreement or contention. It is simply stating that people have raised questions and expressing the author's understanding of those questions.


Passage number 1081.
-101-3/26-27/84MR. CORRIGAN. I think it's a little more than that. It's abillion dollar borrowing assumption in which we go to $400 to $500million of net borrowed reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement providing information about a billion dollar borrowing assumption.


Passage number 1082.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1083.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON" does not directly suggest any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions the position or title of Vice Chairman Solomon without providing any context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 1084.
 I think there is going to be avariety of reactions in the market as to what that sentence means--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is true too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges that different individuals may interpret a sentence differently, without indicating any disagreement between the parties involved in the conversation.


Passage number 1085.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. --because they haven't seen itbefore. Therefore, they are going to have a field day with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the individuals are going to enjoy or have fun with something they haven't seen before.


Passage number 1086.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just have a small logical point. Whereare we starting from when we say "greater restraint or lesserrestraint".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for clarification or further explanation rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1087.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1088.
 We know what we're starting from; wehaven't told them before anything about whether the initial borrowingassumption is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what is the meaning of the nextsentence: Greater reserve restraint than the degree of pressure onbank reserve positions consistent with. We're not saying that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It appears to be explaining a situation or scenario without any conflicting statements.


Passage number 1089.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, you could leave out the word "reserve."We could just say "greater restraint would be acceptable in the event"and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a slight modification to the wording of a statement, but there is no indication of conflict or disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 1090.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are better off to make thesentences hang together. Let's go back to Lyle's language: In theshort run the Committee seeks to maintain pressure on bank reservesconsistent. ..
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a personal opinion and does not involve any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 1091.
"MR. GRAMLEY. But use "anticipate will be consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no direct contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley's statement suggests a recommendation or suggestion rather than a disagreement or dispute.


Passage number 1092.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right--"anticipate will beconsistent with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that suggests agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 1093.
"MR. GUFFEY. That's just an alteration of variant I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a simple statement by one person, Mr. Guffey, about an alteration of a variant. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention in the statement.


Passage number 1094.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So that's what we're ending up with.Would you put M1 last in the order. Do you want M2, M3, and Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation or clarification on the order of M1, M2, M3, and Ml.


Passage number 1095.
MR. WALLICH. I would prefer that, although it's very smallsymbolism. To put M1 first has some meaning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses a personal preference for putting M1 first for symbolic reasons.


Passage number 1096.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Every little bit of symbolism counts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply states that symbolism is important and emphasizes the significance of even the smallest elements of symbolism.


Passage number 1097.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Should we start with M3 and say M3, M2,and M1. Is that what you're saying.SEVERAL. No. M2, M3, and Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The response "No. M2, M3, and M1" is simply a clarification or confirmation of the order suggested in the previous statement.


Passage number 1098.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That just looks so peculiar. We couldleave it as separate sentences, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their perception or opinion on how the sentence looks, followed by a suggestion to leave it as separate sentences. There is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement present.


Passage number 1099.
-102-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's the way we've been doing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the way something has been done.


Passage number 1100.
MR. PARTEE. Once we had it in there like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating a fact or recounting a past event without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 1101.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to leave it this way orsay M3, M2, and Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement is not presenting any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion or suggestion regarding a particular matter without conflicting with any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 1102.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only contains the name "MS. TEETERS" with no context or information to suggest any disagreement.


Passage number 1103.
 If you do it backwards--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we leave it this way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting a suggestion or proposal and asking why it cannot be adopted.


Passage number 1104.
MR. MARTIN. You could say M1 from a range of 1 to N.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1105.
MR. GRAMLEY. M1 from 1 to [unintelligible].SPEAKER(.). Just say consistent with the various Ms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1106.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask this: Are you saying thatif you were asked by a Congressional committee whether we are givingequal weight to M1 these days with M2 and M3, you would say yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 1107.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I would say at this particularmeeting "Broadly, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement expresses agreement or consensus by saying "Broadly, yes."


Passage number 1108.
"MR. MARTIN. That's the fact of the matter. That's the waywe've been discussing it. We have been talking about M1 all the time;we haven't been talking about M3 much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 1109.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's because the market gives 90 percentof its attention to M1; and I don't think it is going to change much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The statement is providing a personal opinion about the market's attention towards M1, and does not suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1110.
MS. TEETERS. Aren't you just encouraging that after-hourstrading.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1111.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it makes the slightest bitof difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing personal opinion and does not involve any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 1112.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They are now trading U.S. governmentsecurities in London on an increasingly large scale, so in New Yorkoffices are now opening at 4:00 in the morning, as soon as the Londonmarket opens. There is around-the-world trading in governmentsecurities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents a fact about the trading of U.S. government securities in London and the corresponding opening of New York offices. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 1113.
MR. ROBERTS. They can take the time they gain on Fridays.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement that Mr. Roberts is making without any conflicting opinions or contrasting viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 1114.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I now have "In the short run the Committeeseeks to maintain pressures on bank reserve positions judged to beconsistent with growth in M1, M2, and M3 at annual rates around 6-1/2,8, and 8-1/2 percent respectively during the period from March toJune." Skip the next sentence. Now we go to the next sentence.There is a slight bias in this thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting views or opinions. It simply states the objective of the Committee to maintain pressures on bank reserve positions and certain growth rates of M1, M2, and M3 during a specific period. The mention of a "slight bias" in the next sentence does not introduce any contention or disagreement regarding the information presented.


Passage number 1115.
MR. PARTEE. You could make it a little more by making thesecond one "might" instead of "would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 1116.
"MS. TEETERS. If you want to make it absolutely symmetricaltake out the word "significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement made by "MS. TEETERS" suggests a suggestion for improvement without any opposing viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 1117.
"-103-3/26-27/84MR. CORRIGAN. I don't want it to be symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan simply states his preference for the situation not to be symmetrical.


Passage number 1118.
MS. TEETERS. It's already symmetrical the way it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement made by Ms. Teeters is a straightforward observation, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Put a comma after "business expansion" andtake out the big substantive change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The suggestion to put a comma after "business expansion" and take out the big substantive change is a grammatical suggestion or editing recommendation, which does not involve any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1120.
MR. PARTEE. You really don't want this last sentence inhere, do you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation or agreement about a particular statement.


Passage number 1121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can take out the last sentence.We have a two sentence directive. Put in the word "might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply suggests removing the last sentence and adding the word "might" in the remaining two sentences. This is a suggestion for improvement rather than a point of contention.


Passage number 1122.
"MR. MARTIN. Isn't the rate of credit growth the end of theparade here. We've been bringing it up in our consideration a gooddeal more, it seems to me, at this meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating an observation and seeking confirmation or agreement from the others present in the meeting.


Passage number 1123.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess the question is whether toput a separate sentence in about it. I don't know whether that's goodor bad. I don't know exactly what the sentence would be but I thoughtit might depend on whether we put another sentence in up above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply unsure about whether to include a separate sentence and is considering the potential factors that might influence that decision.


Passage number 1124.
MR. MARTIN. In our discussions we certainly have given it agood deal of consideration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that a certain topic has been given a lot of consideration in the discussions.


Passage number 1125.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If you don't think this gives it toomuch importance, we could simply say "more substantial growth in themonetary aggregates and the rate of credit growth" in that secondsentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a suggestion to potentially rephrase or simplify the second sentence, without expressing any disagreement with the original statement.


Passage number 1126.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: To determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage, we need to have the specific passage provided. Please provide the passage you would like to analyze.


Passage number 1127.
 If there is a difference, any more substantialcredit growth from where we are now is different from even--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We get in trouble if we put it in thefirst half of the sentence. It's logical in the first half of thesentence, but you have to put it in the second half too, I guess.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 1128.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Monetary and credit aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions monetary and credit aggregates without expressing any conflicting opinions or views.


Passage number 1129.
MR. WALLICH. Shouldn't it be "or credit aggregates".Otherwise you're diluting it; everything has to go up if you say"and.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1130.
"MR. PARTEE. I think it is fairly highlighted where it is.We could use the technical term for it, "the rate of growth ofdomestic nonfinancial debt" to show that we're really looking at that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests using a technical term to emphasize a specific aspect, while implying that the current highlighting may not adequately capture that aspect.


Passage number 1131.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somehow that makes it sound so technical.I think it would be the first time we've had that in the directive; ithas some significance just putting it in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a sentiment about something being technical and having significance when included in a directive. There is no conflicting opinion or debate presented.


Passage number 1132.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The market knows that we don't getdata on the technical classification--total domestic nonfinancialdebt--until after a considerable lag. We get some indications ofvarious types of credit growth with less of a lag and, therefore, byleaving the rate of credit growth we are making it a little more-104-3/26-27/84general and a little more operative. Otherwise, they know it's notthat operative since we don't get that particular data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply explains the lag in getting data on the technical classification of total domestic nonfinancial debt. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 1133.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's better that way. If we wantto highlight it more we could say "the rate of credit growth, whichhas been excessive recently." Are we ready to vote. We have asentence here with the federal funds rate range of 7-1/2 to 11-1/2percent, the standard sentence for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a possible improvement or alternative wording and then asking if the group is ready to vote on a particular sentence.


Passage number 1134.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide any information about Mr. Bernard. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 1135.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley NoPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin NoGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich NoCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1136.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You are going to let Lyle[unintelligible] your explanation and you are going to be set free.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1137.
MR. BALLES. May I ask one question just so we don'tmisunderstand the new ground rules here on access to this material.Do I understand now that we are not to inform even our economicadvisors of the numbers in the directive. This is for the Presidentsonly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification on the rules regarding access to certain material.


Passage number 1138.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you can inform them and follow therule. The numbers in the directive are all right, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their opinion that they believe the directive is correct and can be followed.


Passage number 1139.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The recommendations of our Committeesaid specifically a "normal" type of meeting. We didn't get into anyrecommendations on what is executive only [material]. The Chairman issaying handle it in the usual way.SPEAKER(.). It's all right to tell them. Your memo says onlythe Presidents receive the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 1140.
MR. PARTEE. The directive. That's true.SPEAKER(.). The written directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. There is a statement by Mr. Partee followed by a statement by the speaker, but no disagreement or argument is evident.


Passage number 1141.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever the rule on that says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any opinion or statement that could be disputed. It simply mentions a rule without providing any further information or argument.


Passage number 1142.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the rule says that the directiveshould only go to the President, so the other people who would havebeen here won't know the specifications. Unless they see thedirective, they will not know the specifications.SPEAKER(.). Unless the President tells them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply stating a fact about the rule and how it limits who has access to the specifications, while the speaker is not challenging or disagreeing with this statement.


Passage number 1143.
-105-3/26-27/84 -106-MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1144.
 What I assume you're saying is to act--MR. PARTEE. Do you want to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification about what the other person is suggesting.


