Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  As you all know, Vice Chairman Fischer has announced that he will leave the Board next month, which means that this week’s meeting is his last as a member of this Committee.  He’ll be back at some point for a proper sendoff, and I’ll have more to say then.  But I can’t let this occasion pass without trying to sum up what Stan’s service has meant to me, to the Committee, and to the important job we do here on behalf of the American people. I count myself very lucky that soon after I became Chairman, Stan agreed to serve as Vice Chairman, and it was also a fortunate development for the FOMC.  Few people have ever been as comprehensively qualified to serve as Vice Chairman, and few could have brought the credibility to this Committee and its deliberations that Stan did just by walking in the door. As a scholar, Stan is revered as a towering figure in the development of macroeconomics and monetary policy.  As an international policymaker, he’s a proven leader, adept at institution building and crisis management.  And as a central banker, even before his service on the FOMC, Stan had already helped Israel navigate through an era of difficult economic challenges, shielding it from the effects of the financial crisis.  Stan has, of course, taught and, in effect, recruited a generation of leading central bankers.  But I think Don Kohn put it best when he said that all modern central bankers are students of Stan Fischer.  Stan’s knowledge and deep expertise greatly strengthened the work of this Committee.  Our decisions were better, I’m certain, because of Stan’s contributions, and I’m sure that every one of us has gained insight about the economy from Stan.  I’m personally very grateful for Stan’s wise counsel, his insightful participation in our deliberations, and his strong support for the consensus we seek at each meeting, which is so important to the FOMC’s effectiveness. Outside of this room, Stan has been a tireless leader of the Board and the System.  He is surely the most accomplished and respected diplomat to have served on the Board, and, in a very substantive way, Stan was the Fed’s ambassador to the world, ably representing us in multilateral settings. In another sense, Stan has been an ambassador for central banking, speaking with indisputable authority about its vital role in promoting economic and financial stability and using his authority to forcefully defend the need for central banks, such as the Fed, to make monetary policy independent of political influence.  Stan has forthrightly defended the Fed’s work, implementing financial reforms passed by the Congress, and in other ways has been a highly effective spokesman for the Board and the System. In addition, he has shouldered less glamorous responsibilities for the Board and the Committee with dedication and, when it was needed, considerable patience.  I’m grateful, for example, for Stan’s leadership of the communications subcommittee, as I’m sure Stan is grateful he will never again have to mediate [laughter] between the warring factions on fan charts and other potential enhancements to the SEP. One reason for Stan’s success on jobs great and sometimes trying has been the good humor and conviviality he brings to any occasion.  Economics has been called the dismal science, but Stan has shown that that doesn’t mean one has to be a dismal scientist.  Stan’s  positive outlook has enlivened our meetings and lightened the burden of our responsibilities.  For my part, I will dearly miss my weekly lunches with Stan, during which our discussions spanned the fullest possible range of topics.  He has been unfailingly gracious and thoughtful, and it is a great gift to count him not only as an exceptional colleague, but also as a friend. As many of us have experienced, Stan is an uncommonly decent person: kind and caring with family, co-workers, and everyone he encounters.  I found that there are two types of people in the world:  those who admire Stan Fischer and those who haven’t yet had the pleasure of knowing him. On behalf of everyone here, Stan, thank you for your superlative service to the FOMC, the Federal Reserve, and the American people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a tribute to Vice Chairman Fischer and expresses gratitude for his service.


Passage number 2.
  [Applause] MR. FISCHER.  Well, Madam Chair, all I can say is, “So moved.”  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  We will miss your contributions in that way as well.  Now, one other note regarding transitions—as you recall, at the July meeting the Committee elected Mark Van Der Weide to serve as its general counsel effective at the time that he became the Board’s general counsel.  Mark became the Board’s general counsel on August 20, and his election as FOMC general counsel became effective on that date.  Mark, welcome, and best wishes with your new responsibilities. Okay.  Now let’s turn to the agenda.  Our first item of business is to finalize changes to the Committee’s Rules regarding Availability of Information, which deals with FOIA matters.  We received a memo from the staff on this subject early this month.  To summarize briefly, the Committee issued interim final regulations last December primarily to incorporate certain revisions that were required by statute.  As part of that process, the Committee simultaneously  invited public comment on the interim regulations.  Only one set of comments was received from the Office of Government Information Services, or OGIS. The staff recommends that the Committee adopt the substance of one of OGIS’s comments by approving the insertion into an existing provision of language noting the availability of dispute resolution services from OGIS as a nonexclusive alternative to litigation in the event of an adverse appeal of a FOIA denial. The staff recommends that the Committee determine not to adopt the second and third sentences proposed by OGIS because they would be repetitive or because they could create additional legal obligations not required by the statute. The staff recommends that the Committee approve publication of the amended rules as a final rule in the Federal Register.  The amended rules would then become effective after the typical 30-day delay following publication.  Finally, the staff recommends that the Committee authorize the secretary, in consultation with the general counsel, to take the appropriate steps to reflect these changes in the rules and records of the Committee and to submit the appropriate filings with the Federal Register.  All of these proposed steps were set forth in the memo by the staff. Now, first let me ask if there are any questions about the proposal.  [No response]  Seeing none, I suggest we conduct a single vote on the recommended determinations, approvals, and authorizations.  Is there a motion from a Committee member to approve this proposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 3.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  A second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "So moved" indicates agreement or approval, and the chair's response "A second" suggests agreement or support as well.


Passage number 4.
 MR. POWELL.  Second.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  Okay.  Thank you.  That takes us to “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations.”  Let me call on Simon to deliver the first part of the day’s briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange where a person named Mr. Powell is speaking and then Chair Yellen thanks him. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 5.
 MR. FISCHER.  Well done. CHAIR YELLEN.  All right.  If there are no questions, then we need a vote to ratify open market operations, those conducted since the July meeting.  Do I have a motion to approve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The conversation seems to be progressing smoothly without any opposing views or arguments presented.


Passage number 6.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved.  CHAIR YELLEN.  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.  [No response]  Thank you.  Okay.  Then we are ready to move along to the presentations on the economic and financial situation, and let me ask David Wilcox to start us off on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are in agreement as indicated by the unanimous "aye" votes and lack of opposition. The passage mainly focuses on proceeding with the presentations.


Passage number 7.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m going to refer to the international outlook briefing materials—exhibit 2, panels 10, 11, 12, and 13.  These have a Taylor (1999) rule projection of what these foreign economies should be doing with their policy rate versus a staff forecast of what they’re actually likely to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply referring to some briefing materials and discussing the projections of the Taylor (1999) rule and the staff forecast of foreign economies' policy rate.


Passage number 8.
 MR. KAMIN.  The “should” is a notional idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing a hypothetical concept.


Passage number 9.
 MR. BULLARD.  But you could look at these four, and you could say it looks like the foreign economies are going to go off-track as far as their policy is concerned and, therefore, you’re going to get quite a bit of inflation globally.  But I didn’t hear that in your assessment of what’s happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing his perspective and mentioning something that he did not hear in the assessment given by the other person.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 10.
 MR. KAMIN.  Right.  My intended argument was, in some sense, the opposite of that, which was that the Taylor rule takes into account the rate of core inflation and the output gap as it’s currently estimated, but it does not incorporate considerations of the headwinds that might be temporarily pushing down on r*, which was the point of showing some estimates in panel 9.  The actual cyclical r* could be much less than is incorporated into the Taylor rule.  That’s one issue.  Another issue is that it does not take into account any temporary or not-so-temporary factors that might be obstructing the transmission channel going from economic growth to slack in the labor market to wages and to inflation.  And as long as central bankers are both very concerned about the possibility of headwinds depressing cyclical r*, as long as they are also concerned about their inability to identify longer-run r*, and as long as they have concerns about how well the transmission channels are operating through the labor markets, that might well stay their hand and lead them to be more patient in raising rates than would be indicated by the rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker argues against the use of the Taylor rule by pointing out that it does not take into account certain factors, such as the temporary headwinds affecting the economy and the effectiveness of the transmission channels. The speaker suggests that these factors may lead central bankers to be more cautious in raising interest rates than the Taylor rule would suggest.


Passage number 11.
 MR. BULLARD.  So should we just not use the Taylor (1999) rule as a kind of a benchmark or what our economy should be doing with the policy rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification about using the Taylor (1999) rule as a benchmark for policy rate decisions.


Passage number 12.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, in terms of our thinking about it, we wouldn’t, and we don’t, use that rule in order to assess what the central banks are likely to be doing over the next several quarters because we think these headwinds are operative, and, as a result, central banks will have more accommodative policy.  But down the road when we think that, basically, the economies have returned to some version of normality and these short-term headwinds have abated, we think that it might be a decent guide, or at least the best available guide, to where we think the policy rate will go, conditional on our estimate of what the longer-run r* is.  And that’s why, if you look at these panels, in the case of the euro area, Canada, and more or less the United Kingdom, we basically have the policy rate getting up to the neighborhood of those suggestions of the Taylor rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their thinking about the use of a rule to assess central bank behavior, stating that they currently do not use it due to certain factors but might consider it in the future. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 13.
 MR. BULLARD.  I see.  So the Taylor rule would be valuable, but only in the medium term after these headwinds have dissipated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents Mr. Bullard stating his opinion about the value of the Taylor rule in the medium term.


Passage number 14.
  MR. KAMIN.  Yes, in this particular situation.  I won’t say that one should never use the Taylor rule as a guide to short-run policy.  But, in these particular circumstances, it seems like it’s probably not the best guide. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Kamin and Chair Yellen are expressing their opinions on the use of the Taylor rule as a guide to short-run policy, but there is no direct disagreement between them.


Passage number 15.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  To Steve and to David, for much of this year, we’ve been looking at low inflation in the United States and trying to assess whether it is transitory, or whether there is some low trend ahead.  I’m curious, when you look at the international experience, does it tell you anything about the inflation we’re experiencing here.  For example, when we point to low cell phone pricing, I don’t think anybody would argue that low cell phone pricing in America is affecting global inflation.  I’m just curious how you look at the global experience and what it tells you about domestic inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply curious about how the global experience affects domestic inflation.


Passage number 16.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, I think the main lesson that we’re getting from the foreign experience is that we are not alone in facing the conundrum of diminishing slack with low wage growth and low price growth.  In other words, to varying degrees, all of the major advanced economies are wrestling with very similar problems. In the euro area, wage growth is very subdued, inflation is pretty subdued.  They’ve got a decent excuse.  Their unemployment rate is still probably not quite all the way down to equilibrium, but, nevertheless, even in countries in the euro area that have very tight labor markets, like Germany, they haven’t seen that much wage growth. In the United Kingdom, their headline inflation has been kind of artificially boosted by the fall in their exchange rate.  But domestic inflation is low and wage growth is low despite, again, super-tight labor markets, by their standards.  So, basically, I guess my reaction would be, if you really wanted to explain the conundrum of low nominal wage growth, low inflation, tight markets, you’d probably want to come up with an explanation that works not just for the United States, but probably for other advanced economies as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply observing and discussing the similarities in the challenges faced by various advanced economies regarding low wage growth and low inflation despite tight labor markets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Do you have any explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "Do you have any explanation" suggests that there is a disagreement or differing opinions on a particular issue.


Passage number 18.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, the one that I tend to trot out, in the absence of anything better, is that probably workers throughout the advanced economies have been affected or scarred by a couple of experiences, most recently the Great Recession and financial crisis, which led them to be very anxious about their job security, and probably, over a longer period of time, the advent of China and other emerging market economies, which have basically presented a lot of competition to them.  And those factors together in some way might have led to basically more tepid wage demands than you ordinarily see in these circumstances.  I can’t offer you a lot of concrete evidence to support that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their perspective on why workers have had lower wage demands, but they do not mention any conflicting viewpoints or engage in a debate. They simply acknowledge the lack of concrete evidence to support their viewpoint.


Passage number 19.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It simply includes a conveyance of thanks from someone named Mr. Kashkari.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 20.
 MR. WILCOX.  Just very briefly:  Steve mentioned the recognition that we are not alone in the global economy in having low inflation.  We wouldn’t have been inclined to write off our low inflation experience anyway, but it makes us even more cautious or hesitant about doing that.  I think there are some common explanations.  I’m much less familiar with the international data than Steve is, but productivity growth, I believe, is a phenomenon with considerable global effect—lots of economies around the world have been experiencing slow growth of productivity over a protracted period of time.  And I think some of the explanations that President Kaplan has been highlighting in his recent interventions also have commonality across many different countries, with technology-enabled disruption and perhaps heightened competition undermining  the pricing power of firms.  We don’t have a great set of diagnostics or explanations for that.  There are some phenomena that seem, at least prima facie anyway, at odds with that, but the commonality, I’d say, is worrisome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. While Mr. Wilcox agrees with Steve's mention of low inflation in the global economy, he expresses caution and hesitation in fully accepting it. He also mentions that he is less familiar with the international data and offers his own explanation for low productivity growth, which may differ from Steve's perspective. This indicates a difference in opinion and possible disagreement.


Passage number 21.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kashkari is simply thanking Chair Yellen, and there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 22.
 MS. MESTER.  Thanks.  I have a question on the SEP.  I think this is probably the first time in this cycle that in the funds rate path we have overshooting in the median path compared with the long run.  I was just wondering whether the staff thinks that that’s going to be noticed and whether there will be any reaction about that.  Or is it sort of a nonevent that will be washed out with all of the other things that we’re going to be talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question raised by Ms. Mester about whether the staff believes the overshooting in the median path of the funds rate compared to the long run will be noticed or if it will be overshadowed by other discussions.


Passage number 23.
 MR. LAUBACH.  So I don’t know exactly what, for example, our contacts expect in terms of the longer-run dots.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that the speaker, Mr. Laubach, is unsure about what their contacts expect in terms of the longer-run dots.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 24.
 MR. POTTER.  I don’t believe they’ll be that surprised.  There’s some commentary around the longer-run estimate.  There’s a lot of work by various people that they know that we look at, and that’s been coming down.  I think there were some people who thought that.  I don’t think people in the market necessarily focus a lot on the 2020 dot relative to the long run.  I think the long run probably has more information for market participants than the estimate for 2020, which is about a percentage point or more above the market estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that "there were some people who thought that," indicating a difference in opinion or belief. Additionally, the speaker suggests that the market estimate for 2020 is lower than the estimate provided, which could create disagreement or divergence in perspectives.


Passage number 25.
 MS. MESTER.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing none, I suggest we begin our round.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange between individuals with no conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 26.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it does not present conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 27.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Despite the terrible human tragedy and disruptions caused by the hurricanes, the economic expansion appears to remain on track.  Real GDP growth looks to grow nearly 2½ percent this year, which is toward the higher end of annual increases seen during the expansion.  A wide variety of labor market indicators are also flashing green.  Notably, employment gains averaged 185,000 jobs over the past three months, well above the pace needed to keep up with labor force growth.  In view of the solid momentum along with its still accommodative stance of monetary policy, I expect the economy to overshoot potential further and by a significant degree, with the unemployment rate dipping a touch below 4 percent in the second half of next year. That said, my projection of real GDP growth is less optimistic than that in the Tealbook by about ½ percentage point in 2018 and in 2019, despite an assumed path for the funds rate that’s far less steep.  Specifically, I expect GDP growth to slow to 1¾ percent next year and then drift down to a little below 1½ percent in 2019.  And I assume one more rate increase this year and three in 2018, with the funds rate finally reaching 2½ percent in 2019, which is my estimate of neutral. My relative lack of optimism about economic growth stems from three key considerations.  First, I no longer expect substantive fiscal stimulus to take place in the next few years.  Events this year have shown how difficult it will be to pass new significant tax or  spending legislation, and although one never can be sure, I now see the possibility of a major tax cut as a risk to the forecast rather than the most likely outcome. Second, I don’t see the recent improvement in financial conditions, including lower long-term rates, higher equity and real estate prices, tightening credit premiums, and the decline in the value of the dollar, as necessarily signaling strong growth.  As I noted in our previous meeting, there were two competing narratives regarding the interpretation of the connection between financial conditions and the economy.  One view is that the recent easing of financial conditions provides significant impetus to growth through wealth effects, lower cost of capital, and so on.  This is a perspective adopted in the Tealbook, with, for example, household wealth gains offered as support for higher consumer spending.  My sympathy is for the alternative view in which this apparent improvement in financial conditions mainly reflects perceptions of lower r*.  Specifically, a falling natural rate of interest will push down longer-term interest rates and push up asset prices as the discount rate declines.  For example, price-to-earnings ratios that look excessive with a 2 percent r* are much more reasonable with r* close to zero. Third, the steady-as-she-goes forecast is backed up by the hard data on consumer spending and demand for credit as well as anecdotal reports.  In particular, despite the improvement in asset valuations, we don’t see a surge of C&I loans or nonmortgage consumer financing.  For example, home equity balances are still being paid down.  My business contacts confirm this interpretation, emphasizing how little impact low long-term rates have had on credit demand or business spending. In summary, I expect economic growth to slow as monetary policy normalizes without a sizable boost coming from either fiscal policy or what might appear to be very favorable financial conditions.  With regard to inflation, I feel the agony of Sisyphus as core inflation rolled back down the hill after being so close to our 2 percent goal earlier this year.  My staff has been busy digging into the sources for the recent shortfall inflation, and they did some analysis where they divided the components of core PCE inflation into two groups:  an acyclical group and a pro-cyclical group. The pro-cyclical inflation reflects categories that historically have tended to be sensitive to the aggregate demand and economy-wide slack, consistent with the Phillips curve.  In contrast, the acyclical group consists of categories for which inflation was largely driven by sector-specific supply-side factors that are not as highly connected to the business cycle.  The striking finding is that the procyclical inflation fell a lot during the recession—that’s not surprising—but it also has come back up to about to pre-recession levels, while the acyclical inflation is still very low.  Put another way:  The low core inflation that we’re seeing recently is not due to a breakdown in the Phillips curve relationship between slack and inflation, but rather, stems from some downward shocks in price categories that are typically not that sensitive to slack. Some of the weakness in acyclical inflation is due to large price drops in specific volatile categories we talked about a lot here:  pharmaceuticals, airfares, cellular communications, and education services.  But historical experience suggests that these are unlikely to have persistent effects on inflation.  This analysis, however, also highlighted that the one key factor accounting for the missing inflation has been lower cost for health-care services—the most important acyclical component.  Mandated cuts to Medicare payment growth, which are mirrored in slower private payment growth, have kept increases in health-care services prices unusually low for several years.  These legislative changes are essentially a persistent supply shock that’s holding  down inflation several tenths of a percentage point despite a strengthening economy.  Given the administrative process underlying these payments, I expect these effects on inflation to diminish only gradually over time. Because of this analysis, I am comfortable with the economy running somewhat beyond potential for some time in order to reach our overall inflation target, as is the case in my projection.  Getting inflation back to 2 percent will likely require pushing pro-cyclical inflation fairly high in order to offset the low rate of price increase in sectors such as health-care services. Given the prospect of sustained very low unemployment, I project inflation will move gradually back to our 2 percent goal by the middle of 2019 and, in fact, have a modest overshoot in 2020.  I view the risks to this forecast as balanced.  On the upside, there is the risk that such an extended period of very tight labor markets may foster a more rapid increase in inflation.  But, on the downside, the acyclical factors, such as muted increases in health-care services prices, could continue to hold down overall inflation longer than I currently anticipate.  For the record, I’m SEP respondent number 16.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not characterized by contention or disagreement. It is a presentation of the speaker's perspective and analysis of the current economic conditions.


Passage number 28.
  MR. FISCHER.  I asked the Chair for permission to ask you a question about wages, but I also want to say thanks to you and David and Steve and others for the kind things they have said.  I think we’re going to have another day tomorrow, aren’t we.  So maybe you can save them for the end.  I will report that it is often said of textbooks, or any books, that the second or third edition is the best.  After that you get tired of revising.  David Wilcox was the leading figure in checking the revision of the second edition.  I think, as a historical matter, it may have been the best-selling edition.  Thank you very much, David.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mostly a statement of gratitude and appreciation.


Passage number 29.
  [Laughter] MR. WILCOX.  Can I collect my royalty check at the end of the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 30.
 MR. FISCHER.  I think you got paid, didn’t you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Fischer is simply asking a question and seeking confirmation or information.


Passage number 31.
  [Laughter] MR. WILCOX.  I have sort of forgotten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Wilcox about having forgotten something, accompanied by laughter.


Passage number 32.
 MR. FISCHER.  President Mester, what I wanted to ask was a question about wages.  You talked at the beginning about wages, saying that employers are beginning to say different things, and some of them are raising their wages.  Then you talked about wages again later.  Does any of this show up in the macrodata for your District.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question being asked by Mr. Fischer to President Mester.


Passage number 33.
 MS. MESTER.  It’s starting to show up, but it’s not showing up well in the data.  So, again, it’s nascent.  It’s showing up, but it’s not something that I would say is widespread.  But I think we have to wait and see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that a certain phenomenon is beginning to appear, but it is not yet widespread and more time is needed to determine its extent.


Passage number 34.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thanks.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  Acting President Mullinix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It consists of individuals thanking each other.


Passage number 35.
 MR. MULLINIX.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The main economic indicators that we have received since the previous projection were mostly well aligned with expectations.  If anything, real activity turned out to be somewhat stronger than expected, and, conditional on that  strength, inflation continues to be surprisingly weak.  Accordingly, my SEP submission has changed very little.  I continue to see real GDP growth being slightly above its trend rate next year and near trend in 2019, and I attribute the weakness in inflation to temporary factors whose effects will diminish over the next year.  Of course, Hurricanes Harvey and Irma have caused considerable damage and suffering in the affected communities, yet the overall effect on national economic activity is likely to be limited and temporary. Despite the economy’s mixed performance in the first quarter, we have seen a definite improvement since then.  GDP growth has picked up, supported by solid consumption growth and a rebound of business fixed investment growth.  And the labor market continues to surprise on the upside, with the unemployment rate declining more and the labor force participation rate stabilizing at a higher level than what was expected a year ago. In the face of a strong—even tight—labor market, the weakness in inflation and moderate wage gains are surprising and represent somewhat of a puzzle.  For its part, the staff has kept the puzzle manageable in part by lowering the natural rate of unemployment and raising the trend path for labor force participation.  Nonetheless, the information we received from Fifth District contacts suggests more pressure on resource utilization.  First, I would note that our diffusion index for service-sector wages has steadily increased over the past year and is now near a record high. Second, anecdotal complaints about labor shortages have become much more intense over the summer.  Here are a few examples.  An executive with a West Virginia trucking company currently has 80 trucks and would like to hire up to 100 new drivers but cannot find them despite paying $70,000 per year and offering a $5,000 signing bonus.  His firm’s construction division is currently paying $25 per hour but expects to raise that to a $30 to  $35 range in the next year to support continued growth.  The owner of a staffing firm in West Virginia reported that placements had declined recently because it just can’t find the workers to place.  A North Carolina staffing firm reported that one of its manufacturing clients was offering a $500 signing bonus for temporary workers—the first time they have seen that happen—along with another $500 bonus for staying 90 days.  This was in addition to a $500 referral bonus for any employee who was brought in and who stayed for 90 days.  An engineering and construction firm in Maryland commented, “There is very strong demand for our services.  Most contractors are busy, so the competition has decreased considerably.  We have been able to raise our prices, and we are still getting work.”  Then, finally, a manufacturer in South Carolina said, and I quote, “We are at full employment, and we have about 5 percent that are employed that should be unemployed, because they bring no skills to the job and they move in and out of the wind.” Governor Fischer, I would say that these comments have intensified, much as they have in the Fourth District.  We’re not seeing it come through in price changes at the firm level, but we’re keeping a close eye on that.  In view of these reports, I am inclined to attribute the soft readings on inflation, less to any remaining slack in the labor market, than to transitory factors.  The August CPI report is part of the “why.”  And while we can’t be certain that the soft patch is behind us, my SEP submission is aligned with the Tealbook, with inflation for the remainder of the year close to 2 percent.  I continue to expect headline and core inflation to come in at 1.9 percent in 2018 and 2 percent in 2019.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bostic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any specific contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker's analysis of economic indicators and observations from contacts in different regions. While there may be slight differences in interpretation or emphasis, there is no direct disagreement presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
  MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming data continue to show an economy expanding at a moderate but above-trend pace, with job growth easily strong enough to drive measures of unemployment lower.  Despite rising resource utilization, there is little evidence that wage pressures are building this year or that inflation is moving up to our 2 percent objective.  But with supportive financial conditions still in place, the recent data leave my overall narrative for the economy little changed from the previous SEP—in fact, little changed from a year ago, although I am now a bit less confident that inflation is moving up. Real GDP growth averaged 2.3 percent in the first half, and I expect it to continue broadly on that path, with a strengthening in business investment and a swing in the contribution of net exports from being a moderate drag to being a modestly positive factor this year.  I expect similar outcomes over the rest of this year, as the recent performance seems to be based on solid fundamentals.  The staff’s estimate of the effects of the twin hurricanes, Harvey and Irma, has been evolving, as is appropriate.  The estimate now is that the hit to Q3 growth will be in the range of 1 full percentage point, but that growth will snap back by fourth quarter.  That sounds right, although it does seem to me that there is some risk that the full snapback may extend over another quarter or two. Above-trend growth continues to tighten labor market conditions, with a falling unemployment rate and a rising demographically adjusted labor force participation rate.  Since October 2013, the participation rate has oscillated around 62.8 percent as the estimated 0.2 percentage point annual decline arising from aging has been offset by rising prime-age participation.  Prime-age participation has recovered to 81 percent, still 1 percentage point below its level in 2007, which suggests there may still be some room for further recovery there.  I do expect participation to continue to move sideways for a while longer as the healthy job market  continues to draw in more workers and more of the recession-induced labor market scarring is healed.  Even with this increase in participation relative to trend, I see the unemployment rate reaching the low 4s by the end of this year and into the high 3s next year and remaining there for some time, materially below common estimates of the natural rate, including my own estimate of 4.5 percent. A tightening labor market should mean a gradual acceleration in wages and prices.  So far, that is not in the data, with most measures of nominal wage growth showing no signs of acceleration over the past year.  And while 2½ percent wage growth is in keeping with the underlying fundamentals of inflation and very low productivity growth, the lack of acceleration in wages is surprising if, in fact, we are at or below the natural rate.  This brings me to the unexpected weakness in inflation, for which there is not yet a clear or satisfactory explanation.  After running close to 2 percent for 2016, core PCE prices increased only 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in July, and it may be that we will not see a material increase from that level until well into 2018. There are several plausible explanations, as has been well covered around the table.  First, transient factors may be pushing down aggregate inflation just as transient factors pushed it up last year.  And, like it sounds many around the table have done, I have studied this evidence carefully, hoping to find a clear answer there, but I find the evidence to be ambiguous.  So we’ll have to wait and see.  Second, it may be either that there is more domestic slack, as I mentioned with respect to the labor market, or perhaps that in some sense global slack somehow overhangs wage- and price-setting in the United States and other advanced economies, as I think Steve Kamin was suggesting earlier.  Third, the Phillips curve may be even flatter than we think.  Finally, and most troubling, it may be that underlying trend inflation and inflation expectations have moved down after years of inflation below the 2 percent objective.  Looking across various estimates of inflation expectations received from surveys and markets, I see mixed evidence on this.  Conditional on achieving something like the Tealbook forecast for real activity, which is to say, three consecutive years in 2018, 2019, and 2020 of unemployment below 4 percent, I continue to think that the inflation shortfall should disappear over that time.  If that doesn’t do it, then it’s hard to know what would.  Of course, we don’t know that.  And, of course, if trend has declined, that would have significant implications for the conduct of policy.  For now, in my view, we have the flexibility to be patient, and there is a strong case for continuing to do so. And, Madam Chair, I will close by joining others in thanking Stan Fischer for the privilege, and also the pleasure, of being his colleague for these years.  Thank you, Stan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement in regards to the inflation rate and wage growth. The speaker notes that there is little evidence of inflation moving up to the 2 percent objective, which contradicts common estimates. The lack of acceleration in wages is also surprising if the natural rate is at or below 4.5 percent.


Passage number 37.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Jay. CHAIR YELLEN.  And let me turn things over to Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer is expressing gratitude, and Chair Yellen is acknowledging and allowing for a transition.


Passage number 38.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A week ago, I took part in a meeting of Working Party 3 of the OECD, whose membership consists essentially of the countries that make up the G-10, which is a group of at least 11 countries plus the EU and ECB and a few other organizations.  The members of the group are the deputy governors and directors general of the finance ministries of the advanced western economies, of which Japan is a member, plus senior officials of the organizations of whom the representatives of the ECB and the EU are the most prominent. My first WP3 meeting was in September 2014, so this was my 13th such meeting.  The atmosphere at this meeting was by far the most optimistic of those I have attended in my current  role.  The United States was represented by the newly inducted Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs, David Malpass, and by Governor Powell.  Their presentations were quite similar to the presentation by Governor Powell we have just heard.  [Laughter]  Well, we want constancy, don’t we.  The Japanese economy has been growing faster than Japan’s long-run growth rate.  The Europeans were buoyant, with the NPLs of Italian banks having declined from 8 percent to 4 percent in recent months and the French economy and mood having been transformed by the recent presidential elections.  The British were somewhat exceptional in this feast of happiness, but the stiff upper lip was pressed into service and did its job.  One could also understand that the ECB is very concerned about the recent appreciation of the euro.  Several participants expressed their satisfaction that, at long last, the major economies are all, or almost all, growing well by the standards of the day.  This represents a sea change from the prevailing mood in the group during the previous meetings I have attended. When asked what had produced this sudden change, the members of the group said that the change had been taking place gradually, and that progress in the EU had been slow but steady and has finally now reached the stage when it can be recognized to amount to something serious.  They did not mention that perhaps we have also moderated our ambitions for economic growth. Well, that is part of the good news facing the U.S. economy.  The dollar has depreciated nearly 10 percent since the start of the year.  And as we no longer claim that a strong dollar is in the interest of the United States, that, too, is good news.  Seasonal fluctuations in the data, according to which the growth rate in the second half of the year is greater than that in the first half, can almost be relied on.  Unemployment continues to be below the level the SEP suggests is the natural rate of unemployment, and the inexorable trends of a declining labor force participation rate and a U-6 unemployment rate much above its 2006 level have moderated.  The horrible hurricanes are producing real hardships for the unfortunate people who were in their paths, but their effect on the macrodata is expected to be small ex post.  So all that remains to be done is to increase the rate of productivity growth and produce more equal distributions of income and wealth, and to decide how many immigrants should be allowed into the country each year.  Oh, and to decide whether globalization is a good thing, and to reform the tax system, and to pass a budget that helps protect the stability of the economy, and to be sure that financial stability is maintained.  And the trick of combining an increase in the longer-run real interest rate while avoiding serious declines in asset prices has to be carried out successfully, and, in the opposite direction, if necessary, that the effective lower bound is avoided—and to reduce the size of our balance sheet to something more normal. Well, I need to stop, because we want all of you to have a good night’s sleep, although I could go on.  However, I don’t want to discourage you or myself, but I do want to say that monetary policy has been very well managed during my short time on the Board, and that this is an impressive institution. In the annals of monetary history, the fact that the United States avoided a second Great Depression will be recorded with honor.  And much of the credit for that achievement will be accorded to the Federal Reserve and, no less, to the cooperation between the Treasury and the Federal Reserve.  May this institution continue to be allowed to do its job as well in the near future as it has in the near past.  And, with respect to some of its functions, may it do it better than it has sometimes done in the past. Finally, with respect to the past, everyone knows that those who forget history are doomed to repeat it.  But I do not believe what is reputed to have been Frank Knight’s comment on that statement, and that those who remember history are also doomed to repeat it.  [Laughter]   Those who remember the past are more likely to know that they can do better than their predecessors did even while sometimes making their own mistakes.  And, with that, I thank you, Madam Chair, and I thank my other colleagues on the FOMC.  [Applause] CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 39.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  And, Governor Fischer, I, too, want to thank you for your service.  But I have to say, Brian, I should have asked to go early, because this is the very definition of a tough act to follow, so I do not appreciate going now.  [Laughter] Over the intermeeting period, economic activity in the Third District has firmed a bit, with moderate growth in most sectors.  Employment growth has rebounded, and growth in nonresident investment has outpaced that of the nation.  Retail sales have also picked up, although there’s evidence of continued struggles, as in many Districts, at many brick-and-mortar  stores.  Residential real estate, however, is a prime exception, with housing permits looking flat over most of this year. Led by job growth in leisure and hospitality and in education and health services, three-month average employment growth in the Philadelphia region increased in both July and August and, uncharacteristically, outpaced that of the nation.  Further, the unemployment rate remained at 4.7 percent.  Year-over-year employment growth has been steady.  However, we have seen a noticeable decline in hiring by governments.  New Jersey and Pennsylvania face significant fiscal challenges.  The Pennsylvania legislature has yet again failed to pass a budget and has given a warning of the potential downgrade to the state’s bonds.  New Jersey, although having its debt upgraded from “negative” to “stable” because of dedicated lottery revenue for its pensions, is still facing many hurdles. Growth in nonresidential construction has been steady, if somewhat volatile, and vacancy rates in Philadelphia remain at very low levels.  The same cannot be said for residential housing, as we have witnessed little to no growth for some time.  Although house prices continue to firm, that firming is rather sluggish by national standards. Our outlook for manufacturing remains one of steady growth.  Our September manufacturing index, which will be released this Thursday, remains above its nonrecessionary average, and the details of the report were encouraging.  We saw significant bouncebacks in both new orders and shipments, and the employment index remains high.  There are also signs of price pressures, as there were significant increases in both the prices-paid and prices-received indexes. It also appears that Hurricanes Harvey and Irma may provide some stimulus to the automobile sector.  A manufacturer of auto parts in our District indicated that his order book has  grown by double digits in the past month as manufacturers gear up for anticipated increases in demand. With respect to future activity, manufacturers appear to be quite bullish and have plans to increase hiring and capital spending over the next six months.  Services also rebounded in our August survey, with increases in sales and shipments as well.  Additionally, consumer confidence remains in optimistic territory, and retail activity has improved. With regard to the national economy, my forecast is not very different from that of the staff.  I project slightly weaker near-term GDP growth and slightly stronger growth in the outyears in our forecast.  I also don’t anticipate the unemployment rate falling quite so low.  I project it to decline to 3.9 percent in 2018, before gradually rising to 4.1 percent by 2020.  Our paths for inflation are identical.  With regard to the funds rate, I anticipate that it will be appropriate to raise it gradually to 3.2 percent by the end of the forecast horizon, a rate that is 0.2 percentage point above my longer-term neutral rate. However, I continue, as others have expressed, to be concerned over whether our inflation projection will be realized, as that series has remained persistently low.  It may be that the natural real interest rate will remain low, resulting in the funds rate being uncomfortably close to the effective lower bound.  At the effective lower bound, policy may not be very effective in raising inflation in a timely manner, creating an asymmetry in the distribution of inflation outcomes.  In that environment, a 2 percent target could result in less than a 2 percent average inflation rate.  That is, the mean of the ergodic distribution can be different from the steady state. I hope the latest CPI number will be a harbinger of further firming in inflation, but this is only one number, and I remain concerned that our 2 percent target may prove to be elusive.  So  persistently low inflation remains the most significant risk to my forecast.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a speech by Mr. Harker providing an overview of economic activity in the Third District and his projections for future economic growth.


Passage number 40.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to congratulate you on drafting Stan Fischer into the Federal Reserve and, Stan, for your agreeing to serve.  I was an undergraduate at the University of Virginia in the late 1970s when I was taking an intermediate macro course, and the book that was selected for the class was Dornbusch and Fischer.  I believe it was the earliest edition, and that course for me was very inspiring in deciding to become an economist, and the book was very important, too.  I think back on that, and I don’t know how I could have hoped, in sitting in that class, to aspire to serve on the Federal Open Market Committee with you.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and congratulating the person mentioned.


Passage number 41.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "Thank you very much" is a polite expression of gratitude and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 42.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My reading of the evidence since the previous FOMC meeting is that the economy continues on a trajectory of slightly above-trend growth and a gradually tightening labor market.  We’ve been saying that for quite some time, now.  In my view, this is likely to continue.  Consumption should be supported by the income generated by sturdy job gains and the stable-to-rising wage compensation inflation picture.  Higher equity prices and home prices also should provide additional support.  Investment spending should continue to advance as tight labor markets increase the incentives to substitute capital for labor.  Finally, the trade sector is unlikely to exert a significant restraint on output.  The recent weakness of the dollar and the improvement in foreign growth prospects are important developments in this area.  I view the near-term recession risk as very low, barring some large, unanticipated shock to the economy.  In the coming months, our ability to discern whether this trend actually remains in place may prove difficult, and I believe the damage wrought by Hurricanes Harvey and Irma will restrain economic growth, especially in August and September.  But thereafter, as many have noted, rebuilding efforts are likely to lift growth, and I would anticipate that lift to persist into 2018. Conversely, these storms will lift inflation in the short term, as many have noted, because of higher gas prices.  However, there also may be some longer-term effects that are not yet very visible.  As President Kaplan pointed out, I think finding the construction workers necessary to rebuild could prove difficult at a time when the economy is close to full employment.  So, at the margin, this could lead to slightly more pressure on wages and prices. The key question I continue to wrestle with is a question I think everyone around the table is wrestling with:  Why do inflation and the rate of increase in labor compensation remain so low at a time when the U.S. labor market utilization has tightened significantly.  And, as President Bostic and others have noted, there are a number of competing explanations.  Perhaps we can dismiss the decline in inflation as a result of special one-off factors.  But this becomes harder to do the longer inflation stays lower than anticipated.  Or perhaps the level of unemployment consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective is lower than we anticipated.  It could be that the emergence of Internet retailing and other disruptive technologies is putting sustained downward pressure on prices.  But this argument also has its own weaknesses.  In particular, why is this becoming evident just now.  After all, the disruptive forces unleashed on U.S. retailing by Amazon and its related Internet kin are not new phenomena.  Or maybe it’s a bit of both: one-off factors and more-intense competitive pressures.  At this point, I think, like a  majority of people around the room, I’m mostly inclined toward the “one-off transitory factor” story. Now, even if the uncertainty about inflation proves persistent—and that could definitely happen, and we may not have this resolved by the December meeting or the March 2018 meeting—I don’t think this rules out further rate hikes for several reasons.  First, there is a risk of getting fooled by an inflation path that has turned downward, but maybe only temporarily.  In that scenario, if we delay too long, the risk would be that we push the economy too far beyond full employment.  This would increase the risk that we would have to respond more aggressively, raising the risk of a future recession.  Second, I think you’ll also want to evaluate the appropriate level of the federal funds rate  in the context of financial market developments.  Financial conditions have become easier, even as we have tightened monetary policy.  I don’t see how one can ignore this when evaluating the appropriate level of short-term interest rates at this particular point in the economic cycle. Uncertainty about inflation versus easier financial conditions are offsetting developments, in my own mind.  That’s why I’ve kept one additional interest rate hike for 2017 in my SEP submission.  I think it’s important to keep the possibility of a December rate hike alive, because of how easy financial conditions already are and the fact that market participants are somewhat skeptical that we will, in fact, actually raise our federal funds rate target in December. Now, I’m going to have more to say about Stan tomorrow, but I have followed the strategy that getting the last word is often a very good strategy.  [Laughter]  So, the end of the day tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their analysis and views on the current state of the economy and the factors affecting inflation and interest rates. They acknowledge different possible explanations and uncertainties, but they do not express disagreement or conflicting opinions with others around the table.


Passage number 43.
 MR. LAUBACH.6  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will be referring to the handout labeled “Material for the Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.” The annual extension of the horizon for your projections provides an opportunity to take a longer perspective on the evolution of your projections and to consider how your views on the underlying strength of the economy and its implications for the  6 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 6).  path of the funds rate have changed.  The panels on my exhibit examine that issue through the lens of your SEP-implied neutral real rates. As Michiel noted earlier, the medians of your assessments of the appropriate federal funds rate at the end of this year and the next two have changed little since June.  As shown by the black and blue lines in the upper-left panel, they are also largely similar to the projections you submitted a year ago.  This similarity contrasts starkly with the situation last September, when a number of factors had held back progress toward your objectives and, as a result, you moved down your policy path and lowered noticeably your assessment of the longer-run federal funds rate.  Over the past 12 months the economy has evolved, on balance, in a way that has not led to a significant reassessment of the appropriate path for policy.  And, as many of you already remarked, most of you project core inflation this year to run around ¼ percentage point lower than you expected a year ago, but you view this setback as transitory, in part because the unemployment rate has declined about ½ percentage point more than you expected.  You have attributed some of the decline in unemployment to a decline in the natural rate, but most of you see it as also representing tighter resource utilization.  Taken together, your projections suggest that you now judge it will take a somewhat tighter labor market to achieve a return to 2 percent inflation over the next two years.  The remaining panels update an analysis that I have presented a couple of times before.  They provide an assessment of how your SEP numbers have evolved over the past year while taking into account the joint determination of your goal variables and appropriate policy.  The box at the top right summarizes the key steps in the exercise:  First, I estimate an IS equation that relates the unemployment gap (u minus u*) to its own lag and the lagged real rate gap, defined as the deviation of the real federal funds rate from a time-varying equilibrium level (r*).  This equation has the property that, if the actual real rate were kept at its equilibrium level, the unemployment gap would close over time, but only gradually so.  The coefficients in this equation are estimated over the 1961–2016 period using data for the fourth quarter of each year, the staff’s estimates of u*, and estimates of r* taken from the Laubach-Williams model.  With the estimated coefficients in hand, I insert each participant’s projected values for the unemployment rate and the real federal funds rate as well as his or her estimate of the longer-run normal unemployment rate and solve the equation for the implied values of the time-varying r* at the end of each year from 2017 to 2019.  Note that I cannot calculate the implied r* for 2020 because the equation would require your unemployment rate forecasts for 2021. The implied values for each participant’s r* projections are plotted as the blue dots in the middle-left panel, with the medians denoted by red diamonds.  This analysis requires your longer-run projections.  I have results for only 15 participants.  As always, the diversity of your views about the outlook and appropriate monetary policy results in some dispersion of your implied estimates of r*.  The implied r* values for the end of this year are clustered between ½ and 1½ percent, with a median value of about 1 percent.  Why such a high value.  As indicated in the middle-right panel, most of you project the unemployment rate to decline somewhat further over the coming year.  To bring about that unemployment outcome, the model requires a real rate gap of about minus 1½ percentage points, shown in the bottom left.  With your actual real federal funds rate projections standing at around minus ½ percent at the end of this year, the implied value for r* is thus 1 percent. Beyond 2018, most of you project the unemployment rate to move sideways or edge up despite only modest further increases in the real federal funds rate, meaning that, by that time, policy has turned closer to neutral or even slightly restrictive, as indicated by the upward shift of the blue dots in the bottom left.  Accordingly, for most of you, the value of r* implied by your projections is ½ percent or lower at the end of 2018 and 2019 and below your longer-run values. I don’t want to oversell the results of this simple analysis, as it interprets your projections through the narrow lens of the estimated IS equation.  But two points that I highlighted a year ago still seem to hold:  First, your projections suggest that almost all of you view an accommodative stance of policy, as measured by a negative real rate gap, as still appropriate at the end of this year; second, most of you expect the neutral real rate to be below its longer-run value over the next two years and then to move up by only a modest amount. As summarized in the bullets in the bottom right, the choices offered by the policy alternatives in front of you can be understood as reflecting different expectations regarding r* and, consequently, the appropriate direction of policy.  At one end, the language of alternative C emphasizes that further increases in the federal funds rate are needed soon to moderate growth in economic activity and employment to “sustainable rates in the medium term.”  If you are confident in the Phillips curve mechanism reasserting itself and judge that a prolonged undershoot of the unemployment rate would risk the sustainability of the expansion, as several of you indicate in your SEP narratives, then you might want to communicate that removal of accommodation needs to proceed on a somewhat steeper path than market participants seem to be expecting.  At the other end, the language of alternative A can be interpreted as expressing much less conviction that the neutral rate is in positive territory and thus is agnostic even on the future direction of the federal funds rate.  If you interpret recent inflation data as suggesting that further labor market tightening is necessary to return inflation to 2 percent, you may want to indicate to the public that no change in the stance of policy is likely forthcoming anytime soon.  With alternative B, you would chart a middle course.  You would acknowledge that headline and core inflation have declined this year but express confidence that inflation will stabilize at your 2 percent objective over the medium term, with only modest overshooting of maximum employment while you are continuing on the path of gradual increases in the federal funds rate. Thank you, Madam Chair.  That completes my prepared remarks.  The July statement and the draft alternatives are shown on pages 2 to 10 of the handout.  I will be happy to take any questions.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Questions for Thomas.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting information and analysis without expressing any disagreement or differing viewpoints.


Passage number 44.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m looking at the middle-left panel, “SEP-Implied r* and Longer-Run Real Interest Rate.”  I’m looking at the red dots, and they’re declining.  The Committee-implied estimate of r* is declining, according to this, over the forecast horizon.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 45.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I would not make too much out of the roughly 0.1 percentage point decline from 2018 to 2019.  As I explained, the 2017 dots are really driven, importantly, by your expectation for a decline in the unemployment rate in the coming year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation and expressing their opinion about the minor decline in the percentage point.


Passage number 46.
  MR. BULLARD.  It’s something today, and it’s going to be lower in the outyears, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating a fact about something being lower in the future.


Passage number 47.
 MR. LAUBACH.  It’s an implication of the fact that you have the unemployment gap leveling off and then actually gradually increasing, while the real rate is only very gradually rising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the unemployment gap and the real rate of unemployment. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 48.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, it seems kind of stunning, doesn’t it.  Because most of us would think, you’ve got r* at a depressed value and somehow return it to some normal value later on.  And to have this kind of U-shaped thing is unusual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing surprise or astonishment at the unusual U-shaped pattern being discussed.


Passage number 49.
 MR. EVANS.  I wanted to ask that question, but President Williams tried to get me not to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It shows Mr. Evans stating his intention to ask a question, but President Williams trying to dissuade him from doing so.


Passage number 50.
  [Laughter] MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only includes the indication of laughter, which does not imply any disagreement.


Passage number 51.
 WILLIAMS.  To no avail.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "to no avail" indicates that the efforts or actions mentioned earlier in the passage did not succeed or produce the desired result. It does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 52.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Madam Chair, can I ask a question.  Thomas, what you’re pointing out—I think I’m reading this right—is that if people actually think that r* is rising over time, the decline in the unemployment rate that we’re showing in the forecast is inconsistent with that. CHAIR YELLEN.  It should be faster than people think it’s going to decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the response of Chair Yellen, where she states that the decline in the unemployment rate should be faster than what the person is indicating.


Passage number 53.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you’re pointing out the fact that maybe—assuming that the Laubach-Williams model is the right framework, and there could be alternative frameworks—it doesn’t hang together as well as you would like.  Is that fair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is presenting a statement that acknowledges a potential drawback or limitation in the Laubach-Williams model. However, there is no explicit contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. The phrase "Is that fair" at the end indicates a request for confirmation rather than a contradictory viewpoint.


Passage number 54.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Again, as I said, I don’t want to oversell this analysis.  This is a very simple equation, and I’m not advocating that this is an instrument that you should be using to put together your projections.  It may, for example, be that, in fact, implicit in your projections is a somewhat different lag structure.  In other words, the economy is a tanker that is not responding very quickly right now.  There is some momentum that is still driving the unemployment rate lower, and it takes some time.  You may say, “Well, maybe the stance of policy is, in fact, already not quite as accommodative as a real rate gap of negative 1½ percent,” or your tightening has already had some effect, but still it takes some time before that really shows up in a leveling-off of the unemployment rate.  That’s one possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting an alternative perspective or possibility without contradicting or arguing against any existing views or statements.


Passage number 55.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Or, conversely, our tightening so far hasn’t really tightened financial conditions, but we expect that it’ll actually start to have some effect in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a possible scenario where the tightening of financial conditions may or may not have had an effect yet, but it is expected to have an effect in the future. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 56.
 MR. LAUBACH.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a dialogue where one person confirms or agrees with what another person has just said. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 57.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think the staff forecast has financial conditions tightening as we go through time.  Right.  The dollar appreciates, and bond yields go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both statements are in agreement that the staff forecast suggests financial conditions tightening over time. The second statement supports the first statement by providing examples of the dollar appreciating and bond yields going up, which are indicators of financial conditions tightening.


Passage number 58.
 MR. EVANS.  Can I try something.  As I look at this, I was attracted to the lower-third panel, which seemed to get a comforting result that we almost all think that the current level of the funds rate is providing accommodation relative to some estimate of our short-run r*.  And then it’s diminishing, so that seems like a good result.  You’ve got an analysis here that is very interesting, but, of course, it’s blending different people’s assessments.  You’re using the staff natural rate of unemployment, and every analysis has its own.  So it’s injecting some sort of mismeasurement in the modeling.  Maybe it goes into the error, and it all is nice or whatnot.  Perhaps that type of mischief would show up more in the second-row panel with dispersion and uncertainty.  But this lower one is more immune to it, I hope.  Certainly, the result is easier to interpret.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 59.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Let me just be clear on that one point.  The staff’s natural rate estimate, for example, shows up only in the process of estimating the coefficients in the IS equation.  Thereafter, I throw it away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining the process they follow when estimating coefficients in the IS equation.


Passage number 60.
 MR. EVANS.  I’m trying to help you, Thomas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans states that he is trying to help Thomas, indicating that there is a cooperative or supportive intention.


Passage number 61.
  [Laughter] MR. LAUBACH.  Thereafter, I’m using exclusively each participant’s individual projections.  Another point is, if you fitted this over history, there are, of course, large errors.  There are transitory disturbances, and, effectively, in what I’m doing here, I’m assuming that you are not projecting any such transitory disturbances. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply contains a statement and a clarification.


Passage number 62.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a different question. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, President Evans, you may.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Chairman Yellen allows Mr. Evans to ask a different question, indicating a cooperative and agreeable tone.


Passage number 63.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  We do have time, don’t we. CHAIR YELLEN.  We have plenty of time.  Please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements. It simply shows that there is time available for something without any contradictory or conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 64.
 MR. EVANS.  I don’t want this to show up in the transcripts exactly in this fashion, but the last time we ended before five o’clock and I went downstairs, somebody didn’t offer me a beverage until five o’clock.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  I meant to tell you that five o’clock is the time for happy hour.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It includes a casual conversation between Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen, with a humorous tone indicated by the laughter.


Passage number 65.
  MR. EVANS.  There you have it.  Okay, thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage indicates that Mr. Evans is expressing gratitude or appreciation for something, but it does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 66.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the passage itself. Please provide the specific passage so I can analyze it for you.


Passage number 67.
 WILLIAMS.  Remember, it takes about 10 minutes to get down there. PRESIDENT KAPLAN.  In some Latin American countries, it’s after five.  That didn’t help.  Keep going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers are providing information and there is no conflict in their statements.


Passage number 68.
 MR. EVANS.  Here’s the question.  In my own commentary periodically, and I’ve heard it from others even today, we talk about risk analysis with regard to our outlook, and we could be running a risk that inflation might heat up in a way that we’re not anticipating, and things like that.  And we all have our own views on that.  As I flip through the very nice and helpful staff analyses that are presented to us in terms of Tealbook B as well as in the alternative simulations, and then I look at different explanations of where things might go awry, it has embedded in it an inertial Taylor rule of sorts, so it’s always going to make some kind of adjustment.  But it’s always amazing to me—perhaps comforting, but not really—that the inflation outlook always tends to revert back to our 2 percent objective unless we’re actively going after a totally different scenario in which inflation goes up or the steeper curve kind of runs us awry. And I wonder, in the alternative simulations, if you have any idea, if you had a different policy reaction function in which—and, of course, it would depend on what risk you were thinking about at the time.  But I know that I would find some value in seeing the same simulations, but sort of saying, maybe it’s the lower sleeve of the SEP funds rate path—you know, the people who were advocating being patient and seeing the risks as worse if inflation is too low, and so you do that.  And so I don’t have a great sense as to whether that policy shock embedded in your policy rule would lead to a surprisingly large increase in inflation or whether these things are of a magnitude such that nothing’s really going to make a lot of difference.  And I do recall, over the years, periodically—I see Dave Reifschneider nicely leaning forward [laughter]—there’s been a time when, in order to goose things up a little bit more, you let inflation expectations or policy expectations respond with additional momentum.  Do you ever experiment with things like that, or is there any information you could offer us to help sort through these different policy risk assessments that we all talk about, but we have our own way of thinking about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 69.
 MR. WILCOX.  I’ll just start by reporting that I feel like I need to check myself into the health unit with a broken heart.  [Laughter]  We fairly regularly, for example, show alternative simulations that have inflation expectations becoming unanchored and, therefore, not comfortingly reverting back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a personal statement expressing an emotional state.


Passage number 70.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes, they never get up to 3 percent.  I mean, I take your point, but they almost never get up to 3 percent.  They’re never of the outsized variety that really make us as nervous as this, or do they.  I mean, I thought I’d been paying attention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the point being made but adds additional information or thoughts.


Passage number 71.
 MR. WILCOX.  Well, there is a reason for why it’s fairly hard to generate inflation that moves that high, and that reason—or at least one of the reasons—is that much of the variation in inflation that’s reflected in the confidence intervals reflects just stuff that happens—“own-equation shocks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining a reason for why it is difficult to generate high inflation and mentions that much of the variation in inflation is due to random events or "own-equation shocks." There is no disagreement or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 72.
” And so there will be a lot of variation, but at the moment, in order to get inflation moving out into the end of the tail, we do things like quadrupling the slope of the Phillips curve— MR. EVANS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a specific strategy used to stimulate inflation, without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 73.
  Yes, that was the one that I mentioned, that generates this— MR. WILCOX.  —having inflation expectations become unanchored, more dependent on past performance.  If you get a positive shock, and then that’s allowed to feed on itself and spiral  upward.  Those are the kinds of things that we need to do in order to generate higher inflation in the model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions the importance of generating higher inflation in the model, while Mr. Wilcox expresses concerns about inflation expectations becoming unanchored and potentially spiraling upward. This indicates a difference in opinion or contention surrounding the approach to generating higher inflation.


Passage number 74.
 MR. EVANS.  So we have these error bands that are 70 percent, and I actually don’t find nearly as much value in those as so many other people around the table, but I wonder how many times the actual scenario that we talk about ventures into those higher bands.  I don’t really have that great a memory of outsized exercises like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The speaker states that they don't find value in error bands, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and wondering about the frequency of scenarios that fall into higher error bands.


Passage number 75.
 MR. WILCOX.  I can’t provide you with a tally, but we do generate scenarios that involve venturing outside the 70 percent confidence intervals.  It’s hard to do, particularly in the case of inflation, but it’s happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the difficulty of generating scenarios that venture outside the given confidence intervals, particularly in the case of inflation, but acknowledges that it has happened.


Passage number 76.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a response or acknowledgment from Mr. Evans.


Passage number 77.
 MR. LAUBACH.  May I briefly add that the mechanism that we use when inflation expectations are no longer assumed to be firmly anchored is typically some simple form of adaptive mechanism.  And if you estimate that using long samples of long-horizon survey expectations, that thing doesn’t move quickly.  That’s, I think, consistent with the experience of the 1970s and 1980s if you try to fit it to that.  It took a lot of actual inflation in order to finally push longer-run inflation expectations up.  It’s not easy to make these inflation expectations snap. You invoked Dave Reifschneider earlier, and I have a vague memory that we experimented with some things, for example, that people would start learning from policy rule residual.  So they would have some notion of your normal policy conduct in mind, and then, if they observed that you deviated from that, they would draw inferences from that about what your true inflation objective is.  And maybe something like that could generate more volatility.  But,  frankly, it’s also more speculative, because we just don’t know whether anyone uses, in fact, such a type of inference mechanism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different mechanisms for inflation expectations and reflecting on past experiences. They mention some speculative ideas but acknowledge that there is uncertainty and lack of knowledge about these mechanisms.


Passage number 78.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  I think the word there is “speculative.”  We have done that, but it was sort of, “You got this sensitivity to policy expectations because you assumed it.”  The historical evidence isn’t really consistent with it.  It’s more, as Thomas said and as David was saying—and I know you already know this—that over the past 50 years, inflation expectations appeared to get unanchored over the 1960s and 1970s, but it was a slow process.  And then a re-anchoring of expectations occurred over the course of the 1980s, and it required quite an action by this Committee to re-anchor them.  That kind of process is a very gradual process, as least as far as the data go.  This is going back to something David said.  It was discussed in the memo about a year or so ago on the potential cost of undershooting.  In there we, I think, got closest to what you’re talking about, because we were saying that you have to go back to the dynamics of the 1970s, both on inflation expectations and on the sensitivity of inflation to shocks to real activity and things like that to generate the large inflation effects.  You have to change the whole expectational process and flip back to the old dynamics to get something really moving.  And the question might be, “Well, what would it take to engineer that kind of a return to the 1970s.”  I don’t know, but I would assume it would take quite a lot, and it would take a long period of time to do it. And I guess the final thing I would say—related to what David said—is the 70 percent confidence intervals are wide, but even though they’re kind of wide in some ways, their width is dominated by shocks that die out fast.  The width isn’t generated because something has a persistent effect that throws you outside a narrow range of outcomes.  And so that’s why, in  Tealbook scenarios, you really have to push it to get something outside the 70 percent bound.  I don’t know whether that helps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is primarily providing additional information and expressing uncertainty about certain topics, such as the potential cost of undershooting and the possibility of engineering a return to the 1970s dynamics.


Passage number 79.
 MR. EVANS.  Is there anything in these simulations that could help inform an analysis of whether, if you’re part of the lower sleeve of the SEP’s funds rate path, that’s really risking outsized inflation.  That’s kind of what I was getting at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 80.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement by Mr. Reifschneider and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 81.
 MR. EVANS.  Or is it just going to maybe 2½ percent, in which case I think we need to have a better discussion of what we mean by “symmetry” as a Committee.  That would be informative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, suggests the need for a better discussion about the meaning of "symmetry" if the percentage is going to be around 2½ percent. This implies a disagreement or lack of consensus within the Committee about the definition or interpretation of "symmetry" in this context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 82.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  I think you’d have to speculate.  I think to do that you’d have to have the kind of analysis in which you go back and you have different regimes, different states of the world, and you say, “Oh, what would it be like in a 1970s state of the world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is speculation involved and that different analyses and regimes need to be considered. This implies a level of disagreement or uncertainty in the information being discussed.


Passage number 83.
” MR. EVANS.  Why don’t you just push policy shocks through the policy reaction function.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements or arguments that indicate contention or disagreement. It seems to be a question or suggestion posed by Mr. Evans.


Passage number 84.
 MR. WILCOX.  It just doesn’t matter that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox simply expresses that something does not matter much, without any conflicting opinions or opposing views being presented.


Passage number 85.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints. It is a simple statement of agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 86.
 MR. WILCOX.  I mean, you’ve really got to change the parameters of the inflation process.  And to show how hard you have to work in order to generate an inflation surprise to the upside I think there’s a really terrific scenario in the “Risks and Uncertainty” section this time around.  It’s called “Different Inflation Process.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply suggesting that the parameters of the inflation process need to be changed and referencing a scenario in the "Risks and Uncertainty" section. There is no contention or disagreement presented in this passage.


Passage number 87.
” MR. FISCHER.  Do you have a page reference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of a page reference suggests the speaker is simply seeking a specific piece of information or clarification.


Passage number 88.
 MR. WILCOX.  The description is on page 79, and the graph is on page 82.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply provides information about page numbers where the description and graph can be found.


Passage number 89.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes, that’s the one that generates low inflation, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks for clarification about a statement or concept.


Passage number 90.
  MR. WILCOX.  Right.  But the point in citing that scenario is that, if you re-estimate our standard inflation relationship—I’m going to avoid using the “P” word here—over the post-2000 period, you get parameters that have an even flatter Phillips curve than we have in our standard specification.  And, as you can see, what you generate on page 82 is a track for core PCE inflation in the lower left that runs a little lower than what we have. Now, we could presumably pump monetary policy surprises, or shocks to the monetary policy rule, through a simulation long enough and hard enough to generate a material upside surprise to inflation.  I myself don’t actually think that exercise would be particularly helpful, because it would countenance that the Committee would somehow repeatedly ignore the evidence that was unfolding in front of your eyes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own opinions and perspective, without contradicting or challenging anyone else's views.


Passage number 91.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  I appreciate the lengthy discussion.  I appreciate everybody being patient.  I guess I’m trying to find out the message coming out of this.  And so I’m coming away with the idea that when different people on either side of the table talk about a scenario where, “Boy, I think if we do this, we’re going to risk inflation getting up above what we like,” or “It’s going to get bogged down,” and I think what you’re telling me is, unless you rattle your analysis in a really big way by going back and re-estimating things, things are so locked down with inflation expectations that what we’re talking about just isn’t really germane within the context of these analyses.  Everything’s pretty well contained.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing appreciation for the discussion and trying to understand the message being conveyed. They summarize what they believe they have learned, which is that the analysis suggests inflation expectations are well-contained and any risk or potential impact discussed is not relevant within the context of the analyses.


Passage number 92.
 MR. WILCOX.  I guess, as the person who will have at least an important share of the responsibility coming back to you and saying, “Well, inflation didn’t turn out like we were expecting,” I’d put it a little differently myself.  And that is: I think there’s a very good chance that a year from now, the inflation outcome will be materially different from what we envision  today.  I just can’t tell you in which direction.  And even ex post, we may well not be able to put a very convincing label on what happened. This all goes back to a result that Bob Tetlow demonstrated probably a decade ago, which I still find very compelling.  He did an analysis of variance of the inflation process and documented that, in a standard model, most of the variation in inflation doesn’t come from the right-hand side variables that we talk about—things like the slack term or exchange rate depreciation, energy price pass-through into core.  There’s a lot of variation.  Most of it comes from the error term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain a contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Wilcox discussing his own perspective on the potential variability of future inflation outcomes.


Passage number 93.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  There is a caveat to that, which gets to what you’re concerned with.  And I think noting it is to be fair to people who are worried about, “Something’s going to come out and bite this Committee in the next five years.”  The caveat is:  Nobody can really explain very well what happened going from the 1960s to the 1970s.  Maybe you can tell a story for what happened in the 1980s about getting re-anchored.  But the process of unanchoring is not that well understood.  The reasons why the slope of the Phillips curve has apparently fallen so much is also not well understood.  And so, in a world like that, you worry, “Well, if I can’t explain something very well, something fundamental, that happened over the past 50 years, isn’t there a risk that....”  It presumably has something to do with monetary policy, and it presumably, according to history, looks like it would take a while.  But there’s still the fact that we don’t really understand what that was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the limitations of understanding certain economic phenomena and expressing concern about the potential risks associated with these limitations.


Passage number 94.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions.  [No response]  Okay.  I think it’s time to recess.  There’s going to be a reception starting now downstairs in the West Court Café and, following that, dinner.  Unfortunately, as you know, our Martin Building cafeteria is closed, and space  downstairs is tight.  But all FOMC participants and all the staff who are attending this meeting who have RSVP’d are invited to attend the dinner.  We’re planning another similar event on the first day of our October–November meeting, and then we will discuss and try to evaluate whether we should continue or what we should do.  And, finally, we will reconvene at 9:00 a.m. tomorrow for the policy go-round. [Meeting recessed]September 20 Session  CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Good morning, everybody.  I think we’re ready to get going on our policy go-round.  There is just one thing I want to note—a suggestion that we can work on later.  Paragraph 2 of alternative B refers to “Hurricanes Harvey and Irma,” but we have perhaps the most devastating one of all that’s hitting Puerto Rico as we speak and probably doing a lot of damage.  I would suggest that we change this to “Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria.”  I think we ought to include that.  But reactions are welcome, and we can work on that at the end if you want. Okay.  Let’s begin the policy go-round.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The conversation is focused on logistical details and a suggestion for a small wording change.


Passage number 95.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B and the revised statement language.  Over the intermeeting period, I heard from several people that the Committee has done an excellent job in communicating its plans for the balance sheet, and some of them haven’t always given the FOMC high marks on communications.  I credit Chair Yellen for driving us to this outcome, and I’m happy that the economic progress that’s been made over the expansion has allowed us to begin the gradual process of balance sheet normalization. I believe the progress on our dual-mandate goals, the medium-run outlook, and the risks to the outlook continue to support the Committee’s strategy of gradually normalizing interest rates, a strategy that the Committee has been communicating for some time is appropriate.  This gradual removal of accommodation gives us the best chance of sustaining the expansion.  It’s a balanced approach.  It helps avoid a buildup of risks to macroeconomic stability that could arise if the economy is allowed to overheat, as well as risks to financial stability if interest rates remain too low and induce “search-for-yield” behavior or engender other financial imbalances, which we may not see developing.  It allows us to carefully assess incoming economic  information, and it has already incorporated the kind of fluctuations we’ve seen in the data on the economy and inflation. If we had started out on a steep path of normalization, we might very well have had to change strategy in response to economic developments.  Instead, we’ve been able to keep our strategy consistent.  I view this consistency as a positive and worth preserving.  It underscores that we do take a systematic approach to promoting our policy goals, contrary to recent criticisms that we are too discretionary.  It also removes policy ambiguity at a time when uncertainty seems to be rising on other fronts.  It goes without saying that we want policy to be responsive to material changes in the outlook.  But, in the absence of those changes, sending consistent messages has value, and I think we should keep this in mind.  Because the gradual path of normalization does not entail an increase in the funds rate at each FOMC meeting, a pause today is still in keeping with the strategy. One of the goals of our balance sheet communications was to ensure that the announcement would not signal a material change in policy expectations and thereby engender a sizable reaction in financial markets akin to the taper tantrum.  Making the balance sheet announcement today without a change in rates and making only minimal changes in the statement language could be the best tack in avoiding sending unintended messages about policy.  I can support the pause in that context.  I would not want it to be read as a change from our gradual normalization strategy. I see a couple of challenges for us in the period ahead.  One challenge we face each time we pause is that we may inadvertently signal a change in our view about the economy and appropriate policy.  I think we need to guard against this.  At this point, market participants already have a flatter anticipated policy rate path than we do.  This could prove to be a problem,  especially if financial conditions remain very accommodative and we end up having to implement a steeper funds rate path than we currently anticipate.  This might seem unlikely now, but, over the past two years, the funds rate has increased 100 basis points, while financial conditions are less restrictive now than they were in December 2015.  It’s good to keep in mind this upside risk. A related challenge is that the monthly data are likely to show increased variability because of the hurricanes and rebuilding efforts.  So far, analysts have appropriately read through the softness in the data reports, such as retail sales and industrial production.  But these readings may accumulate, so it’s going to be particularly important to read through such fluctuations and keep people focused on the medium-run outlook. At past meetings, I’ve expressed some concern that paragraph 1 in our statements has tended to focus too much attention on short-run movements in the data without giving proper context about what those moves mean for the outlook.  While factually correct at times, changes in the description can send the wrong message.  I think we’ve improved the language over time, but I think we need to keep attuned to what message we’ll be sending in future statements in light of the expected fluctuations in the data reports in coming months.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing support for the Committee's strategy and emphasizing the importance of consistency and careful communication.


Passage number 96.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 97.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B with the modification that you just mentioned.  While the hurricanes have created terrible loss and hardship across a wide swath of the country, our experience with previous natural disasters suggests that the hurricanes will not markedly change the medium-term outlook.  The economy will continue to grow above potential, pushing the labor market further beyond full employment.  On the inflation side, we continue to fall below our longer-run objective but not by much, given the normal variability in inflation measures.  Indeed, when one looks at inflation, coupled with the employment figures, we are very close to meeting our dual-mandate goals.  Given these conditions, it’s appropriate that we initiate normalization of our balance sheet at this meeting.  I’ve every confidence that the launch of balance sheet normalization will go well.  In large part, this is a testament to the Committee’s preparation and communication. My SEP submission calls for a federal funds rate path that is flatter than the one I had in June, as well as the Tealbook, and as well as the recommendations of the simple rules or optimal policy simulations.  I’ve taken on board the possibility that some of the transitory factors pushing down inflation, particularly those associated with health care, may indeed prove to be somewhat more persistent, requiring more patience to bring us back to our inflation target in a timely manner.  In addition, my very low estimate of r* of ½ percent implies that monetary policy is not providing as much stimulus as might otherwise appear to be the case. My projection involves an additional rate increase in December and three increases in 2018.  And assuming that data come in as expected, a rate increase in December will maintain our policy optionality.  My projected path for the economy includes a substantial overshooting of full employment, with unemployment dipping below 4 percent for a time.  Therefore, while we’re not “behind the curve,” we shouldn’t slow down the process of normalization too much, either.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 98.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as modified.  Utilizing our balance sheet was an appropriate action during extraordinary times.  But with the unemployment rate of 4.4 percent, we no longer need to rely on the balance sheet to provide  accommodation.  The Committee has selected a well-communicated, gradual path that I expect will elicit no meaningful market response to the announcement today. Successfully exiting from our large balance sheet is particularly important, because I expect this tool will be utilized again in the next recession and lessons learned from this exit will be important for determining how reluctant we should be to use the tool in the future.  In addition, gradual reductions in the size of our balance sheet may provide some desired tightening in financial conditions, affecting a broad array of asset prices in a way not accomplished to date by our federal funds rate increases. Since we began tightening in December 2015, many financial conditions—longer-term interest rates, the exchange value of the dollar, equity prices, and house prices—have remained flat or have moved in a direction consistent with monetary policy easing rather than tightening.  I do not expect large reactions from financial markets.  But, to the extent that financial conditions have not supported our normalization intentions, the balance sheet normalization may help nudge things in the right direction at the margin. I am also comfortable with there being no immediate need to raise short-term rates.  The uncertainty surrounding our balance sheet announcement and the recent problems created by hurricanes are good reasons to take a little time to evaluate whether these events could be more problematic.  In addition, the softness in recent inflation data makes it easier to continue on our very gradual tightening path.  However, embedded in my forecast is a significant risk that unemployment rates fall even further than expected to a clearly unsustainable level.  The expected decline in the unemployment rate, as well as a risk with that forecast, provides justification for continuing our gradual tightening path.  Given what we know today and expect for the near future, I would favor another tightening by the end of this year, presuming incoming data unfold as anticipated.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker expressing their support for "alternative B" and explaining their reasoning behind it.


Passage number 99.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to start with my own congratulations to Stan Fischer on his retirement from the Fed.  Stan may be surprised to learn that I’m his grandson.  [Laughter]  It happened a long time ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing congratulations and sharing a personal connection with Stan Fischer, which is met with laughter.


Passage number 100.
 MR. FISCHER.  That’s the other joke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 101.
  [Laughter] MR. BULLARD.  I may have forgotten a word—“intellectual” grandson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the speaker's potential forgetfulness of a word.


Passage number 102.
  [Laughter] MR. FISCHER.  Well, you know, you’re taking this story away from me.  It is reported that in one Brazilian election, it was discovered that one of the candidates had an illegal son.  After further work by the journalists, it got up to 11 illegal children.  And then they suggested, “You should use the motto ‘Vote for me—I may be your father.’ ”  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  That’s an excellent two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is light-hearted and includes laughter, suggesting that there is no contention or disagreement present in the conversation.


Passage number 103.
 MR. BULLARD.  You would just import paragraph 4 from alternative A into alternative B, which means that you would strike out the clause beginning with “The Committee expects.” CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Bostic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no conflict or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is suggesting a specific action to be taken, and Chair Yellen acknowledges it with a simple "Okay. Thank you."


Passage number 104.
  MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Good morning, everyone.  As I stated at the previous meeting and again during yesterday’s economy round, a chief concern of mine has been the persistence of weak inflation numbers.  Yesterday I discussed some explanations that I’m skeptical of and two other possibilities, a higher-than-understood slack in the labor market and a downward shift in inflation expectations.  What these two have in common is that they suggest that we should see a lower baseline level of inflation, and they imply that the prevailing levels of inflation are not out of line. That noted, I’m still not willing to completely let go of my basic economics training.  And for this training, I owe a major extension of thanks to Stan Fischer.  Like many in the room, I was influenced very early on by Stan.  My first economics texts were the Dornbusch and Fischer macroeconomics books, and these inspired me to a deeper engagement in the economics field.  So while I can’t claim a familial relationship like President Bullard [laughter], I can join him and others in the room in offering thanks and congratulations to you, Stan.  Your reach is far further than perhaps you even understand.  Thank you very much. As I was saying, I do have some basic economics training, and it taught me that very low unemployment should trigger higher wages and, ultimately, higher prices.  So I’m in a kind of limbo, looking for definitive signals one way or the other.  Now, I thought we were receiving clearer signals toward the end of August, but the hurricanes were a disruptive force that will distort the signal provided by data for some time into the future.  As a consequence, I am willing to continue the wait-and-see attitude I’ve had since our previous meeting and continue this for the next few months.  I’m comfortable with standing pat on the federal funds rate today but also favor one more move during this calendar year of 2017.  I’m comfortable with the language in alternative B with the hurricane amendment.  That’s fine. Regarding this meeting’s other policy action, I fully support beginning the normalization of the portfolio by reducing the level of repurchasing.  I believe that this is an important next step in our institution’s return to historical positions from which to execute policy.  If I have a criticism, it is that we could have started this sooner.  But I understand logistical constraints associated with this. Now, some might view this latter position as a conflict with my wait-and-see attitude.  As a technical matter, this observation is correct.  However, as I stated at the previous meeting, the pace at which we begin on this course is very slow, sufficiently so that I expect very little market reaction.  This could change if we accelerate the pace of reduction or as the cumulative effect becomes larger.  But for now, I’m not concerned.  I will, however, be monitoring markets for any adverse reactions that may emerge.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 105.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B as modified.  The time has come to begin the gradual process of normalizing the size of the balance sheet.  Under the Chair’s leadership, the Committee has developed a thoughtful plan to do so and has carefully communicated that plan to the public.  The public’s reaction has so far been de minimis.  I admit that I began this year thinking that this process risked significant unwanted tightening and that this was, therefore, probably a matter best postponed until the first half of 2018.  But the fact that the plan has been developed and communicated without reaction shows that it does seem safe to proceed now, and I support doing so.  As intended, markets seem to be focused on the expected path of interest rates and not on the effects of the shrinking of the balance sheet.  As long as that remains the case, those balance sheet effects may be small.  However, there’s an obvious tension between the official view, which seems right to me—that the balance sheet continues to provide significant support to economic activity—and the apparent reality that the reversal of QE is having little or no effect.  There is still a reasonable chance that there will be a substantial reaction, perhaps at a time of more “hawkish” balance sheet news coming from one or more of the other major central banks. The total amount of assets held by the Bank of England, the ECB, the Bank of Japan, and the Federal Reserve has increased from $4.3 trillion to $14.9 trillion since the end of 2007.  And while much of that is unlikely ever to be reversed, nonetheless, the flows from the reversal of QE will be dauntingly large, although they’re also likely to be glacially slow.  However, there is there the possibility of a surprise. If the economy continues on its current path of above-trend growth and strong labor market conditions, I could support another rate increase at the December meeting.  The performance of inflation over the next 90 days will figure importantly in that decision.  I see it as potentially a very close call and one not to be made today.  However, my SEP submission still reflects a baseline assumption that we will choose to do another rate hike in December.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It simply presents the author's observations and thoughts on the balance sheet normalization process and the potential impact on the economy.


Passage number 106.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B at this meeting and the proposed language revisions. I am strongly in favor of beginning the process of unwinding the balance sheet starting in October and will leave open the possibility of another rate hike this year should economic  conditions warrant it.  I anticipate that they will, but I need to see more numbers like last Thursday’s to be convinced that inflation is returning to target. As I stated yesterday, the persistence of inflation below our target is, to me, the largest risk to my forecast, and I am somewhat concerned that continuing to rely on the language “transitory factors” may increasingly call our credibility in question.  I’ll have more to say on this subject at our next meeting after analyzing the intermeeting data releases. I do want to comment on President Bullard’s suggestion on paragraph 4.  I think it is probably something that’s worth discussing at a future meeting, but right now, given all of the other moving parts in the statement and the balance sheet reduction, I would not be supportive of that at this meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and the proposed language revisions, while also discussing their concerns about inflation and President Bullard's suggestion. However, there is no direct disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 107.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  And I also want to say thank you to Governor Fischer for your service to our country.  Congratulations on a job well done.  I’ve been here for only two years, but it certainly strikes me that you’re leaving this organization a stronger one than when you joined, and it’s been a privilege for me to serve with you in the past two years.  Thank you. I also support alternative B with the revised language on the hurricane.  I agree with President Harker—I’m not comfortable with the change proposed by President Bullard, because I actually still believe that we should be gradually removing accommodation.  It’s just a question of, how gradual is gradual.  But we’ll come back to that. I strongly support the proposal to begin to wind down the Fed’s balance sheet.  And, as for the federal funds rate, while I have been consistently advocating patience, I am open-minded about the possibility of raising the federal funds rate in our December meeting.  I am mindful  that if we wait too long to see evidence of greater inflation, we may well have gotten ourselves in the position of having to accelerate rate increases, which will likely lead to a recession.  If we get ourselves in that position, I’m mindful of that. I do believe that the cyclical effects of the tightening labor market are causing inflationary pressures to build.  However, as I’ve stated, I do believe these forces are being muted by powerful structural factors.  Some of them are, in fact, intensified.  It’s the intensification that’s gotten my attention.  But over the next weeks and months, I’ll be carefully monitoring how these opposing forces are playing out in the economy, and I will be keeping an open mind.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kaplan expresses gratitude and support for Governor Fischer and agrees with President Harker on the proposed language for the hurricane. He also supports the proposal to wind down the Fed's balance sheet and is open-minded about the possibility of raising the federal funds rate. While he acknowledges the potential for inflationary pressures from the tightening labor market, he also recognizes the impact of powerful structural factors and states that he will be monitoring the situation with an open mind.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B with the changes you suggested.  It is time to begin balance sheet normalization.  But when the time comes for our next increase in the federal funds rate, we should be confident that inflation is indeed moving up toward our symmetric 2 percent objective. I think the statement sets the table well for our December decision point.  For me, this will hinge on whether the inflation outlook solidifies enough to justify another increase in rates or whether the downside risks to inflation continue to dominate and thus dictate delaying the next move. In my view, the descriptions of inflation in the statement lay out the recent facts well and give appropriate weight to concerns about the downside risks.  I have to say, however, that given where things stand now, I don’t expect to see enough evidence by December to justify a rate increase.  The current soft underlying inflation trend just seems too entrenched, and the uncertainties are too large and too one sided.  My SEP submission has no additional rate hike this year.  I do expect three rate increases in each of the next two years.  I also expect the Cubs to repeat as World Series champions before I retire.  [Laughter]  This puts the funds rate at the end of 2019 at 2¾ percent, which is my new assumed level for the longer-run neutral rate.  My SEP leaves the funds rate at neutral in 2020 even though, by the end of that year, we project inflation will be 2 percent.  At 3.9 percent, the unemployment rate will be about one-half percentage point below the natural rate. This configuration is obviously not a rest point, but it doesn’t cause me a great deal of angst, either.  Under this scenario, inflation probably would increase modestly above 2 percent in 2021.  But given the flat Phillips curve, the amount of resource pressure we envision, by itself, is not going to generate a great deal of inflation overshooting.  Instead, such an outcome may be what is needed to solidify inflation expectations symmetrically at 2 percent, which is an important foundation for achieving our inflation objective.  Unless we’re willing to signal that we can accept a reasonable chance of such outcomes, I don’t see how inflation will ever get back to target.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. 

The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses his view that he does not expect enough evidence of inflation by December to justify a rate increase. He believes that the current soft underlying inflation trend is too entrenched and the uncertainties are too large and one-sided. However, he also states that he expects three rate increases in each of the next two years, suggesting a differing opinion on the timing and necessity of rate hikes.


Passage number 109.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B and welcome the initiation of balance sheet normalization as an appropriate and necessary adjustment to our policy.  With respect to the timing of further interest rate adjustments, I thought yesterday’s go-round highlighted the uncertainty we face about our judgments of full employment and low inflation, and we should continue to challenge our assumptions of frameworks in the interest of sustaining this expansion. At the same time, it seems to me that we face age-old policy challenges.  Obviously, moving too fast could excessively tighten financial conditions and slow the economy, and  moving too slowly could cause a tight labor market to become further stretched beyond what is sustainable in the longer run, with increasing risk of financial instability. It’s also true that our dashboard measures concerning financial stability aren’t sounding alarms today, and we’ve seen a broad-based softening of inflation this year.  But this softer inflation does not appear to be tied to weakening demand or other cyclical factors.  In fact, the Tealbook projects real GDP growth to average 3 percent in the second half of 2017 and more than 2 percent in 2018, both of which are well above the longer-run estimate of trend growth.  With this growth forecast, the output gap is estimated to expand to more than 2 percent by the end of 2018, and the unemployment rate in the Tealbook is projected to be 3.8 percent. Given an outlook for economic activity well above potential in 2018, my own view is that further adjustments in the federal funds rate will be needed.  If we push interest rate normalization further into the future while waiting for clear evidence of overheating and inflation, I worry it will compromise a desirable course of gradual normalization.  At that point, the decision to act may be easier to justify, but it may also come at a much higher cost to the economy’s longer-run sustainable growth. I want to close, too, with thanking Governor Fischer for his service to the Federal Reserve.  It’s been an honor for me to serve on the FOMC with you, and I join my colleagues and the staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City in wishing you all the best. CHAIR YELLEN.  Acting President Mullinix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing the author's support for alternative B and their perspective on the timing of interest rate adjustments.


Passage number 110.
 MR. MULLINIX.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I join others in the room, Governor Fischer, to thank you for your service to the Federal Reserve and our nation and for the many impressive contributions you’ve made over the span of your career.  Thank you.  My outlook for appropriate policy in the coming months has changed little from my June SEP, when I anticipated that two more rate increases this year would be appropriate.  The only substantive change is that the softness of inflation persisted longer than I had expected.  I attribute this largely to temporary relative price shocks, and I expect that interpretation to be borne out by the next few months of price data.  Until those data arrive, I support staying put with the funds rate, but I expect that, come December, we will have sufficient evidence that it will be appropriate to raise the funds rate.  Indeed, recent real activity and Thursday’s CPI report are both steps in that direction. In moving from two more increases this year to one, I’m not shifting down my funds rate path but shifting it out in time—effectively by three months.  That gradually increasing funds rate path over the next two years is appropriate given that the economy seems to be operating above sustainable levels. As for the policy statement, I support alternative B with the proposed modification to include Hurricane Maria.  At the moment, I am concerned that inflation may be too low, so a policy of waiting is justified.  However, assuming that the coming months reveal inflation to be within our comfort zone and unemployment continues to be low, the stage will be set to continue with our policy of gradual rate increases. Finally, if we look back over the past 10 years, it is notable that the economy is in a position where commencing balance sheet normalization not only is appropriate, but also seems poised to generate little attention.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 111.
  MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I prefer alternative A but can support alternative B.  I actually had the same comment that President Bullard had about the language in paragraph 4, preferring not to make the reference to “gradual increases in the federal funds rate.” I continue to monitor inflation, inflation expectations, and the unemployment rate, looking for signs that the labor force participation story is running to its conclusion.  Right now, I’m mostly focused on inflation, where we are far from target.  As we’ve discussed, core inflation is low at 1.4 percent.  It’s been persistently low for six months, and it does not appear to be transitory, especially given low global inflation, which we discussed yesterday. My view is that low inflation reflects a mix of remaining slack coupled with low inflation expectations.  Given this diagnosis, I think it is appropriate policy at this point to remain accommodative until inflation returns to target.  In my view, we should hold off on any further increases in the federal funds rate until we’ve reached our inflation goal of core PCE at 2.0 percent on a 12-month basis unless we see a large further decline in the headline unemployment rate, suggesting that slack has been used up, or evidence of inflation expectations starting to drift higher, which we’re not seeing right now. To me, maintaining accommodation will support economic growth, which will help reduce slack, which will eventually increase wage and inflation pressures.  Signaling a firm commitment to our symmetric inflation target will also help support inflation expectations.  If we instead—this is about the language—continue to signal that the federal funds rate is on a gradual upward path, I fear that inflation will continue to drift sideways and we risk expectations becoming unanchored downward. At the previous meeting, I mentioned I was trying to rethink how I was approaching the SEP, and I tried my best not to rely on the Phillips curve.  But I couldn’t get there.  At the end of  the day, I do believe that a tight labor market eventually should lead to higher wages and higher inflation.  So, what I’ve done—I’m SEP submission number 5—I have no increase in the federal funds rate this year or next year until I reach some view that slack is being used up.  That is sometime in 2019. Finally, I do support starting our plan for balance sheet normalization in October.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kashkari, expresses disagreement with the language in paragraph 4 and argues against making gradual increases in the federal funds rate. He believes that maintaining accommodative policy until inflation reaches target is the appropriate approach.


Passage number 112.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The proposed change to our reinvestment policy today should amount to a material removal of accommodation over time and comes on top of three increases in the federal funds rate since last December.  In assessing the appropriate future settings of the funds rate, I will be looking carefully at the evolution of inflation.  We’ve been falling short of our inflation objective not just in the past year, but over a longer period as well, and standard monetary theory suggests that we shouldn’t return fully to the neutral rate of interest until we’re confident inflation is on track to achieve our target. The models that I and others monitor suggest the short-run neutral rate is currently around zero in real terms.  That’s also the view of outside analysts, as we saw in the primary dealer and market participant surveys conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  Adding in a trailing core PCE inflation rate of only 1½ percent suggests that the present setting of the nominal funds rate may be only slightly below its current neutral level.  So unless we expect inflation to move quickly back to target or there are indications that the short-run neutral rate has moved up further, it appears we could approach neutral without too much additional work.  As I talked about extensively yesterday, there are good reasons to believe inflation will not move quickly back to target.  Today, let me touch briefly on r*.  It’s possible that the short-run neutral rate has moved up.  The unemployment rate has fallen over the past year, and staff estimates of the output gap have moved further into positive territory.  At the same time, interest rates have been rising, and that does, together, suggest an increase in r*.  But, as I noted earlier, the models that we tend to monitor suggest a relatively low value for r*.  And because we’re falling short of our inflation objective, it seems appropriate that real interest rates be set below that level. That said, the future evolution of r* will bear close monitoring.  In the staff’s medium-term projection, r* rises well above its longer-run equilibrium value.  That occurs despite balance sheet normalization, which the staff estimates will boost the level of the 10-year term premium by about 30 basis points between now and the end of 2020.  Various staff estimates suggest that such an increase in term premiums would imply a decrease in the short-run neutral rate of interest.  And if, as I anticipate, the ECB or other foreign central banks decide to pursue a similar course before too long, this could also have a reinforcing effect.  Of course, if the neutral rate remains low relative to its historical averages, this puts a greater premium on guiding inflation back up to target so as to retain space to buffer against adverse shocks with conventional policy. For these reasons, in the months ahead I’ll want to see data that allow me to be more confident that core inflation is indeed on track to move up to our target. Finally, I endorse the proposal in alternative B to announce, at the end of this meeting, the change in reinvestment policy we agreed upon in June, with the implementation to begin next month.  I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the Chair for her exceptionally deft  management of the balance sheet normalization process.  This is virtually uncharted territory for the FOMC, and the very clear, well-communicated, and carefully considered approach that she has led will, I believe, provide a model for peer central banks to build on in years to come.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the views and opinions of the speaker.


Passage number 113.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, you’re a tough act to follow, Stan.  I can’t say the words with as much grace and humor and dignity as you can, but I think I do want to echo the  Chair’s remarks and the other Committee participants’ remarks over the past two days and thank you for your contributions that you’ve made to this Committee, to the Federal Reserve, and to the economics profession over your long, illustrious career.  There really is no one quite like you in terms of the breadth and magnitude of your achievements in academia, the World Bank, the IMF, the Bank of Israel, and here at the Federal Reserve Board as Vice Chairman.  The saying “You are a gentleman and a scholar” is often used lightly and in jest, but in your case, it truly applies.  The Internet dictionary I referenced says the saying means someone who is admirable and of high esteem.  That is you in spades, and I know my sentiments are shared by all of us at the FOMC, around the Federal Reserve System, and among our central bank colleagues whom you and I have had the pleasure of meeting so regularly in Basel over the years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a complimentary message expressing admiration and gratitude towards someone.


Passage number 114.
 MR. FISCHER.  Well, thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 115.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let me turn to the more boring issue of alternative B.  [Laughter]  I support alternative B with the Chair’s modification. I agree with everyone else on the Committee that it’s time to begin the balance sheet normalization process, and I’m really pleased that everyone on the Committee supports this.  That’s really a remarkable achievement.  The process of raising the federal funds rate target range, in my view, is indeed well under way.  And the prospects are good that the economic expansion will continue over the medium term, so the risk of a near-term reversal in our monetary policy path seems low at this point.  Finally, it’s widely anticipated that we’ll start the process in October, and there’s been little market reaction as expectations have shifted in terms of timing.  In addition, the debt limit issue has been put to bed for a while, so there basically are no compelling reasons for delay at this point, and I think that we all share those sentiments.  I view this shift as a major milestone even as the balance sheet normalization process is  anticipated to run on autopilot, in the background.  The plan will normalize the balance sheet over time but with appropriate safeguards to minimize the risk of a sharp disruption to financial markets. Now, one issue that I have been wrestling with is the lack of response of the U.S. Treasury market and the agency MBS market as expectations have changed about the timing of balance sheet normalization.  If expectations matter, why haven’t bond term premiums risen and the agency MBS–Treasury option-adjusted spread widened as balance sheet normalization has become more likely.  I find it hard to reconcile the taper tantrum experience with what we’re seeing currently.  I think there are a number of competing explanations to account for the lack of movement in Treasury yields and the agency MBS option-adjusted spread to Treasury securities.  Some of these explanations suggest that the widening in risk premiums maybe had just been delayed.  Others suggest that the widening will be smaller than we might have anticipated. On the side that the widening in term premiums will be smaller than anticipated, market participants do give us credit for good communication, and that stands in sharp contrast to the taper tantrum episode.  I think this has helped.  Also, the term premium may be permanently lower than has been the case historically.  Over the past 50 years or so, the average spread between the 10-year Treasury note yield and the 3-month Treasury bill yield has been about 100 basis points.  But if inflation risks are viewed as much reduced, might not this have a persistent effect on the level of term premiums. Finally, most likely, our balance sheet is going to remain considerably larger than when we started to expand our balance sheet in 2008.  If our actions depressed 10-year Treasury note term premiums by, say, 50 to 100 basis points as the balance sheet rose from $800 billion to $4½ trillion, then it should widen by much less as the balance sheet falls to only around $3 trillion to  $3½ trillion.  I’m assuming here that the FOMC ultimately decides on a monetary policy framework with a large amount of excess reserves—in other words, a floor system. Or it’s possible that the upward pressure on term premiums could just be delayed.  Undoubtedly, the continuing European and Japanese asset purchase programs are helping restrain our bond term premiums.  Perhaps when these programs wind up, we’ll see more widening in bond term premiums on a global basis.  Also, it could be that flows matter more than shifts in expectations.  In other words, only when the additional supply hits the market will it have a significant consequence for yield levels and term premiums. Finally, the timing of balance sheet normalization in terms of large supply effects may simply be so far out in the future that it’s not now the focus of market participants or yet priced into the bond market.  This is consistent with the June Desk surveys, in which market participants generally viewed the impending shift in the Fed’s balance sheet as not yet having any effect on the level of term premiums. How much term premiums widen and when this occurs is, I think, important in terms of thinking about the appropriate stance of monetary policy.  Wider term premiums would represent a tightening of financial conditions, all else being equal.  The more the term premium widens, all else being equal, the less we’ll have to raise short-term rates.  Right now, at least, there’s been no widening.  Thus, as matters stand today, that bolsters the case for further monetary policy tightening.  But circumstances could change as the balance sheet normalization process gets under way in earnest, so that may have effects on our future monetary policy decisions.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing support for alternative B and agrees with everyone else on the Committee that it is time to begin the balance sheet normalization process. The speaker also discusses potential reasons for the lack of movement in Treasury yields and the agency MBS option-adjusted spread to Treasury securities, but there is no disagreement expressed.


Passage number 116.
 MR. FISCHER.  Madam Chair, can I ask a question. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer simply asks if he can ask a question, and Chair Yellen responds with a simple "yes."


Passage number 117.
  MR. FISCHER.  If interest rates are going down, what do we know about the utility functions in the markets.  I’d think that there’s a good shot that they’re logarithmic and that what’s constant is the log of the term premium and not the term premium itself.  We’re going to be operating with significantly lower interest rates as far as the eye can see.  We measure it in basis points, don’t we.  I think we might want to measure it as a percentage of something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and making observations about interest rates and utility functions in the market.


Passage number 118.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, I mean, the point I was making is, if inflation is low and inflation is less volatile, the big risk of holding long-dated assets is that inflation rises.  So we may be in a regime of permanently lower term premiums. The other story that we hear from market participants is that there’s a demand for safe assets, to guard against reversals in the economic environment, that is raising the value of Treasury securities. They’re more worried about the downside risk to the economy than they are worried about the upside risk to inflation.  So that changes the relative attractiveness of longer-dated Treasury securities.  Hard to know. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Well, I’ve heard broad-based support for alternative B and the initiation of our balance sheet program today.  Before we vote on the statement, I want to discuss President Bullard’s suggestion a little bit more.  President Bullard and President Kashkari, I heard, supported a change to paragraph 4—essentially substituting the alternative A version—and I have heard some opposition, but many of you didn’t comment. I would say that, from my own standpoint, essentially removing that language gets rid of any expectation that the Committee has expressed for a long time that the path will be one of gradual rate increases.  That’s an extremely significant change, not a minor change, to alternative B, and I do find it a strange time to make such a change when the SEP continues to show that most participants have an unchanged path that they expect for the federal funds rate of further  gradual increases.  So the language is consistent with the median path.  There’s not been much change in the SEP this time.  And while I was pleased to hear a lot of open-mindedness about future policy—which I think is fully appropriate—and concern about inflation and open-mindedness in terms of watching the data, the SEP does suggest that most of us do think that inflation is going to rebound, although, obviously, it’s a hypothesis we’ll be reevaluating in light of the data.  I would say, from my own standpoint, I would have concern myself about making the substitution that you’ve proposed.  But I do want to let anyone else who wishes to weigh in, especially if anyone else wants to support the change.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Chair Yellen is simply discussing different options and perspectives on the issue at hand.


Passage number 119.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, Madam Chair, I agree with you.  I think if it wasn’t in, you wouldn’t have to put it in.  But if it’s in, I think it sends a very strong signal if you take it out.  Taking it out, I think, would be confusing to people.  I think they’d be having trouble reconciling the two.  They’d say: “Why are you taking it out at this meeting, when your SEP forecasts have really fundamentally not changed.” CHAIR YELLEN.  There would be that.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the chair and expresses their rationale for keeping something in, rather than taking it out.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 120.
 MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair, I appreciate your comments, and I think if I was in your chair, I would agree with that.  [Laughter]  But I’m not.  I think that I would like the Committee to think about this, especially Governor Brainard’s comments about where r* is, how fast do you think r* is going back, and how close are we to r* right now.  I think there was a time when this language was put in where we thought that the policy rate was quite a bit below r*, and, therefore, we said that this gap has got to be gradually closed.  But since then, President Williams and Thomas Laubach have convinced us that r* is quite a bit lower than we thought, plus we’ve raised the rate.  This gap has become pretty low, and I’m wondering if it’s really  appropriate now to continue to say that we’ve got a long path of gradual rate hikes.  I agree about your SEP comment, though. CHAIR YELLEN.   From my own standpoint, point well taken, and I think I agree also with what the Vice Chairman said, which is, this isn’t language I would propose to put in today if it wasn’t already there.  I do think it’s worth a rethink at an appropriate time, especially if we determine in light of data that a more gradual path than we’re anticipating—in light of inflation data, perhaps—becomes what we expect.  I do think it’s something we should rethink, but I wouldn’t want to make the change today.  And if anyone wants to express support, please do.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing none, then let me ask Brian to call the roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement or contention between Mr. Bullard and Chair Yellen regarding the appropriateness of continuing with a "long path of gradual rate hikes." Mr. Bullard questions the language and suggests that the changing economic conditions and lower estimates of r* may warrant a reevaluation of the policy. Chair Yellen acknowledges his point but states that she wouldn't make the change at that moment.


Passage number 121.
 MR. HARKER.  Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Oh, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Oh, yes" is simply an affirmation or acknowledgment.


Passage number 122.
 MR. HARKER.  One other just minor suggestion.  I would recommend, instead of naming another hurricane, just saying “hurricanes.”  Now, why.  Because Jose, even though it’s a minor hurricane, may do damage from Cape Cod to Cape May.  People there may say, “What about us.” because it’s still spinning off the East Coast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Harker is simply giving a suggestion and explaining his reasoning behind it.


Passage number 123.
 MR. POWELL.  I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement indicates agreement between the speaker (Mr. Powell) and an unidentified party.


Passage number 124.
 MR. HARKER.  So instead of adding another name, just say “hurricanes,” and people will know what we mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or ideas. It is a straightforward suggestion given by Mr. Harker, which does not generate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 125.
 MR. POWELL.  I agree with that.  “Recent hurricanes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage as Mr. Powell states that he agrees with the previous statement about recent hurricanes.


Passage number 126.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Could just say “recent hurricanes.” CHAIR YELLEN.  So will we say “recent hurricanes have devastated”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a suggestion to rephrase a statement for improved clarity.


Passage number 127.
 MR. HARKER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No


Passage number 128.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, I’m not sure if Jose fits the class of devastation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or contrasting arguments. It only mentions uncertainty about whether Jose fits a certain class or category.


Passage number 129.
  MR. HARKER.  No, no, but to those communities, it’s going to cause disruptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 130.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I’ll tell you when I land in Boston. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  So, is everybody okay with “recent hurricanes”.  Loretta.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply confirming if everyone is okay with using the phrase "recent hurricanes."


Passage number 131.
 MS. MESTER.  I thought of that, but the reason I thought the way you worded it was better was that it acknowledges that one of them is hitting Puerto Rico. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Mester is simply stating her thought process behind preferring a certain wording, and Chair Yellen agrees with her reasoning.


Passage number 132.
 MS. MESTER.  And I thought that if we just say “hurricanes,” it still might guide people into thinking that all we’re caring about are the two that hit the U.S. mainland.  That’s the nuance, but I just put it out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a thought or suggestion without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 133.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, I’m where Loretta is. CHAIR YELLEN.  That was, in part, a motivation to name it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their agreement with Loretta and expresses a motivation for their actions.


Passage number 134.
 MR. KASHKARI.  There’s a flipside.  I mean, people might say, “Why does the Committee know something about future devastation.”  I just feel like we’re getting a little bit ahead of ourselves with the hurricane that’s ongoing right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the topic without directly opposing or disputing another perspective.


Passage number 135.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, it’s hitting Puerto Rico as we speak.  So we’re pretty sure.  I mean, it’s a Category 4 hurricane.  I don’t think there’s that much forecasting required to understand it’s going to cause a lot of damage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker seems to be stating a fact about the hurricane hitting Puerto Rico and expressing confidence in the prediction of significant damage based on the hurricane's category.


Passage number 136.
 MR. KASHKARI.  For what it’s worth, I was where Pat was.  The “recent hurricanes” just felt like it acknowledged the devastation without getting overly specific.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kashkari, agrees with Pat's perspective on how the term "recent hurricanes" is used to acknowledge the devastation without being specific.


Passage number 137.
 MR. BOSTIC.  I agree with Pat as well. CHAIR YELLEN.  With “recent”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses agreement with Pat, indicating no disagreement or contention.


Passage number 138.
 MR. BOSTIC.  Yes, “recent hurricanes.”  CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let’s take a straw poll.  How many people prefer “recent”.  [Show of hands]  Okay.  And how many people prefer the listing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are simply discussing the use of a word and taking a poll to decide which option to choose.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 139.
  [Show of hands] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You had to have some controversy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of "[Show of hands]" indicates that there is some controversy or disagreement among the audience or participants.


Passage number 140.
 MR. POWELL.  Chair’s call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 141.
 MS. GEORGE.  I think you should make the call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. George is simply providing her opinion or suggestion that someone should make a call.


Passage number 142.
 MR. HARKER.  Yes, sorry to bring it up. CHAIR YELLEN.  Stan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Harker apologizes for bringing something up and Chair Yellen acknowledges it. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 143.
 MR. FISCHER.  There is a compromise, which is “recent hurricanes, among them Irma, or whatever.” CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, it seems like it’s a tie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen seem to be in agreement about the existence of a compromise.


Passage number 144.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The tie goes to the Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  I guess I would stick with the listing—the “Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria.”  It’s a close call.  I wouldn’t be unhappy with “recent,” either, but let’s stick with the listing. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Chair Yellen is simply stating her preference for a particular listing and clarifying her reasoning.


Passage number 145.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As you noted, this vote will be on the monetary policy statement for alternative B, as shown on pages 5 and 6 of the package of materials for Thomas Laubach’s briefing on monetary policy alternatives, except that the second sentence of the second paragraph would begin with “Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria.”  The vote will also encompass approval of the directive to the Desk included in the draft implementation note on pages 9 and 10 of those briefing materials. Chair Yellen   Yes Vice Chairman Dudley  Yes Governor Brainard   Yes President Evans   Yes  Governor Fischer   Yes President Harker   Yes President Kaplan   Yes President Kashkari   Yes Governor Powell   Yes  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Now the Board needs to vote on corresponding interest rates on reserves and discount rates.  I first need a motion from a Board member to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances unchanged at 1¼ percent.  Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The individuals mentioned are all in agreement in their responses.


Passage number 146.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: Both Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen appear to be in agreement as Mr. Fischer moves a motion and Chair Yellen seconds it.


Passage number 147.
 MR. POWELL.  Yes, second. CHAIR YELLEN.  Without objection.  Finally, I need a motion from a Board member to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing rate of 1¾ percent and establishment of the rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas specified in the staff’s September 15 memo to the Board.  Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 148.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer makes a motion, and Chair Yellen seconds it.


Passage number 149.
 MR. POWELL.  Second. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  Okay.  Thank you.  And our final agenda item is simply to confirm that our next meeting will be on Tuesday–Wednesday, October 31 and November 1.  As usual, there will be boxed sandwiches and salads in the anteroom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the agenda for a meeting.


