Passage number 1.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to apologize to the group for having an excerpted part of my speech in the Wall Street Journal on Monday during the blackout period.  I asked them not to publish it during the blackout.  Michelle has seen the string of e-mails. They sent me back what I actually said, which is always dangerous, on the 16th of July.  I did correct it because there were a lot of misstatements in there that they had created from the speech.  Having said that, I think all of us, especially me, need to be conscious of the fact that whatever we say can appear.  I did argue with them about publishing it.  They were firm on it. But I think, Madam Chair, I am embarrassed because this is a sacred institution.  I am also embarrassed because they had one of the San Francisco Fed’s dollars in the picture.  It had an “L” at the very end, rather than a “K.”  I don’t want to embarrass my colleague from San Francisco, and I just wanted to issue a public “I’m sorry.”  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Next I want to mention that the subcommittee on communications is up and running under the leadership of Governor Fischer.  I thought I would just turn over the floor to him for a second to report on their activities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a person apologizing for a mistake and expressing embarrassment.


Passage number 2.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thanks very much, Madam Chair.  We are waiting for the third “Fisher” to come follow me and say something.  [Laughter]  The communications subcommittee consists now of Jay Powell, Loretta Mester, John Williams, and me.  We had our first, primarily agenda-setting, meeting this morning, and the first item on the agenda is going to be revising the statement on longer-term goals and monetary policy strategy that was agreed on in January by the Federal Open Market Committee. We’ve had the idea of circulating some of the discussion that took place in this Committee when that was discussed, so that people can see what the issues are.  We are clearly going to have to find some way of relating to the financial-stability function, which is not defined as part of our dual mandate.  We have a hard time getting financial stability into the dual mandate, but we clearly are focusing more on it than we did in the past, and it will have to make an appearance of some sort.  There are other issues that you discussed earlier, ones that possibly we could make another incremental step on, but we will see what those are, and we hope to have something ready to discuss at the December meeting.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Thank you.  Our first two items this morning will be considered in a joint meeting of the FOMC and the Board.  I need a motion to close the Board meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 3.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Let me turn over the floor now to Simon for the Desk report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the process of turning over the floor to Simon for the Desk report.


Passage number 4.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you.  Looking at your charts 13 and 14—when I do econometric work I spend a lot of time looking at outliers, and it looks like the end of the quarter has outliers that are relevant for understanding short-term credit behavior.  When I think of federal funds, I think it’s a GSE-dominated market.  When I think of excess reserves, I think of it as basically a foreign branch–dominated market. I wonder if you could expand a little bit more on the behavior—we have been calling it “window-dressing” in some of the memos, but it might be worth just elaborating a little bit more on what is encouraging the branches to dramatically change toward the end of the quarter, and what would be the implication—are there other ways that we could affect behavior.  If we had significant limitations on some of our facilities, are there other alternatives that could make us think about foreign branch behavior at the end of the quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply asking for further information and elaboration on a particular topic.


Passage number 5.
 MR. POTTER.  My view of what’s going on is that a large amount of the reserves in the system are held at these foreign banks.  About 52 to 54 percent is the average.  Most of the trading in the federal funds market, and also the Eurodollar market, is an arbitrage trade.  It is an overnight trade, in which someone who doesn’t have access to interest on excess reserves gives money to a foreign banking organization who can then earn interest on excess reserves. At quarter-end, the easiest way for the foreign banks to reduce their balance sheet is to reduce those excess reserves, because they are not really serving any purpose other than the arbitrage trade.  It’s a rather neutral event within financial markets for the foreign banking organizations.  It does cause challenges for the investors that they deal with.  As you can see, last year what would happen is the custodial balances in big custodian banks would go up at that point, because there wouldn’t be balance sheet available elsewhere. In terms of how we could change this, I’m not completely sure what the economics are behind the window-dressing that happens.  It seems that there could be accounting incentives to do it.  There are regulatory incentives.  Clearly, the incentive—not in the branches here, but for the other parts of a foreign banking organization—to reduce their balance sheet in the most recent quarter were quite strong because of their trying to calculate the $50 billion asset threshold for the IHC requirement.  I think it is worthy of more investigation. But overall this is reasonably neutral.  I think going in and out, there is no friction within money markets from the existence of the overnight RRP.  It probably does make it a little bit easier for some of the people who want to do this behavior to maintain the relationships they have after that.  If I’m a money fund, I feel less disturbed by the fact that I have to go to the ON RRP for one day, and then I form my relationship back with a foreign banking organization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own views and observations about the role of foreign banks in the reserves system and the impact of balance sheet reduction on financial markets.


Passage number 6.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Just one quick follow-up.  This is indexed to 100.  When I look at $630 billion, how much of a movement was there just of the FBOs in terms of quantity of excess reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 7.
 MR. POTTER.  It was a reduction of 25 percent.  We have the numbers.  [Aside to Ms. Logan]  Is that right.  How much.  $150 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be disagreement or contention regarding the amount of reduction. Mr. Potter states that it was a reduction of 25 percent and asks Ms. Logan for confirmation, signaling a potential discrepancy or discussion about the actual amount.


Passage number 8.
 MS. LOGAN.  $350 billion, maybe—something on that order.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not include any form of disagreement or contention. It is a statement by Ms. Logan providing a potential figure.


Passage number 9.
 MR. POTTER.  It’s in one of my notes—$340 billion or 25 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, simply states a fact or information from his notes without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 10.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a short interaction between Mr. Rosengren and Chair Yellen. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 11.
 MR. FISHER.  Can I just follow up on chart 13.  If we weren’t to have a discussion, as we’re about to have this morning, or change the parameters, the normalization principles, all of the things we hope to issue in September, and we come to quarter-end September, would you expect a similar bar to what you saw in Q2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question being asked.


Passage number 12.
 MR. POTTER.  These bars have been growing.  One of the differences from the previous quarter-end was that the cap was $10 billion rather than $7 billion.  I think four funds were maxed out at quarter-end, if I remember exactly, might have been a few more.  I would expect this to perhaps be a little bit higher, depending on what the dynamics were in money markets at that time. The dynamics were quite unusual in this quarter-end, as dealers were trying to net down their repo books.  It’s hard for us to think through what the rate configuration was, because rates are actually quite high in the GCF market.  That wouldn’t be predictive of this kind of spike, but that’s what we got.  It was a pretty sudden spike.  I think it surprised some of us here that it was that big.  Is that fair, Bill.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers are simply discussing the increase in bars and the dynamics of the market at the quarter-end.


Passage number 13.
 MR. POWELL.  I have a question on the term deposit facility, and that is, we have a reference in the draft normalization principles to our other supplementary tools, which I take to include the TDF.  The take-up is kind of interesting.  There is really a big increase in take-up.  I guess my question is, if you eliminate the individual caps, make it LCR-friendly, and then start playing around with price, what kind of size could it get to.  Really, the question is, at the start, is this a tool that we can actually think might have some effect around the time of liftoff.  Or how many reserves do we really need to drain, do we think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification on the potential impact and effectiveness of a specific tool.


Passage number 14.
 MR. POTTER.  I’m going to let Bill answer this one—I’m sure I will agree with him.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is indicating that he will defer to Bill's answer and expects to agree with it.


Passage number 15.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I guess my first answer is, we don’t know.  We’ll be doing testing of the breakable TDF, and we will get better information on how much that helps to increase the amount that we can drain.  I think that my expectation is that it will help a fair amount—that we will get considerably larger amounts that we can drain.  But I don’t think they will be so large that we will get to a situation in which reserves will be scarce, and we can kind of implement policy through scarcity of reserves, unless the rate is extraordinarily high. Nonetheless, draining some reserves in this way, and offering an attractive investment for banks that they can then respond to, and their actions in other markets, should help to firm rates.  The extent to which that’s the case—it’s just hard to judge, I’m afraid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own expectation and uncertainty about the potential impact of breakable TDF on draining reserves and firming rates. They acknowledge the difficulty of judging the extent to which these actions will have the desired effects.


Passage number 16.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  I think that there are two things that could happen—the profits of banks go up, or they pass on some of this rate increase, and there will be some mixture.  We will have more rate control from it the less it just increases the profits of banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply stating his opinion about the potential outcomes of a rate increase on banks. He suggests that there may be a mixture of increased profits for banks and some rate control resulting from the increase.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
 MR. POWELL.  We shouldn’t count on this tool being useful at the time of liftoff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Powell, is expressing skepticism about the usefulness of a certain tool at the time of liftoff.


Passage number 18.
 MR. POTTER.  I think in terms of theatrics, it might be useful, that we are actually doing things.  But in terms of changing some of the competitive dynamics that might be there, you’d have to work really hard because it’s the same set of counterparties who have access to interest on excess reserves.  You are not changing that competitive dynamic in money markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents the perspective of Mr. Potter on the topic of changing competitive dynamics in money markets, without any conflicting viewpoints being mentioned.


Passage number 19.
 MR. POWELL.  Okay.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 20.
 MS. GEORGE.  I wanted to go back to something President Rosengren asked, to make sure I understood.  On chart 14, when you look at those quarter-end responses from the foreign banks, so this is not eliciting a regulatory response in terms of managing the balance sheet as it relates to capital.  Or is this just a function of the amount of reserves in the system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 21.
 MR. POTTER.  I am not a supervisor, so—I think that the answer I gave is they have massive reserve balances, so they’ve got 52 percent of $3.6 trillion.  That’s a big number.  They are not really using it for anything other than the arbitrage trades, so they are reducing it down.  It’s risk-weighted capped to a charge of zero, so it doesn’t matter.  But on the leverage ratio, it has the same weight as everything else, which is the behavior you’re seeing. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage consists of statements made by Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen, and there is no indication of disagreement between the two speakers. They are simply discussing the reserve balances and their use in arbitrage trades.


Passage number 22.
 MR. LACKER.  It was my understanding that there is an asymmetry between the domestic and foreign banks in the degree to which daily averaging was the relevant balance sheet measure versus quarter-end.  And the foreign banks are more tilted toward quarter-end, and, thus, they place sort of a higher shadow value on actually doing it.  Is that understanding correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation of their understanding of the situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 23.
 MR. POTTER.  As I said, I’m not a supervisor.  I think our leverage ratio is calculated as an average.  There’s less of an incentive to do it.  It is not obvious how people are going to apply the Basel III leverage ratio to foreign banking organizations, but they seem to be thinking that it might be applied more at the quarter-end.  There’s some uncertainty.  If you talk to some of the people who have to manage these balance sheets, they are unsure on a number of aspects about what the final rules will look like.  They still have the net stable funding ratio, for example, that has to be finalized. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, expresses uncertainty and a lack of clarity about how the Basel III leverage ratio will be applied to foreign banking organizations. He also mentions that there are still aspects, such as the net stable funding ratio, that need to be finalized, indicating disagreement or contention about the final rules.


Passage number 24.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  One more, just to follow up on that.  The Europeans are doing a stress test this fall.  If they are worried about their balance sheet at the end of the quarter, would we expect during the stress test that we might see even larger movements by the foreign banking organizations and need to be aware of that as we go into the fall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a follow-up question for more information or clarification.


Passage number 25.
 MR. POTTER.  I think that you saw that at the end of last year, when it was true that European banks tried to get their balance sheets a little bit lower, because that was the snapshot that was taken for the AQR and also for the stress test, in my understanding.  That is less of an issue now.  But in countries in which there are other regulations coming on—the United Kingdom, for example—you are going to see these dynamics continue if you do all of the measurement at a particular point in time. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions for Simon.  [No response]  Seeing none, I need a motion to ratify open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 26.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.  Without objection.  I think we are now ready to turn to the next topic, which is monetary policy normalization.  Let me just make a couple of introductory comments to start things off. I want to begin by once again expressing my appreciation to all of you for the productive discussions you have had over the past two meetings and also for your thoughtful and constructive comments on the draft normalization principles and the memos that were circulated for discussion today.  I also want to thank the staff for their continued excellent support. I think we all agree on the importance of clearly communicating to the public our normalization plans well before the first steps in tightening policy become appropriate.  In light of the good progress we have made so far, I believe we are on track to roll out our revised policy normalization principles and strategy in September.  As you know, staff circulated a revised set of normalization principles yesterday that reflect the comments we received late last week.  I hope that any further revisions that seem necessary can be locked down in the coming weeks so that we can finalize and release these principles in September. Therefore, my first goal for today’s meeting is to make sure we agree on the general approach to conducting monetary policy during normalization that is spelled out in the main memo, and incorporated in the policy principles, and that we iron out any remaining issues with the overall approach during today’s session.  Secondly, I hope we can make progress on the mechanics of our approach, and in particular on the role and design of the overnight RRP facility, something that is clearly a concern to many of you and to me as well. I think that most of you agree that the overnight RRP facility needs to play a supplementary role in enhancing our control over the federal funds rate during the normalization process.  Personally, I will say that I think it’s important for us to demonstrate convincing control over short-term rates at liftoff.  But because of our concerns about this facility’s potential to create systemic risk or to cause significant and unintended changes in the structure of money markets, we will definitely need to address these concerns. With respect to the numerical parameters pertaining to the caps, I would suggest that we still have time to work out these details, and we can and should wait to finalize these choices until we have done some further testing.  We are likely, in that testing process, to learn more about usage and the limits that will be needed to establish adequate monetary control.  There is no need to nail down the parameters today.  That said, I will surely be asked questions about the facility in September, and I’d like to be able to describe some of the key design features of the overnight RRP facility at the press conference.  But the draft normalization principles omit technical details, and I think we can say at that time that we have made no final decisions on numerical parameters. A third goal today is to address how we will handle intermeeting adjustments in the event that the funds rate moves outside the target range set by the Committee.  As we have discussed before, under the unprecedented circumstances we face, we cannot know with certainty how well any specific approach to normalization will work in practice.  We, thus, need to be able to adjust our mix of tools flexibly.  One important issue raised in the staff memos regards the possible need to make an adjustment to one of our tools between FOMC meetings in order to help keep the funds rate in the Committee’s target range. We hope that this need would not arise very often, but I think we need arrangements for making adjustments that are prompt and effective and also appropriate from a governance standpoint.  As noted in the staff memos, one possibility is for the Committee, at the outset, to delegate carefully circumscribed authority to me as Chair to make such intermeeting adjustments.  I want to make clear that I am not asking for this authority now, but I am interested in hearing your views on how we should proceed if, say, the federal funds rate moves significantly or persistently outside of our target range.  Of course, the Committee is responsible for setting the stance of monetary policy, and I would not support any plan that, in practice or in appearance, distances the Committee from policy decisions. I think we are ready to get to it.  As in our previous discussions, I encourage you to make good use of the Q&A period after the staff presentations.  We will then have a go-round to hear everyone’s views on the proposals.  With that, I am going to turn the floor over to Patrick McCabe, who is going to start us off on the staff presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 27.
 MS. WEINBACH.  Thank you, Patrick.  In my remarks, I will summarize the key aspects of the overall approach to normalization discussed in the staff memo, and then describe some possible adjustments that could be made to allow for a smaller role for the overnight RRP facility if that were desired.  As noted in the top panel of your second exhibit, under the approach in the staff memo, you would continue to set a target range of 25 basis points for the federal funds rate; that target range would be your primary means of communicating the stance of monetary policy.  Framing the stance of policy in terms of the federal funds rate would focus monetary policy discussions and communication on a rate that is familiar to market participants and the public.  In addition, setting a target range rather than a point target would afford some leeway in achieving your stated interest rate policy while the quantity of reserves in the banking system remains elevated, and could be especially helpful during the early stages of liftoff. The IOER and overnight RRP rates would be used as tools to move the effective federal funds rate into the target range and to maintain it within that range.  The IOER rate would be set equal to the top of the target range and the overnight RRP rate set equal to the bottom of the target range, settings that would be straightforward to communicate.  Because the resulting spread of 25 basis points would be a little wider than the current 20 basis points, it should continue to encourage a volume of trading in the federal funds market that is similar to the current level.  A spread of 25 basis points would also help to mitigate concerns about having a large footprint in the nonbank financial sector during normal times.  As I already noted, I’ll return to the topic of the role of overnight RRP operations in this approach a bit later. Communicating adjustments to the stance of policy would be straightforward under this approach.  For example, the first tightening move could be to set the target range to 25 to 50 basis points, with the IOER rate at 50 basis points and the overnight RRP rate at 25 basis points.  Subsequently, the target range could be adjusted in steps of 25 basis points, or multiples thereof.  At a typical FOMC meeting, you would primarily focus on setting the target range for the federal funds rate.  The staff memo included an illustrative draft of a postmeeting liftoff statement announcing the first change in the target range.  The statement notes that, “In a related action to help move the effective federal funds rate into the new target range,” the Board had changed the IOER rate.  It also notes that the Board had approved a change in the primary credit rate in the same way that changes in the discount rate have been communicated for quite some time.  Next, the draft statement also notes that the FOMC had changed the overnight RRP rate.  Mentioning the IOER rate first in the statement, and the overnight RRP rate subsequently, would help to signal that the IOER rate was seen as playing the primary role in implementing monetary policy.  Of course, you do not have to mention the overnight RRP rate in your statement; it could be noted in the directive to the Desk instead. Assuming that the limits on usage of overnight RRPs were designed to rarely bind, as presumed in the staff memo, the staff expects that this approach would result in the effective federal funds rate residing in the lower portion of the target range.  But if the federal funds rate were to move outside of its target range, you might find that you need to adjust some of the parameters of this approach, or employ other measures.  As noted in the bottom-left panel, your preferred response would likely depend on the specific circumstances at hand.  For example, if the baseline approach works broadly as intended, but the effective federal funds rate nonetheless moved out of its target range often enough and by a sufficient amount to warrant a response of some sort, you might decide to adjust the administered rates. Such adjustments could be made at the next scheduled FOMC meeting, or you might prefer to hold an unscheduled joint meeting of the Committee and Board.  Alternatively, the Board and FOMC may want to delegate to the Chair the authority to make modest adjustments to the IOER and overnight RRP rates between meetings, if such changes were judged necessary to keep the effective federal funds rate within the target range established by the FOMC.  For the same reason, as Patrick noted, you might also choose to authorize the Chair to adjust the caps on usage of the overnight RRP facility, if necessary.  The Board and Committee would, of course, set limits on the size of the adjustments that the Chair could make under delegated authority and, consistent with past practice, the Board and Committee could instruct the Chair to consult them, if feasible, before making any intermeeting adjustments. If such adjustments were not successful in keeping the funds rate in its target range, there are several additional steps that you could take if warranted.  For example, if the federal funds rate remained persistently below the bottom of its target range, you could use term-draining tools or sales of short-term Treasury securities to firm money market conditions. You may want to consider ways to alter this approach in order to allow for a more complete assessment of the need for overnight RRP operations as part of the normalization strategy, as noted in the bottom-right panel.  One possibility would be to lift off by setting the target range for the federal funds rate to 25 to 50 basis points and the IOER rate to the top of that range, just as in the baseline approach, but keep the overnight RRP rate at its current level of 5 basis points.  Relative to the baseline approach, having a wider spread between the IOER and overnight RRP rates at the outset should reduce the attractiveness of the facility, but it would also result in the facility providing a lower floor on short-term interest rates.  It is possible that the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates could move up nearly one for one with increases in the IOER rate.  If so, the Committee could subsequently maintain the wider spread between the IOER and overnight RRP rates, or consider widening that spread further in order to minimize use of the overnight RRP facility.  However, if the IOER rate did not provide enough lift for the federal funds rate or other short-term rates, the Committee would likely need to make adjustments to the overnight RRP rate to move the funds rate into the target range.  But in this case the first policy tightening would not have been successful, which could significantly undermine the Federal Reserve’s credibility and greatly increase uncertainty in financial markets.  Such an outcome could also have reputational consequences in the political sphere, in which criticism of the asset purchase programs has included concerns about difficulty of exit. As a consequence, the Committee might want to take a more cautious course by first using the approach in the staff memo to lift off from the effective zero lower bound, setting the target range for the federal funds rate to 25 to 50 basis points and the IOER and overnight RRP rates to the top and bottom of that range, respectively.  From that policy position, the Committee could then assess the size of the overnight RRP facility and conditions in money markets, and decide if the spread between the overnight RRP and IOER rates could be widened while still maintaining acceptable control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term rates.  When it seemed prudent, the Committee could widen that spread, either at the time of the next policy tightening or sooner if desired.  Such an approach would be consistent with the Committee learning about the tools during normalization and making adjustments to their use in order to best balance the Committee’s various objectives.  That said, assessing the contribution of the overnight RRP facility to the behavior of the federal funds rate, a key feature of this approach, could be difficult.   Steve will now continue our briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing and explaining the key aspects of an approach to normalization.


Passage number 28.
 MR. MEYER.  My assignment is to introduce revised drafts of the “Policy Normalization Principles and Strategy” document.  Releasing such a document is one tool that you might use to give the public more information about how you intend to normalize the stance of monetary policy.  The current drafts reflect your comments on the version we distributed with the two memos on normalization back on July 18.  I suspect that the document will evolve further in light of your upcoming discussion. First, I will briefly compare the current drafts with the June 2011 “Exit Strategy Principles.”  Then I will discuss how the current drafts differ from the version we sent you with the two memos. The June 2011 “Exit Strategy Principles” are reproduced as exhibit 3 in the handout.  I’ve highlighted the portions of that document that staff took as principles—the rest seemed, to us, to be tactics.  The highlighted principles appear—either verbatim or in substance—in both new versions of the normalization principles.  Those new versions appear as exhibits 4 and 5.  I should note that the organization of the two versions differs, but the content is the same.  Exhibit 4 shows the principles as major bullets and the Committee’s current thinking, as we understand it, about how it will implement each principle in indented subbullets.  Exhibit 5 more sharply separates tactics from principles. The key differences in the draft normalization principles shown in exhibits 4 and 5, from the June 2011 exit principles, include:  (1) ceasing or reducing reinvestments will come after the first increase in the federal funds rate, rather than before; (2) instead of referring to “temporary reserve-draining operations,” as in 2011, the current drafts refer to temporary use of an overnight RRP facility and other supplementary tools; and (3) the Committee now anticipates that it will rely primarily on ending reinvestments rather than on selling assets to reduce its securities holdings—particularly its holdings of MBS—although it retains the option to sell MBS to eliminate residual holdings in the longer run. The strikeouts and red text in exhibit 4 show the changes from the draft that we sent you with the memos on July 18.  With respect to the high-level principles, the key change is adding back language, in the fourth principle, that explains why the Committee intends to reduce its securities holdings and return to holding primarily Treasury securities.  With respect to tactics, there are two major changes from the earlier version.  The first is to make clear that a standing ON RRP facility will be a supplementary tool to be used only as necessary to help improve control over the federal funds rate and, further, that the facility will be phased out as soon as it is no longer needed for this purpose.  The second major change is to state that the Committee “currently anticipates that it will normalize the size and composition of its portfolio primarily by ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal on securities held in the System Open Market Account.”  These words indicate that the Committee expects to let maturing Treasuries roll off but does not expect to sell Treasury securities.  However, other new language—language stating that, during normalization, the Federal Reserve will use “other supplementary tools as needed to help improve control over the federal funds rate”—holds open the possibility of selling either Treasury securities or MBS if necessary to maintain control of the funds rate. The changes that I just summarized are also incorporated in exhibit 5, though they are not shown in strikeout and red in that exhibit.  The markup shown in exhibit 5 shows wording changes from the version in exhibit 4. That brings me to the final page of the exhibit, which reproduces a set of questions that you received with the July 18 memos.  You may wish to address these questions in your remarks today and, by doing so, give the staff guidance about how to proceed in further refining the approach to policy normalization so that it can best meet your objectives.  I should note, however, that question 2 asks about the draft directive and postmeeting statement that Gretchen mentioned earlier, and that were attached to one of the memos.  We jumped the gun with that question.  There is no need for you to address statement and directive language today.  Patrick, Gretchen, and I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have. CHAIR YELLEN.  Let’s go to Q&A for the staff, and President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 29.
 MR. LOCKHART.  The implication of implementing an overnight reverse repo facility is that you have some doubt that IOER will work, that it will be a powerful enough tool, and that the arbitrage relationships that historically have had some power will not be as potent in the future.  Can you elaborate a little further on how you come to that conclusion, or why you think or doubt that the IOER tool will be powerful enough, and maybe talk about the latest we know about arbitrage relationships.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Lockhart expresses doubt about the effectiveness of the IOER (Interest on Excess Reserves) tool and the potency of arbitrage relationships in the future. This indicates a disagreement or contention regarding the efficacy of these tools and relationships.


Passage number 30.
 MS. WEINBACH.  I would just say—and maybe Simon would want to talk about the latest developments—but, in general, the activity that is going on in the federal funds market now is predominantly a singular kind of transaction.  We have seen at quarter-end and other times when the purchasers of those funds who earn the spread by depositing in IOER, are unwilling to do that consistently on a through-and-through, day-in and day-out basis.  That is one indication of why the strength of that upward pull might be limited, at least at times.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage presents a statement by Ms. Weinbach about the activity in the federal funds market and provides an analysis of the behavior of purchasers of those funds. There is no direct contention or disagreement expressed in this passage.


Passage number 31.
  And so— MR. POTTER.  I think what might happen is then the federal funds rate would jump to the top of the range but reflect these trades among banks that aren’t really relevant to the financial conditions that you are trying to set.  There is a mixture of the low rate and high rate trades, and that is how you get the effective rate as it is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a possible scenario and explaining how the effective rate is calculated.


Passage number 32.
  That is one of the concerns we have had in terms of— MS. WEINBACH.  I would just say the TDF has the same kind of merit in terms of rate control, in terms of trying to be kind of an upward force on money market rates.  But it has a secondary merit in terms of the reserve scarcity properties, and so that could provide some upward pull as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents two different perspectives on the topic without conflicting with each other.


Passage number 33.
 MR. MEYER.  But, President Lockhart, rather than saying we doubt that IOER and arbitrage will work, I would say we are unsure about how well it will work, about how much the spread between the IOER and funds rates might widen when we start raising the IOER rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Meyer is simply expressing uncertainty and questioning how well IOER and arbitrage will work.


Passage number 34.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think the spread between the IOER rate and the federal funds rate reflects a number of factors, but one is the balance sheet cost to the borrowing banks, of having a larger balance sheet.  One is imperfect competition in that market, and understanding how that would play out if there were, say, a gap of 50 basis points between the IOER rate and overnight RRP rate, instead of 25 basis points, is just very difficult to know. We don’t, I think, have enough understanding of exactly who the marginal player is and what the pressures are on the marginal player that are determining that spread to know how that would work.  It is possible that if you raised the IOER rate, the way the markets would play out is you’d end up with roughly the same spread between the IOER rate and the federal funds rate, other short-term market rates.  Rates would just kind of move up together, and that would work out okay.  But we are not confident of that and the evidence that we have seen from the overnight RRP exercises is that it does help to provide a firmer floor under money market rates.  I think it would provide greater confidence when it comes time to liftoff.  You’d get the effects on market rates that you desire.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there is discussion of different factors and uncertainties, there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing the potential effects of raising the IOER rate and the need for more understanding and evidence.


Passage number 35.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Is there scope for more study to understand the details of the federal funds market and the arbitrage activity in the coming weeks.  Or do we essentially know as much as we’re going to know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the possibility of further study in the future and whether the current knowledge is sufficient.


Passage number 36.
 MR. POTTER.  With the new FR-2420, I think that we have learned more about what that arbitrage looks like compared with the brokered data that we have.  Then we can see which banks are actually doing this trade and how much they account for that trade.  What’s very hard to work out is the competitive environment when we increase the interest rate on excess reserves. The notion, I think, that the effective federal funds rate would stay at 9 basis points seems hard to imagine if we moved IOER to 50 basis points.  If you have some trades at 25 basis points, and those trades move to 50 basis points, that is going to get you 5 basis points to start out with if that’s 10 percent of the trades.  So you would expect some firming in the effective rate at that time. Our issue is whether you could be pretty confident you would get the effective rate above 25 basis points.  Most likely, you would, most of the time I think from the arbitrage, but you would be running some risk, both that you wouldn’t get over 25 basis points and, more importantly, that the federal funds rate might disconnect from other money market rates.  Those are two possibilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Potter discussing the potential effects of changing interest rates on excess reserves.


Passage number 37.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Two-handers from Vice Chairman Dudley and then President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 38.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Isn’t there also a problem that the regulatory regime in which these firms are operating is changing, and it’s not clear exactly at what point in time they are actually going to take on board fully these new regulations that are going to be phased in over time.  At the margin we would expect that the incentives to arbitrage are probably going to lessen because the leverage ratio is going to become more important for the foreign banking organizations.  It comes back to what Simon said—there’s the issue that just the incentive to do the arbitrage will change as the regulatory environment changes. The second set of issues is that the federal funds rate itself could become different, more idiosyncratic, as this process unfolds.  I think there are sort of two sets of issues.  Having an overnight RRP rate that ensures a floor, I think, potentially can be important for the credibility of this Committee. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a series of statements and observations, without any contradictory or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 39.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  My question might have been answered already, but I’ll ask it anyway.  I’m thinking about the bottom-right panel on page 2, the upper possibility, in which  you raise IOER at liftoff but keep ON RRP at the current level, and we observe that short-term rates, money market rates, don’t move up as much as we expected.  Isn’t there a response whereby you could actually raise IOER by more than we had originally raised it.  So we had raised it to 50 basis points.  We can just go up by another 25 basis points and see what happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Instead, Mr. Kocherlakota is asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 40.
  That would be— MR. POTTER.  Completely.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. It simply agrees with the statement made by "MR. POTTER."


Passage number 41.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their agreement or understanding.


Passage number 42.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That’s right.  I think we felt that at some point having the IOER rate far, far above the federal funds rate and other short-term market rates would be viewed by the Committee as a potential problem.  It’s just paying a whole lot of money to banks to get a funds rate to 25 basis points if you have to have an IOER rate of 75 basis points or whatever.  I mean, at some point that spread presents real problems. It also potentially leaves you with less good control, in the sense that rates may be moving around in some range.  Again, having a floor may limit that variation over time and help you to have improved control over short-term market rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing their belief or opinion about the potential problems of having the IOER rate far above the federal funds rate and other short-term market rates. There is no mention of any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 43.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks.  I will come back to my one-hander questions later, which I will follow up on. CHAIR YELLEN.  You are next for one-handers as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a polite exchange between two individuals.


Passage number 44.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Ah.  That’s convenient then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing convenience.


Passage number 45.
 MR. TARULLO.  Then we go to your zero-handers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is a continuation of a conversation and does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 46.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m going to return to the same panel I was referring to earlier, which is the bottom-right panel of page 2.  It makes reference to the need to have sufficient interest rate control—it is certainly an important element in our decisionmaking.  Sufficient for what.  What are we trying to achieve by interest rate control.  There are references to reputational risk and credibility.  Let me try to talk about economics for a second.  Does the staff think that inflation expectations would rise in a material and untoward way if short-term money market rates do not rise one-for-one with the IOER rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply asking questions to seek clarification and understanding.


Passage number 47.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I don’t know exactly what would happen.  I think that the confidence in the Federal Reserve’s ability to raise and control rates would be damped, for sure.  The Committee would be subject to considerable criticism from various outsiders over the confidence it expressed earlier that it could tighten policy smoothly when the time comes.  And, gee, that doesn’t really look like it’s true, and that would undermine the credibility of the Committee.  If you could quickly reestablish control, presumably that has only limited effects.  If it took a while and there was kind of flailing around, as perceived from the outside, I think that could have adverse effects on expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing potential consequences and concerns.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 48.
 MR. POTTER.  As we thought of it, there is a tool that would allow you to quickly reestablish control, which is the overnight RRP.  You just have to do it in a much bigger size at that point.  But you would probably not get much of a hit to how credible you were for a few weeks.  You could try to explain that it doesn’t affect how you are going to achieve the long-run objectives.  People in money markets might not listen to that, though.  They might just question whether we are really serious about trying to raise rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests using the overnight RRP as a tool to regain control, but acknowledges that people in money markets might not believe the explanation or take it seriously.


Passage number 49.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  I guess I am still struggling with this, but that is somewhat helpful.  Another question I had was on the new normalization principles on page 4 of , exhibit 4.  What would be the conditions that would lead to phaseout.  It’s phased out as soon as it is no longer needed for this purpose, and certainly a line of questioning that I think this Committee will face if it were to issue these principles would be questions about, well, how long will that be, or—we could deflect that presumably and talk about conditions instead.  What would be the conditions under which we would no longer be using this facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a continuation of a discussion where Mr. Kocherlakota seeks clarification on the conditions and timing related to a specific facility.


Passage number 50.
 MR. ENGLISH.  As Gretchen said, I think it is difficult to know and to judge precisely what the overnight RRP is contributing to control without experimenting.  But if, for example, you raised rates once or twice, and found that usage of the facility was modest and rate control was pretty good—rates were not at the floor, they were above the floor by 5 basis points or 10 basis points—then I think you would, when you raised rates, you would raise the overnight RRP rate less.  You could, in some sense, phase it out over time.  You would allow that spread to widen.  Maybe the funds rate and other short-term market rates move down a bit relative to the IOER rate, but that’s not so bad.  Then you continue in that track.  After a while, the spread is large enough that takedown at the overnight RRP facility is extremely small, and you just say, “Okay, we are going to close the doors.”  That is what I had in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. English expressing his thoughts and suggestions on how to handle the overnight RRP rate.


Passage number 51.
 MR. POTTER.  I think I view it in a slightly different way.  One of the ways we think the facility works is by changing the competitive conditions in the market.  Usage could be low, but it could still be helping to form the floor.  Can we achieve something similar to those competitive conditions in the market with a different tool.  As reserve balances fall, I think we could use more traditional reverse repurchase agreements to achieve that similar effect, if it is still the case that we would have money funds as the counterparties.  A lot of this, from my perspective, is how comfortable you feel for a period of time having the money funds as counterparties, because if we have the money funds that helps you with the competitive pressure to firm rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and suggesting an alternative approach, but there is no argument or contradiction present.


Passage number 52.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  If you don’t mind, Madam Chair, a follow-up.  I think you are describing benchmark outlooks to a certain extent.  When you make a commitment of this kind, it is more about what is the worst-case scenario.  What is the worst that could happen.  That is what we’re sort of on the hook for.  What’s the worst that can happen in terms of using this facility.  Is it until reserve balances get back to normal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a clarification or follow-up question asked by Mr. Kocherlakota.


Passage number 53.
  Is that— MR. POTTER.  No it’s not.  I was saying that reserve balances are about $2.6 trillion right now.  Last time we thought about exit, I think they were about $1.1 trillion, $1.2 trillion.  We will have currency growing over time.  That will help us.  We will have the portfolio run off.  Then, we will also have the IOER rate moving up.  We will have a better understanding of the dynamics.  I’m not sure at what point, but two to three meetings is one way to go.  The other way is thinking it might be two or three years.  At that point, you feel you have sufficient control from other tools.  You could still use sales as well if you wanted to.  There are lots of tools that you have.  I think our focus has been on the initial time that you raise interest rates.  Having as little drama around the engineering of raising rates would seem helpful for you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and discussing potential options, but there is no argument or disagreement present.


Passage number 54.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  “As little.”  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 55.
 MR. POTTER.  As little.  No drama at all would be good.  They’ll move up and nobody will even notice that.  They’re just talking about something else. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher, you had a two-hander.  You’re also next on the list for one-handers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 56.
 MR. FISHER.  You mentioned portfolio runoff.  We’re still, under the proposal, contemplating reinvestments.  Give me the time frame in which you think the portfolio runoff actually begins to occur, its size, and when it would be subject to the influences you described.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. It is a straightforward question asking for specific information about the portfolio runoff.


Passage number 57.
 MR. POTTER.  Lorie, can you summarize.  What’s—2016 is how much.  I’m just trying to add some numbers in my head:  $160 billion plus $200 billion, so $360 billion in 2016, then another $400 billion in 2017.  So it gets quite large. You could also, if you wanted to, sell short-term Treasury securities.  Suppose you’re at a point at which the federal funds rate is in the range—we have to say “range” now—of 2.75 to 3 percent.  Then you might feel comfortable at that point selling some of the short-term Treasury securities because that’s not going to have the kind of signaling effect it would have now.  If you defined short-term Treasury securities as we did in the MEP, we’d have $300 billion to $400 billion at least of those, which, if we sold at $50 billion a month, would amount to $600 billion over a year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is just providing information and making calculations.


Passage number 58.
 MR. FISHER.  The total size of the portfolio would then be what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It only presents a question and does not provide any arguments or contradictory views.


Passage number 59.
 MR. POTTER.  The total size of the portfolio would be under $3 trillion probably.  And remember, currency under the way that we do the projections is moving up at about 6 percent, I think at this time—6 percent or 7 percent.  One of the other issues is, when we came to you in the summer of 2012, we had the other side of what the new regulations would do, which would increase the demand for reserves, and that is still going to be true as we get to smaller reserve balances.  I think the demand for reserves will be higher than under the old regulatory structure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is stating facts and explaining the potential increase in demand for reserves under the new regulatory structure.


Passage number 60.
 MR. ENGLISH.  In our projections, we’ve written down a somewhat larger number for reserve balances than we had in the past, but I think only $100 billion if I remember correctly.  It might be larger than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states their projections and admits they are not certain about the exact number, mentioning it might be larger than what they initially thought, without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 61.
 MR. POTTER.  But there are other central banks.  The Bank of England, as I’ve told you, is thinking they’ll run with a high level of reserves at that point because of the regulatory demand produced for high-quality liquid assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the perspective or plan of the Bank of England regarding their reserves.


Passage number 62.
 MR. FISHER.  Thanks, Simon. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher, did you have a one-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple exchange of thanks and a question.


Passage number 63.
 MR. FISHER.  No, ma’am. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of statements between Mr. Fisher and Chair Yellen without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 64.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes, just two kind of follow-up questions to the first two that you got.  One actually is a comment—if the IOER has to be raised significantly to get market rates up, what we would be doing is paying a very high rate predominantly to foreign branches in order to get a small increase in market rates.  I can imagine that in testimony that wouldn’t play particularly well.  I think there is a political risk that if that were the predominant way that we decided to move forward that that would be an issue. In terms of risk management, we’ve talked a lot about the risk management related to financial stability at the previous meeting, and I think it is good to get a better sense of kind of the subjective probabilities for monetary policy control.  Simon mentioned the phrase “pretty confident.”  I just wanted to get a sense of what kind of confidence I can have—and I know this is subjective and very hard for you all to answer—but if we just relied on the IOER rate and we were to raise IOER to 50 basis points, what kind of probability would you put that we would be in the range for both short-term rates and the federal funds rate.  Is that 1 percent.  Is that 5 percent, 10 percent, 25 percent.  That subjective probability of how likely we are to miss actually does matter.  Now, I know it’s an unfair question, but if you could just scale it to me, am I 99 percent confident or am I only 80 percent confident.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of questions and comments from Mr. Rosengren, seeking clarification and expressing concerns.


Passage number 65.
 MR. POTTER.  I’ll start, seeing as how we talked beforehand, but I didn’t tell Bill he was going to get this question.  My view on the federal funds rate is that there’s probably a 75 percent chance that you’ll get it in the effective range.  Basically, the FBOs have to offer around 22 basis points to collect the money to get the effective rate to around 25 basis points.  I am sure that they’ll be completely aware of what they need to offer such that we wouldn’t make any changes in that framework because they’re making money from it, and this is the other side of not having the overnight RRP.  One of the comments that we got when the minutes came out from one of the foreign dealers is that the carry trade was still live, which I thought was quite interesting—they quite like this trade, because they’re making money on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own view and discussing the comments they received from foreign dealers. There is no conflicting opinion.


Passage number 66.
 MR. ROSENGREN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 67.
  And just to follow up— MR. ENGLISH.  Simon is a little more optimistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that Simon is more optimistic without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 68.
  I think if you just raise IOER, it certainly is completely possible— MR. POTTER.  Just the federal funds rate, though; I wasn’t talking about the other short-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement that raising the IOER (Interest on Excess Reserves) can potentially raise the federal funds rate. The speaker clarifies that they were not referring to other short-term rates.


Passage number 69.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Agreed, but I guess I am making up numbers here, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement acknowledging a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 70.
  But 50-50 chance, whether you’d end up with the funds rate in the 25 basis point target range— MR. POTTER.  To get the federal funds rate in the target zone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a possibility or probability.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 71.
 MR. FISHER.  Does that make you feel good, Eric.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough information to determine the exact nature of the contention or disagreement.


Passage number 72.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Madam Chair, could I ask President Rosengren a question.  What comfort level do you like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question to President Rosengren.


Passage number 73.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  A one-in-four or a one-in-two chance of not achieving our goal when we announce it strikes me as a very high probability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the high probability of not achieving their goal.


Passage number 74.
  I’d much rather get it down— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  To 95 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any specific statements or ideas that could be seen as contentious or causing disagreement. It is simply expressing a personal preference to "get it down" to 95 percent, without any conflicting viewpoints or controversial claims.


Passage number 75.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  —to 95 percent.  Economists have a 95 percent confidence level for a reason.  As I think about those kinds of probabilities, they seem extremely high, that we wouldn’t have the monetary policy control at the time that we first announced.  Now, obviously as we got further down the road, we could widen the spread, and that would be much easier to achieve, but I’m worried about how that first announcement would go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is solely expressing the speaker's concern about the initial announcement of a monetary policy control.


Passage number 76.
 MR. POTTER.  I think you also just want to be careful—there are things we could do with the calculation of the effective rate that could make it much more likely.  But that doesn’t help you if repo and other rates are still below 25 basis points.  You’re trying to move up all of the rates.  I’d be closer to Bill’s estimate if you ask me about all of the other money market rates, but the effective federal funds rate is this rather strange market, and I think we could probably have a lot of influence because the FBOs would be saying, “Well, they’re just going to roll out the overnight RRP if this doesn’t work, and why would we let that happen because we’re going to lose money.  Let’s price this trade at a certain amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing potential strategies, but there is no explicit disagreement with anyone else's views.


Passage number 77.
” MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Rosengren is simply expressing his gratitude, and Chair Yellen is acknowledging President Lockhart. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 78.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have a question that in the greater scheme of things may be trivial, but it’s the dynamics around quarter-end and how you’re thinking about that.  Quarter-end would constitute, as we’ve seen at least, a surge, and the circuit breaker then would conceivably bind, which would lead us to an auction, and then my question is:  What would be the likely rates around that auction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked by Mr. Lockhart about how rates would likely be affected during an auction.


Passage number 79.
  Probably rates would rise to the extent that participants really, really, really want— MR. ENGLISH.  They’ll fall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a speculative statement followed by an agreement from Mr. English.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 80.
 MR. POTTER.  They’d have to go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "they'd have to go down" implies that there is disagreement or opposition between Mr. Potter and another person or group.


Passage number 81.
 MR. LOCKHART.  They would not be bidding up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 82.
 MR. ENGLISH.  They’re offering money.  They would be taking a lower return on their investment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states the fact that "they" (someone or a group of individuals) are offering money and, in return, would be accepting a lower return on their investment. There is no conflicting opinion or contradictory statement presented.


Passage number 83.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Then there may be need for the Chair to try to raise that return.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a possibility and suggesting a course of action that may be taken.


Passage number 84.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Rates would trade soft that day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states that rates would trade soft that day, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 85.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I am confused then.  Just at quarter-end are we likely to end up with some kind of chronic dynamic every quarter-end that requires the Chair’s intervention and just how do you think it would work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 86.
 MR. ENGLISH.  What would happen is that the FBOs wouldn’t be borrowing.  More funds would come into the overnight RRP auction or, as you say, if the cap were kind of as we expect it probably would be, it would probably bind, and the rate that would clear at the auction would fall.  That’s actually okay.  That’s kind of what happens at the end of quarters.  It happened at the ends of quarters before we had an overnight RRP program.  Rates would fall, and I think the issues then are exactly the ones that Patrick raised.  There’s kind of a tradeoff.  On the one hand, you may be perfectly happy with that.  You’re not encouraging the sort of adjustments in balance sheets at the end of the quarter, and you may feel that’s okay.  On the other hand, your control over rates is less good.  You’ve said that the funds rate is going to trade in some range and then it’s not trading in that range, and it’s possible that that could also result in different behavior of money market participants.  They would want to make sure they’d have some place to park their money at quarter-ends.  They’d be parking money with folks at low rates not at quarter-ends to make sure they have access to that balance sheet.  It could affect your control some even not at quarter-ends, but that’s the tradeoff.  I mean, all of this discussion is full of tradeoffs.  You can have a benefit on the one hand and a cost on the other, and we’re trying to trade off those things in a way that’s comfortable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents two opposing viewpoints - one suggesting that a decrease in rates at the end of quarters is acceptable, while the other viewpoint raises concerns about the potential impact on control over rates and money market participants' behavior.


Passage number 87.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer, you’re next.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are simply addressing each other in a polite and orderly manner.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 88.
 MR. FISCHER.  Well, actually I was going to ask the question that President Lockhart has asked.  I will pass. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester, you had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from Mr. Fischer's response of not asking his question after President Lockhart has already asked it.


Passage number 89.
 MS. MESTER.  Yes.  I just wanted to ask:  Would the recommendation be that when we do liftoff, it shouldn’t be at quarter-end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 90.
 MR. ENGLISH.  If you were going to lift off right at quarter-end, which actually—it’s an issue, given the timing of meetings.  You might want to have a higher cap at that quarter-end just to show that you can hit your target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing a potential strategy for achieving a target.


Passage number 91.
 MR. POTTER.  I think the federal funds rate would be less susceptible to this because as the arbitrage trading goes down, those high rate trades would still be there.  Even though other rates would have gone down, a lot would depend on how much you just want to achieve that federal funds rate target range versus getting other rates to conform. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are simply discussing the likelihood of the federal funds rate being affected by arbitrage trading and the relationship between different interest rates. There is a discussion of different perspectives, but no direct disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 92.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have a different question, and Gretchen alluded to this in her comments about the revised principles, and I want to turn attention to the balance sheet for a moment. In the new language in the revised statement, there’s a new bullet that says that the Committee currently anticipates that it will normalize the size of the balance sheet primarily through stopping reinvestments, in other words, primarily through no sales whatsoever.  Then it makes another blanket statement that says we’re not going to sell MBS, and then it makes another statement that says our goal is to return to a portfolio of nearly all Treasuries.  I find these three statements kind of confusing and partially at odds and inconsistent with each other because I don’t know what the path is then to normalizing back to an all-Treasuries portfolio if we’ve flatly said we’re not going to sell MBS.  We’re actually going to be going in the opposite direction for a while probably. I’m trying to figure out exactly how to put these pieces together in a coherent way because to me it’s a bit confusing in terms of how we’re expressing it.  Can somebody help me figure out how the markets and others ought to interpret these sorts of conflicting messages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, expresses confusion and finds three statements "kind of confusing and partially at odds and inconsistent with each other." He is seeking clarification on how these conflicting messages should be interpreted by the markets and others.


Passage number 93.
 MR. POTTER.  At least it’s really clear for the market how to interpret it.  You’re unlikely to sell stuff from the portfolio, and they’re going to be scratching their head—“Well, maybe they’ll get there in 2033.”  A lot will depend on how much currency grows in the 2020s.  The faster it grows in the 2020s, the more we will have to do outright sales of MBS to get back to an all-Treasuries—pardon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 94.
 MR. PLOSSER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of any contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions "MR. PLOSSER" without any further context or information.


Passage number 95.
  If we’re not going to get to the right composition until 2033— MR. POTTER.  If you buy mortgage-backed securities, then it’s 30-year mortgages.  Absent paydowns, it’s going to take a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statements made by both individuals are in agreement about the timeline it will take to achieve the desired composition.


Passage number 96.
 MR. ENGLISH.  The third subbullet does say “although limited sales [of MBS] might be warranted in the longer run to reduce or eliminate residual holdings.”  So I guess I had in mind that after the size of the balance sheet is more or less normalized—admittedly you’re in 2020 or something like that—then the Committee may well choose a gradual, pre-announced, clearly communicated trajectory for selling down the MBS over a few years so that we get out of the MBS business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own thoughts and understanding of the situation without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 97.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Implicitly, that signals a sequential decisionmaking process in terms of normalizing the balance sheet in terms of its composition. CHAIR YELLEN.  Two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Plosser and Chair Yellen are discussing the Federal Reserve's decision-making process regarding the normalization of the balance sheet.


Passage number 98.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  I actually am going to follow up with the line of questioning that President Plosser had, although I’ll probably take a slightly different tack on it, which is:  This prediction in the fourth bullet that we’re not going to hold more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively—we’re only going to hold Treasury securities—when Governor Stein was here, he had a number of interesting ideas about using the balance sheet as a tool for financial-stability concerns.  Is this bullet designed to rule out the use of the balance sheet for those purposes or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a follow-up question and an explanation of the question that was asked earlier.


Passage number 99.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think your staff was trying to not rule things out, but just to say that the size of the balance sheet will be determined by the way that you choose to implement policy and what policies you implement in the longer run.  I think this sort of wording originally came up as a way of avoiding saying that the Committee was going to go back to a corridor system or a floor system with the larger balance sheet.  You could choose whichever system you like.  One would involve a larger balance sheet than the other, but the idea was that it would be the smallest balance sheet that you need to implement a policy given the policy structure that you’ve put in place. If the Committee decided that as part of it—it would still be monetary policy—they wanted to pursue something along the lines that Governor Stein had suggested to have a bigger balance sheet and engage in overnight RRPs in volume to, in some sense, crowd out what we think of as undesirable, short-term, money-like assets, that would be fine.  This would say you’re going to have the smallest balance sheet that you can, consistent with that intention for monetary policy.  But we were trying, I think, to leave flexibility for later on.  The Committee has got a bunch of decisions to make about how it’s going to implement policy post normalization in the longer run and we are not prejudging that here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is giving an explanation of the reasoning behind certain decisions and policies, but there is no clear contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 100.
 MR. MEYER.  I’m going to do something dangerous by disagreeing with my boss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly mentions that they are going to disagree with their boss, indicating contention or disagreement.


Passage number 101.
 MR. ENGLISH.  You’re finished.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 102.
  [Laughter] MR. MEYER.  Well, the language that you were just discussing doesn’t rule out something like Governor Stein was suggesting.  I think another bullet, which says you intend to get rid of the ON RRP facility as soon as you no longer need it for interest rate control, does rule that out.  If you wanted to go the route that Governor Stein was suggesting, you wouldn’t want the language in your principles that says it’s a temporary facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 103.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Absolutely right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement made before by saying "Absolutely right."


Passage number 104.
 MR. DUDLEY.  The consensus of the Committee isn’t necessarily where Jeremy was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit disagreement or contention mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 105.
 MR. POTTER.  I think we should also point out that if we change these each year, people might not think that they’re that cast in stone as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is suggesting a potential consequence of changing something every year and expressing a concern about the perception it may create.


Passage number 106.
 MR. MEYER.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  Do you have a two-hander or one-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The conversation seems to be straightforward and without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 107.
 MR. TARULLO.  I guess it’s two.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  I’ll dock you for a two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response of "I’ll dock you for a two" seems to be lighthearted banter or a joke rather than a serious disagreement.


Passage number 108.
 MR. TARULLO.  Steve, are you saying—and I agree with this—that it appears to eliminate the use of an ON RRP facility, but you wouldn’t understand it to eliminate the possibility of holding a somewhat bigger portfolio of securities of different durations with the potential for Committee decisions to purchase or sell those securities in an explicit effort to affect the shape of the yield curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Tarullo and Steve seem to be in agreement that the use of an ON RRP facility may be eliminated, but there is still a possibility of holding a bigger securities portfolio with the potential for Committee decisions to affect the yield curve.


Passage number 109.
 MR. MEYER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in the provided passage as it only consists of a simple response.


Passage number 110.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses gratitude towards the chairperson.


Passage number 111.
 MR. MEYER.  I would point out that we were responding to the comments we received from you, right.  [Laughter]  If we haven’t captured your intent or desires correctly, let us know and it’ll change. CHAIR YELLEN.  Two-hander, President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It involves a remark made by Mr. Meyer about responding to comments, followed by a humorous comment from Chair Yellen.


Passage number 112.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Right.  Just to elaborate on this point about the penultimate bullet, the ruling out of holding mortgage-backed securities does rule out certain kinds of balance sheet interventions that the Committee might want to contemplate later.  The reason I’m bringing this up is I think the staff has done a great job of reflecting the comments they’ve received.  It’s more that these are principles that are intended to bind the Committee over the next 10 to 20 years, if I understood correctly, and I could imagine the composition of the Committee changing over that time, maybe in ways that might perhaps be even beyond imagination.  I wonder about to what extent we should be viewing these as commitments and that kind of thing. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is raising a question and expressing wonderment, but not arguing against anyone's point or stance.


Passage number 113.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have two questions.  The language in the penultimate bullet about “will hold primarily Treasury securities, thereby minimizing the effect of Federal Reserve holdings on the allocation of credit across sectors of the economy”—could the staff explain the logic behind that additional insertion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks for an explanation of the logic behind a particular statement.


Passage number 114.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Those are words from the 2011 principles.  We received comments suggesting they be put back in as a way of explaining why the Committee would want to go back to a Treasury-only portfolio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there were comments suggesting the inclusion of certain words in a document.


Passage number 115.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Thank you.  The second question I had was we talked a lot about monetary control, and I know that is very important obviously, and it is obviously important because we are going to talk about a federal funds target range, and there is an expectation that we are going to hit that.  Simon and, I think, Vice Chairman Dudley at various points have talked about how there could be a disconnect between the funds rate and other money market rates.  Are we contemplating any communications about the transmission mechanism for monetary policy. That strikes me as a very important additional line of communication.  It could be the case that at some point the funds rate is going to be soft relative to our target.  These are things that historically we’ve experienced at various times, and you can imagine some collection of financial market indicators, money market rates of some sort, auto loans, the things that matter for transmission, and if we could point to them moving up in our announcements, that would mitigate the embarrassment if there’s some period of softness. I’m just trying to get at how much discomfort we should have over things taking off slowly and perhaps if we choose to experiment a little bit with spread sizes and things like that.  I realize that most of the discomfort is concentrated here in Washington and with you, Madam Chair, but just a question if anybody has considered the financial interest rate effects and how that might be communicated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked and a request for information.


Passage number 116.
 MR. POTTER.  Were you talking about loans that consumers and firms have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply asks about the topic of discussion - loans that consumers and firms have.


Passage number 117.
 MR. EVANS.  When we announce that rates are going to take off, other interest rates are going to move up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It states a hypothetical situation without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 118.
  Historically— MR. POTTER.  The primary rate will, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is an interrupted statement or conversation where one person (Mr. Potter) starts speaking but is cut off before finishing his thought. There is no conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 119.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, and they’ll have a little bit of term to them, too, right.  Like auto loans of five-year maturity and such, and the fact that things like that are moving up and the entire monetary policy transmission is that we want more financial restrictiveness.  We’ll be able to point to that as being in train, maybe even in a bigger sense since sometimes these things start out more quickly than we think.  The slope of the term structure might be higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential term (length) of auto loans and how it relates to monetary policy. They mention that these loans are increasing and could serve as evidence of financial restrictiveness. The speaker also suggests that the slope of the term structure might be higher, indicating a potentially quick start to these changes. Overall, there is no disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 120.
 MR. POTTER.  I’d say rates linked to LIBOR, which might be more closely linked to interest on excess reserves, would probably move up in a stronger way.  We seem to have seen something like that, perhaps, when the minutes came out.  The repo market is pretty important, though, for overall financial conditions, and that will be harder to see directly in the rates that households and firms are getting on that day.  Over time, that kind of disconnect between the federal funds market and a really large market will be important for how policy is going to be interpreted.  But I think you’re correct that some of the actual rates that people face would move up with the interest rate on excess reserves and the increase in the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a discussion about the potential effects of changes in the federal funds rate and how they may impact different markets and interest rates.


Passage number 121.
 MR. EVANS.  For instance, it’s the entire time path of what we’re talking about.  That’s why I’m talking about the term aspect of this.  In the past, we’ve seen sort of outsized reaction in bond markets and other aspects.  That might be enough for people to sort of have confidence that, yes, tightness has begun.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It is a statement discussing the past reactions in bond markets and how they might influence people's confidence in the current situation. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 122.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Could I rephrase your question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. English is simply asking to rephrase the question.


Passage number 123.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans is simply expressing his agreement or consent to something without providing any conflicting or opposing views.


Passage number 124.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think I understood it, but I’m not positive.  We’ll raise, at some stage, the target range for the funds rate today, but we would expect that that would move up expectations for the trajectory of the funds rate, and that would then be reflected in longer-term rates and maybe also, probably, there’d be some increase in volatility, and so term premiums might widen out, and that would push up longer-term rates as well.  I would expect to see those effects even if there was some floundering around in actually getting the funds rate into its target range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their understanding of the situation and the potential effects of raising the target range for the funds rate.


Passage number 125.
  I think the concern would be if there was a difficulty and it took time and a further adjustment to get the funds rate in its target range, you may get more volatility than you want, and so more term premium than you want, and some concern—it depends on how big the problems were— MR. EVANS.  But the higher term premium would mean higher rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing a hypothetical scenario and expressing concern about potential volatility and higher rates. There is no disagreement between them.


Passage number 126.
  I mean— MR. ENGLISH.  Maybe you’re okay with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Maybe you're okay with that" is more of a question or statement seeking agreement or clarification rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, I’m just saying one of the concerns, I think, throughout this is we don’t get rates up.  If term premiums are going up, then certain rates are going up even more.  The balance is what we presumably care about.  You’re talking a lot about morning-call-type issues here with respect to monetary control as opposed to a little bit more emphasis on the monetary policy transition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is expressing concern about the potential increase in rates and suggesting a different emphasis on monetary policy transition. This could indicate disagreement or differing perspectives on the issue being discussed.


Passage number 128.
 MR. POTTER.  I think our viewpoint is that, unless this looks smooth, then a lot of people want to be on the morning call to work out exactly how we’re going to fix the problem that we said we weren’t going to have. CHAIR YELLEN.  Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen seem to agree on the need for a smooth resolution to the problem at hand.


Passage number 129.
 MR. POTTER.  And I can agree with you that, in the big scheme of things, you’re tightening financial conditions.  The reason you want control over overnight rates in the money markets is, the more volatility that you have in there, the less control you have of that transmission from your intentions to the future. CHAIR YELLEN.  I have two-handers from Governor Fischer and Vice Chairman Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 130.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes, just to continue President Evans’s comment, I assume that what we want is a very moderate version of the taper tantrum result—that is, things will move up, all the way up the term structure and then we’ll know we’ve done something.  But we’re going to have to do it in a way that shows we can control the short rate.  Otherwise it’s going to be all over the place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a continuation of President Evans's comment, discussing the goal of achieving a moderate version of the taper tantrum result and the need to demonstrate control over the short rate.


Passage number 131.
 MR. EVANS.  I think that’s a fair point, and through this discussion we’ve sort of had it on both sides of this.  The short-term policy rate might not move, but the term rates might go up a little bit like the tantrum that you’re talking about, and that might be enough to convince markets that we’re serious at the outset.  It is hard to know exactly what the circumstances are going to be when we start doing this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging a point made by someone else and expressing uncertainty about future circumstances.


Passage number 132.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes.  Well, that’s one of the arguments for using the overnight reverse repo rate actively, and it is sort of hard to imagine a setup in which the short rate doesn’t move and the long rates do move as a result of things we did at the short end.  I don’t know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their understanding and agreement with the idea of using the overnight reverse repo rate actively.


Passage number 133.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think, to just amplify, Governor Fischer, how much long rates move in response to our moves in short rates—there are a whole bunch of things that affect longer-term rates other than the path of short rates, and it also depends on what the expectations are for the monetary policy change.  If the market expected us to do 50 basis points and we did 25 basis points, long rates would probably fall.  I think it’s pretty complicated when you look at long-term rates and try to tie them back sort of in a simple way to short-term rates and what we do.  I think that would just be very hard for us to explain, ex post, why long rates either did or didn’t do what we wanted them to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining that there are many factors that affect long-term rates, not just the path of short rates, and that it can be difficult to accurately predict or explain the impact of monetary policy changes on long rates.


Passage number 134.
 MR. POTTER.  Is your question—suppose IOER goes up to 50 basis points and we can’t get the federal funds rate to quite move, but everyone knows we will at some point.  We’ll have the intended effect on the long rate.  Is that the way you’re thinking about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and confirmation of the other person's perspective on how the intended effect on the long rate would be achieved.


Passage number 135.
 MR. EVANS.  I guess I’m interpreting this commentary as a bit of hand-wringing over the thought that we’re not going to be effective at the outset of our interest rate liftoff.  But there are just a number of other factors that are going to come into play whereby a market reaction is likely to be, “Oh, this is restrictive.”  It may not be concentrated in the money market funds in the New York morning call–type activities, but I think I’d be surprised if people out in the economy weren’t seeing this and if we continued that with our further actions, I think that it would have the intended effect largely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their interpretation and expectations regarding the potential reactions to interest rate liftoff and further actions.


Passage number 136.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But shouldn’t tighter control lead to a more solid linkage between financial conditions and what we do in terms of monetary policy.  Wouldn’t we want to have that link be as strong and as robust as possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage is asking rhetorical questions, expressing the idea that tighter control should lead to a stronger link between financial conditions and monetary policy. It does not convey any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 137.
 MR. EVANS.  I’m trying to get at this from risk assessment, which is, of course, if we get the monetary control right, then I think it works better.  But what if we don’t quite get it exactly.  Is it as bad as most of the commentary here is suggesting.  That’s how I’m coming at it. CHAIR YELLEN.  Two-hander—President Lacker, President Kocherlakota, and then President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The individuals mentioned are simply being identified for further discussion.


Passage number 138.
 MR. LACKER.  It’s pretty clear that the staff scenario should be on the table, the one in which we let the ON RRP rate sit at 5 basis points for a couple of weeks.  Worst case, a couple of weeks later, we get the RP rate up.  The import of President Evans’s question is, I think, it should be obvious that it’s only if we fail to bring the RP rate up that we’re going to fail to have an effect on the rates we care about, which are things like three-month, six-month, one-year interest rates. To me, it means that the embarrassment factor, the “egg on the face” factor, doesn’t have to do with our effect on the economy.  It’s just this little optical thing that people in the markets can kind of write clever newsletters about.  The other thing to keep in mind here is that, I may be wrong about this, but I think my sense is that we’re not going to “spring” liftoff, right.  It’s not going to be a bolt out of the blue.  We’re going to signal beforehand.  Rates are going to rise before the meeting.  We can actually find out if they expect it.  We’ll be able to read off before the meeting whether they expect us to have control of short-term rates or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 139.
 MR. POTTER.  That was part of my briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the statement mentioned was part of Mr. Potter's briefing.


Passage number 140.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Isn’t that kind of the problem.  If there’s a problem and maybe the Committee doesn’t view there as being a problem, but they expect us to have control.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a concern or question, but there is no indication of a disagreement or argument.


Passage number 141.
  If the time comes and we don’t have control, that’s— MR. LACKER.  Two weeks’ surprise and one-year rates don’t budge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement about surprise and one-year rates not budging is presented as a fact without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 142.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Maybe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes one statement and does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 143.
 MR. LACKER.  For what we care about, it’s not going to matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is straightforward and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 144.
 MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, the example of the release of the June minutes—it’s controversial and I think the staff might disagree.  The interpretation of the Desk is that the changes that we made did ease money market conditions through 2015.  I’m not sure completely why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, simply mentions that the example of the release of the June minutes might be controversial and that the staff might have a different interpretation than the Desk. However, there is no explicit disagreement or argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 145.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m sorry.  What changes do you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage indicates a lack of understanding or confusion, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 146.
 MR. POTTER.  The effective federal funds rate was going to trade lower in the range, less of a tight spread.  You also saw that in the survey.  Of the 20 people across the two surveys who thought we’d have the interest rate on excess reserves at 50 basis points in the first tightening move, the median of the change in their effective federal funds rate was down 13 basis points.  That was in my last chart.  That’s consistent with the money markets, and it could be the newsletters they’re writing; I agree with you completely that the people in the middle of the country are not aware of it.  That is something that is likely to happen. We could disagree on how likely it is that we’ll get above 25 basis points, but that’s a lot of noise, and it probably is going to mean the other rates aren’t exactly where you want them to be.  But if you wanted to run this, you should probably just explain clearly in advance that’s the system that you’re going to do and see what kind of reaction you get.  If you see a big easing of conditions—some of the letters that we got after the release of the June minutes said thanks for the rate cut.  You have to think about whether that’s the situation you want to be in, whether you want to communicate a quite high path for the interest rate on excess reserves to get that insurance because that’s what you could do.  You could communicate, instead of 50 basis points for the first move in the interest rate on excess reserves, something like 75 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different options and considerations regarding interest rates and communicating them effectively. There is no indication of any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 147.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, let me ask this.  What research have we done on the effect of the overnight reverse repurchase facility on longer-term rates, like three-month, six-month Treasury rates and term RP rates.  What do you know about the effect of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about the research done on the effect of the overnight reverse repurchase facility.


Passage number 148.
 MR. POTTER.  It has been at 5 basis points, so not much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a factual statement about the basis points.


Passage number 149.
  I mean if— MR. LACKER.  Well, it didn’t used to be at 5 basis points.  You told us you wanted to do some research.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply offering their opinion and stating a historical fact.


Passage number 150.
 MR. POTTER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply mentions "MR. POTTER" without providing any information or context that would suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 151.
  No, it was 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 basis points, but for a long time we’ve had it at 5 basis points, and as you know, the quality of the floor has improved over that time, so it’s hard for— MR. LACKER.  Then you should see an effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating some facts about the basis points and the quality of the floor without expressing any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 152.
 MR. POTTER.  At 5 basis points, though, it’s hard to say what effect you’d expect to see if it’s consistent with what we’ve been saying, but we did see rates in 2015 and predictions of repo in 2015 fall after the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 153.
 MR. LACKER.  I don’t understand.  You told us that the evidence that you’ve gathered suggests that you’ve been able to establish an effective floor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker simply expresses his lack of understanding regarding the evidence that has been gathered.


Passage number 154.
 MR. POTTER.  Of 5 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a measurement or statistic (5 basis points) without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 155.
 MR. LACKER.  I think you’ve represented to us that you’ve influenced the RP rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the person being addressed has represented to the speaker that they influenced the RP rate.


Passage number 156.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The fact that the expectations of the spread widened, and that’s what pulled down money market rates.  That’s what happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating the cause and effect relationship between the widening of expectations of the spread and the decrease in money market rates.


Passage number 157.
 MR. LACKER.  The expectation of what spread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions Mr. Lacker and discusses the expectation of a spread, without any conflicting opinions or opposing statements.


Passage number 158.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The spread between the interest rate on excess reserves and the overnight reverse repo rate was changed by the June minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the spread between the interest rate on excess reserves and the overnight reverse repo rate was changed according to the June minutes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 159.
  Market expectations widened, and that’s what caused the money market rate— MR. POTTER.  It’s possible that people just had a trade on, and that’s what we saw unwind at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker suggests two possible explanations for the widening of market expectations and the resulting change in the money market rate. While one explanation is presented ("Market expectations widened"), Mr. Potter introduces another possibility ("It's possible that people just had a trade on"). These two explanations present a contention or disagreement about the cause of the observed events.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 160.
 MR. LACKER.  Before the minutes, you could have been looking at this, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage because Mr. Lacker is questioning whether the person he is speaking to could have been looking at something before the minutes were mentioned.


Passage number 161.
 MR. POTTER.  We looked at the futures market to understand that.  We do see influences from the announcements that we’ve made, and maybe 1 basis point or 2 basis points, because if you wanted us to do an experiment, which you wouldn’t, what happens if we put the overnight RRP at 25 basis points for a month in a surprise way.  I think we would have a strong effect on financial conditions in the United States.  You probably would want to move up IOER at the same time, but you’d have a strong effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their viewpoint and suggesting the potential impact of a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 162.
 MR. LACKER.  Madam Chair, you can cancel my one-hander. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I have a two-hander from President Kocherlakota.  Is that still on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The conversation seems to be about scheduling and time management, rather than conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 163.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  I’ll be brief, Madam Chair.  I just want to build on this really interesting conversation triggered by President Evans’s question.  The Vice Chairman correctly reminds us that there are so many factors that are influencing the monetary transmission mechanism to two-year, three-year, five-year rates, which is the way we were actually trying to affect the economy.  I think we want to keep in mind the magnitude of this particular effect relative to all of the other variables that are going to be affecting that transmission mechanism, including the speeches we give on an everyday basis and that kind of thing that are also having an influence on all of that stuff.  How we shape the expectations of what we’re going to be doing over the next three to five years, and how we are responding to shocks, those are all going to be really important characteristics of liftoff, and we should be putting this in the context of that bigger picture, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply adding to and expanding on a previous conversation.


Passage number 164.
 MR. POTTER.  The only actual thing that they get to see from you is what’s happening in money market rates or if you buy a large amount of assets.  The signal that is clearest for them about your intent is what’s happening in those money market rates.  That’s, I think, the debate we’re having here—whether you can send the same signal when you have less control than you used to have, or whether you have to give a really clear signal of control at liftoff. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing and debating the clarity of signals in money market rates and the level of control necessary to send a clear signal at "liftoff."


Passage number 165.
 MR. FISHER.  I was just going to suggest that there will be other indicators that may not be manifest in rates themselves—covenants or, I think Charlie mentioned, subprime lending.  If you look at autos, that’s where the growth is in autos—subprime lending.  We’re going to get lots of signals, and we may get them before we see rates increase.  That was the simple point I wanted to make earlier.  These are subsidiary indicators, and we are just going to have to monitor them very carefully because I would expect, if there was confidence that we were going to be firm here and this would stick, then you would see some shift in these patterns.  Not an esoteric point, but I think it’s an important point to bear in mind.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply a statement about the different indicators that can be used to monitor the health of the auto industry, particularly in the context of subprime lending.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 166.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I just wanted to follow up on what Simon just said, that the only way markets can get a signal from the Committee is to look at tangible objects.  Doesn’t that bring into question putting so much emphasis on the federal funds rate.  It’s a very idiosyncratic market.  It’s moving around in odd ways.  It seems to me you should be emphasizing other interest rates as policy rates and not the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: Mr. Bullard is questioning the emphasis on the federal funds rate as a signal for markets and suggests that other interest rates should be emphasized instead. This indicates a disagreement or contention regarding the reliance on the federal funds rate as a policy tool.


Passage number 167.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I’m not sure it’s true the funds rate has been moving around in an unusual way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. English's uncertainty about the truth of a statement regarding the movement of the funds rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 168.
  We had a Board briefing that was distributed to the Committee— MR. BULLARD.  There’s certainly a smaller number of players in the market than there has been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests that there is currently a smaller number of players in the market compared to the past, which implies a disagreement or difference in opinion about the current state of the market.


Passage number 169.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I agree with that, but the rate itself is moving about as closely with other short-term market rates as it has in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. English, expresses agreement with a previous statement.


Passage number 170.
  I don’t think it’s— MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  If federal funds behaves normally, then we don’t have to worry about all of these issues.  The question is if federal funds does not behave as expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not imply any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply posing a question and discussing a hypothetical scenario regarding the behavior of federal funds.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 171.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I don’t think that’s right—sorry—if I’m understanding what you’re saying.  I think the funds rate is moving with other short-term market rates about as it has in the past.  I think with the 25 basis point spread between IOER and overnight RRP, that’s likely to continue to be true.  The question in my mind is, if you raise IOER, for example, without raising overnight RRP, what will happen to the funds rate and the whole panoply of short-term market rates.  Will they move up roughly one-for-one with the higher IOER rate or will they move up less than one-for-one. My concern is they’ll move up less than one-for-one and we won’t have the funds rate where we want it, and there are ways of handling that, as President Kocherlakota said.  You could raise IOER more.  Another way would be to raise the overnight RRP rate to provide a better floor and move all short-term rates up.  But, given the spread that you around the table seem to prefer between IOER and overnight RRP, I’m not so worried about the funds rate becoming suddenly an idiosyncratic rate.  It’s kind of moving with other short-term market rates and there are, as we’ve talked about in the past, ways of making that a more robust benchmark as well.  Simon may disagree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident when Mr. English states "Simon may disagree" at the end of the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 172.
 MR. POTTER.  No, I think that’s correct.  IOER is what’s really causing that to happen, and that’s reasonably stable.  The issue is whether you need the overnight RRP to support the arbitrage by putting more competition into the market.  I think our feeling is from the testing that it’s helpful, but people could disagree both about how important the overnight RRP is and whether you really need to worry so much about the precise control in the overnight rates, as President Evans was saying. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans, you have a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen are discussing the importance and necessity of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (RRP) in supporting arbitrage and controlling overnight rates. They both acknowledge that there are differing opinions on these matters.


Passage number 173.
 MR. EVANS.  I had a one-hander, but I’m happy to ask it. CHAIR YELLEN.  Oh, okay.  Governor Fischer has a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen seem to be discussing the order in which they will ask their questions or make their comments, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict between them.


Passage number 174.
 MR. FISCHER.  In thinking about the benefits of the auction at the end of each quarter, what we say is well, at that time, there’s great demand for funds and so we’re going to let the interest rate go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there is great demand for funds at the end of each quarter, and as a result, the interest rate is allowed to go down.


Passage number 175.
 MR. POTTER.  Well, great demand to invest funds.  That’s the crucial point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply stating a fact about there being a great demand to invest funds, which he believes is a crucial point.


Passage number 176.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation:
Since the answer "yes" is given without any further context, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 177.
 MR. FISCHER.  Right.  We’re going to let the interest rate go down.  Why do we want to let the market work once every quarter and not otherwise.  Why do we want to not use the rate for the rest of the quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning or challenging the idea of only allowing the market to work once every quarter and not using the interest rate for the rest of the quarter.


Passage number 178.
 MR. POTTER.  We could run a quantity-based operation.  That’s one of the things we’ve been thinking about, where each day we just auction off a certain quantity, and you could have the same counterparties for that, and you could basically just take whatever rate was produced fulfilling that quantity, and that would be another way to go.  That’s probably going to be larger in usage than the overnight RRP because it won’t have the same impact as when the Federal Reserve is offering a rate—this was the original way that we talked about it.  I can go trade with some other people and say, “If you don’t offer me the Fed’s rate, I will go to the Fed and I’ll get a higher rate.” The problem we encountered is, at times of financial stress, if the Fed is there offering this fixed rate, a lot of people might just want to go there, which I think we’ve been trying to balance over the past three meetings—that is, the desirable part of adding in this notion of an outside option or threat point of going to the Fed facility versus what happens if there’s financial stress.  The old-style RRPs we used to do, we’d just announce we’re going to do $700 billion, say, and we’d run an auction, and that would not have the financial-stability risk in the same way because if we thought there was a financial-stability risk, we wouldn’t auction that much and there would be no understanding that we’re going to auction more.  That’s going to require a really big footprint with the money funds to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting different options and discussing the potential advantages and disadvantages of each. There is no argument or disagreement between different parties.


Passage number 179.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You’d get some interest rate volatility day-to-day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there would be interest rate volatility on a day-to-day basis.


Passage number 180.
 MR. POTTER.  You’d get some volatility in interest rates.  If we’re using the federal funds range, I think this would be reasonably effective.  It’s a big operation to do each day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 181.
 MR. ENGLISH.  One small point, Governor Fischer, is, just to be clear, we would be running an auction every day under the arrangement that the staff has suggested, but with an amount that we would be auctioning that we would expect would exceed the demand for placing funds with us at the maximum bid rate.  We would be auctioning an amount with a maximum bid rate, and we think most days, except maybe quarter-ends and occasionally other days, the quantity would not be the thing that would bind.  It would be the maximum bid rate, but there would still be an auction every day.  If there were events in markets that caused a surge in demand, as is laid out in the memos, then the quantity would bind and the price would be set at the auction. CHAIR YELLEN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. English is simply explaining the proposed arrangement for running an auction every day and how the quantity and price would be determined. Chair Yellen does not respond in this passage.


Passage number 182.
  President Evans, did you have a further— MR. EVANS.  I do, if we are finished with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their intention to speak further if the previous topic is concluded.


Passage number 183.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 184.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Back to monetary control issues, I want to make sure, as we have talked about this, all of the proposals on the table, as I understand it, envision some role for the overnight reverse repo facility.  Maybe IOER plays a stronger role for trying to push the funds rate than otherwise.  But we still contemplate having this facility, and it is going to set a floor for the funds rate, right.  Maybe we have to adjust our thinking on what the target range for the funds rate should be.  I wonder if somebody could comment on President Plosser’s proposal in his memo about the 50 basis point spread between the IOER and the overnight reverse repo rates, because I, frankly, found that interesting.  I am thinking that if we implemented something like that and adjusted our public commentary about the federal funds target range appropriately, wouldn’t we expect the monetary policy transmission mechanism to behave in the same way.  That is, the funds rate would trade in a certain area.  Other market rates and the nonfinancial borrowing rate would go up, and that would work to tighten as much as we were expecting if we got that right.  Or would there be more of a difficulty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing various proposals and seeking clarification on President Plosser's proposal.


Passage number 185.
 MR. POTTER.  Let me just understand.  Interest on excess reserves goes to 50 basis points, and we say we are happy that the federal funds rate is trading between 0 and 50 basis points, is that it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is seeking clarification and understanding.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 186.
  Then we just move up the overnight RRP— MR. EVANS.  Yes.  I think it’s a little cleaner if we get as far as 100 basis points on the IOER rate and overnight reverse repo rate is 50 basis points and the funds rate is 50 basis points.  It might have to start off a little bit higher, but once we get going, wouldn’t everything move up the same way.  Or are there added difficulties with a wide spread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans suggests that the overnight reverse repo rate should be 50 basis points, while someone else may argue that it should be higher. Mr. Evans also mentions the possibility of added difficulties with a wide spread, which suggests potential disagreement or differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 187.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think that that would be a plausible way forward.  I think the wider spread gives you a smaller overnight RRP facility, which you may like.  Where in the 50 basis point range market rates would end up, I am not sure.  Probably higher relative to overnight RRP than now, but I’m not sure how much higher, because as we were discussing earlier I’m not sure how powerful a “magnet” the IOER is for market rates.  I don’t think there is a conceptual problem with implementing policy that way.  The control over money market rates would be less tight in the short run.  There would be just a bigger range and probably more variability of rates from day to day.  How much you care about that is yet another thing to trade off against the size of the overnight RRP program and the expense involved with the IOER rate being higher relative to market rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of opinion and does not involve contention or disagreement.


Passage number 188.
 MR. EVANS.  All right.  The expense I understand, but “less tight” I’m not quite sure.  It’s a definitional matter.  What if you just sort of took the viewpoint that IOER is just going to be at a premium for a while, because we’ve got a large balance sheet, we understood this at the outset.  So you might just sort of acknowledge that IOER might be 25 basis points higher than you could have imagined.  It will take a while for the funds rate to get up, but it will still be within 25 basis points, maybe, of the floor—the overnight reverse repo rate—until you see it start to tighten and then you adjust that range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and discussing a possible scenario.


Passage number 189.
 MR. POTTER.  So I gave you a version in which LIBOR might be linked more to interest on excess reserves.  You are going to have a lot of segmentation across these money market rates.  I don’t know what that does to financial conditions.  I think your assumption is, I can just move up interest on excess reserves, and look at where the federal funds rate is, and that is what the center of policy is.  I wouldn’t be so confident that I haven’t just said to banks, “Well, don’t bother lending stuff out.  Here’s 75 basis points just to put money back with us.”  If this was the question about that, that’s the hurdle rate now.  You’re increasing the hurdle rate of banks to lend to the households and firms relative to just putting cash back with us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing uncertainty and raising potential concerns about the impact of linking LIBOR to interest on excess reserves.


Passage number 190.
 MR. EVANS.  Isn’t that the point of financial restraint.  We’re trying to curb lending at some level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the point of financial restraint is to curb lending at some level.


Passage number 191.
 MR. POTTER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The provided text, "MR. POTTER," is insufficient to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It does not contain any additional context or information to analyze.


Passage number 192.
  You are, but I don’t think your intent is to curb it quite that quickly, because if that’s the path of— MR. EVANS.  I say this in public all the time.  People ask, “Aren’t you worried about inflation.”  Oh, inflation could be when money starts growing.  That means when banks start lending, and what we want to do is to restrict that.  Then I stop and think, it’s a little hard to envision this because banks aren’t really lending that much.  But that’s the mechanism here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and observations about inflation and lending by banks.


Passage number 193.
   MR. POTTER.  It is the mechanism, and the way you prevent them from doing that and getting the big increase in the money multiplier would be to have a high interest on excess reserves and they’ll just put the money back with us.  I don’t understand what that would look like in terms of the intent, because it would be a new world for us with that big of a gap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply expressing his lack of understanding regarding the possible consequences of implementing a high interest on excess reserves.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 194.
 MR. MEYER.  Presumably that restricts bank lending, but it might just shift borrowing out of banks into nonbanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 
Explanation: The passage presents a potential disagreement between the statement "that restricts bank lending" and "it might just shift borrowing out of banks into nonbanks." The first part suggests that the restriction impacts bank lending, while the second part posits that borrowing would simply shift to nonbanks. This creates contention regarding the implications of the restriction on bank lending.


Passage number 195.
 MR. POTTER.  Well, if they’re offering much lower rates, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Potter regarding lower rates being offered.


Passage number 196.
 MR. MEYER.  Unless other market rates go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining a condition or requirement.


Passage number 197.
 MR. EVANS.  That’s very important.  I mean, if I understood that better, that would change my preferences a lot.  If the narrowness of the spread on this is very important for the effectiveness of monetary policy, I’d like to know more about that.  I could have a very different attitude on the overnight reverse repo if somebody clarified and strengthened that argument.  It would play a more important role, but to date I have not heard that, or, if I have, I missed it. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Why don’t we begin the go-round, and then maybe in half an hour we’ll take a break for lunch.  First on my list is President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a desire to understand a topic better and potentially change their preferences if given more information. The response from Chair Yellen indicates a lack of further discussion or clarification on the topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 198.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the general approach in the revised principles and strategies of normalization.  I’d also prefer the reorganized revised principles, though I do have a few suggestions. First, I view the use of the federal funds rate as a communication tool rather than a hard target.  This is consistent with the second main bullet in the reorganized revised principles memo that says, “The Committee intends to adjust the stance of monetary policy primarily through actions that influence the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term rates.”  I like that phrasing.  “Influence” is not the same as “target.”  Specifically, we are communicating using a federal funds range, but it is important to move short-term rates more generally.  I am less concerned about a thinly traded market dominated by the GSEs.  I would like some more background provided at future meetings on federal funds trading patterns to get a better understanding of the arbitrage relative to IOER, as President Lockhart had suggested. Second, I like the principles document having no numbers.  Precise numbers have a way of becoming hardwired and difficult to change.  I would prefer that we not hardwire details until we are more confident about how markets will react to our actions and gain experience that can help us better understand the interrelationships among the IOER, the overnight reverse repo facility, and the federal funds rate. Given the concerns raised about the overnight reverse repo facility, it may be worth making a technical change that would help us infer how much we can rely on the IOER alone.  I would suggest that we make a technical adjustment to the IOER of perhaps 5 or 10 basis points at a meeting prior to when we officially begin to tighten policy.  If all relevant short-term rates move up, we can have more confidence that we can more heavily rely on IOER as our policy instrument. I would also note that I would view it as a significant problem if we observed little response by other relevant short-term rates through an announcement that we were tightening policy by 25 basis points using only the IOER.  We have said in speeches and testimony that we are confident that we can raise rates when that becomes appropriate.  Announcing our intention to raise short-term rates with only modest reactions from short rates other than our administered rate would seriously harm our credibility and could lead to unnecessary financial turbulence. We need to carefully balance the goal of meeting our monetary policy objectives with the legitimate concerns raised about the reverse repo facility.  I would view the initial announcement to tighten as critical to meet our monetary policy objectives.  Depending on the market reaction, I would then adjust the reverse repo facility and potentially the IOER−ON RRP rate spread. In terms of the caps, I would eliminate the dynamic aggregate circuit breaker.  The two main concerns raised at the previous meeting regarding the reverse repo facility were that the facility would have too large a footprint in short-term credit markets, and that the facility would exacerbate financial-stability problems during periods of financial turmoil.  Having a large initial spread and an initial overall cap seems sufficient to avoid these two issues.  However, the dynamic aggregate circuit-breakers do not as effectively address either concern and will be quite complicated to explain.  For example, I am not sure why I should be concerned with declines or surges in the reverse repo facility take-up that have been primarily influenced by end-of-quarter window-dressing, which largely reflects decisions being made by foreign branches.  Better understanding the role of foreign branches in short-term credit markets at future meetings would also be useful. In addition, it is not obvious to me that a $100 billion change in the use of our overnight reverse repo facility constitutes an alarming change in short-term markets or will significantly affect the global supply of short-term credit.  Given the size of financial markets, and the fluctuations in the facility to date, the dynamic cap is set quite low and would likely be influenced by one-day declines or surges that seem immaterial as long as the overall cap is not breached. I would also prefer to keep the caps simple.  A complicated structure may imply more permanence than necessary.  I would imagine an initial cap that would be lowered when it becomes clear that the IOER is sufficient to move short-term market rates when that is appropriate.  The key point is that we need to be confident that we can move short-term market interest rates when that is appropriate.  We can scale the reverse repo facility flexibly as we learn more about how rates react to our actions.  I think the revised principles make clear that this is a temporary facility. Finally, I would not rule out using our balance sheet for financial-stability purposes, which is relevant to President Kocherlakota’s comments.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the use of precise numbers in the principles document and instead suggests making adjustments based on market reactions and experience. The speaker also disagrees with the inclusion of a dynamic aggregate circuit breaker in the reverse repo facility, stating that it is not effective in addressing concerns and is complicated to explain.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 199.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thanks to some helpful memos from the staff and from some other Committee participants, I can be relatively brief on the questions on the table today.  There is one important issue I would like to spend a little time on.  I’ll save it for last. First, I support the general structure of the approach to conducting monetary policy during normalization outlined by the staff, including the directive and the statement.  Like President Plosser, I don’t see a need for the proposed delegations of authority to the Chair.  In the past, we have been able to schedule videoconference meetings on very short notice.  And in this instance, the potential need for consultation is fairly predictable, so we might even want to schedule a videoconference in advance for the week after our liftoff announcement. As for the structure of the overnight reverse repurchase facility, I very much share the concerns expressed eloquently by Governors Tarullo and Powell and President Plosser.  I strongly support their proposal for a significantly lower overall cap.  I agree with President Rosengren; I don’t believe a surge cap is necessary.  It’s complicated and a bit too fussy.  I also support President Kocherlakota’s proposal to issue a public consultation paper.  The implementation of such a facility is clearly as consequential as many other things that we’ve put out for public comment on the grounds that they have an effect on the industrial organization of a particular sector.  And I think there are useful things we could learn from the process, despite all the research that the Desk has done. Regarding the spread between the IOER and the overnight RRP rates, 25 basis points is about the smallest spread I could support, including the option outlined today by the staff of leaving the interest rate on ON RRPs at 5 basis points when we lift off.  If the RP rate doesn’t rise, we can raise IOER within a week or two and limit the egg-on-the-face phenomenon to a relatively short time horizon. Regarding the spread between the IOER and the discount window rate, the rate on primary credit, I question leaving it at 50 basis points.  We haven’t discussed this at all, and we haven’t seen any staff analysis.  We had a fairly thoroughgoing study when we first set the spread at 100 basis points more than a decade ago.  I think it deserves more thought, and I think the Committee would benefit from staff analysis of the pros and cons of a spread of 50 basis points versus restoring what I thought we carried around as our view of the normal spread of  100 basis points. For the most part, I support the new statement of our normalization principles.  I particularly support the revisions to the second bullet point that emphasize the possibility that we could withdraw and wind down the program, and that we intend to use it only as a supplementary tool. Finally, I would like to make a few observations about the plans for our holdings of the securities issued by or backed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.  There is a tension within the principles as written, and President Plosser raised this question during a Q&A.  In one sub-bullet we state that we don’t intend to sell Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac securities.  In the second-to-last bullet, we say we want to minimize the effect of reserve holdings on the allocation of credit across sectors of the economy.  And these two, I think, directly conflict.  If we want to minimize credit allocation, we would obviously plan to sell Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac securities as soon as possible. You might be wondering what credit allocation looks like.  Fortunately, the staff has provided us with quantitative estimates of the effects.  An August 28, 2012, memo reports the estimates of the effects of buying $500 billion of long-term U.S. Treasury securities and compares that with the effects of buying $500 billion in MBS.  Buying Treasuries is estimated to lower both mortgage rates and the Treasury term premium by the same amount, 21 basis points.  Buying MBS is estimated to lower mortgage rates by more, as you’d expect, 24 basis points, but to lower the term premium by less, only 16 basis points.  Combining these estimates implies that by holding MBS rather than Treasuries, we are lowering mortgage rates but raising the term premium on long-term Treasury securities.  For example, if we sold all of our $1.7 trillion in MBS and bought Treasuries with the proceeds, the theoretical effect would be to raise mortgage rates by 10 basis points, but to lower the Treasury term premium by 17 basis points.  And we have been operating on the notion that the Treasury term premium passes through to other people’s borrowing rates, so borrowers outside the housing market are, in essence, paying higher interest rates by 17 basis points as a result of us choosing to hold Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac securities instead of U.S. Treasuries. Now, there may be reasons for variance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, disagrees with the proposed delegations of authority to the Chair and expresses support for a lower overall cap on the overnight reverse repurchase facility. He also questions the spread between the IOER and the discount window rate and suggests that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac securities should be sold to minimize the effect of reserve holdings on the allocation of credit. These views conflict with the current approach outlined in the passage.


Passage number 200.
  Actual results may not match up with the staff’s estimate, but— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Don’t try this at home.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply advising not to try something at home.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 201.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  And the staff may have updated the rest of this, but these are the estimates on which we based our decisionmaking in September 2012, when we embarked on the latest purchase program.  I think they’re the best we have to go on regarding this effect.  So this is a measure, a 27 basis point twist in relative borrowing rates, that we’re engineering by holding MBS instead of Treasuries alone. Now, you might be tempted to resolve this tension by deleting the clause about minimizing credit allocation, but that’s not the only source of tension.  For several decades now the Committee has had standing guidelines for the conduct of System open market operations in federal agency issues.  They state that “System open market operations in federal agency issues are not designed to support individual sectors of the market or to channel funds into issues of particular agencies.”  Now, it’s true that these guidelines were temporarily suspended in January 2009, but we did not abolish them, and they’re still on the Board’s website. Moreover, these guidelines have deep roots in Federal Reserve history.  They were first adopted in August 1971, a few years after Congress passed legislation authorizing Federal Reserve purchases of federal agency securities.  They did that with the intent to allow the Fed to buy the obligations of Fannie Mae and Federal Home Loan Banks to support the housing market.  The Board did not want to buy agency securities, and the FOMC initially instructed the Desk to just test doing repos in agency securities but to hold off making outright purchases.  But Congress repeatedly pressured the Fed to use its authority to make outright purchases and had some very contentious hearings on the subject.  Senator Proxmire explicitly threatened legislation to reduce the Fed’s independence. For a time the Fed resisted.  Chairman William McChesney Martin testified that to have any effect on mortgage rates, the Fed would necessarily have to restrict credit to other sectors of the economy, such as state and local governments and business borrowers, consistent with our staff’s 2012 estimate.  He said that it would “violate a fundamental principle of sound monetary policy in that it would attempt to use credit-creating powers of the Central Bank to subsidize programs benefiting special sectors of the economy.”  Arthur Burns wrote in a similar context, “Decisions as to social priorities in the use of credit are inherently political in character.  If such decisions are to be made at all, they should be made by the Congress, not by an administrative and nonpolitical body such as the Federal Reserve.  After all, tilting credit in favor of some borrowers implies denying credit to someone else.” The most problematic source of tension surrounding our MBS holdings, however, is the March 2009 joint statement by the Department of Treasury and the Federal Reserve, titled “The Role of the Federal Reserve in Preserving Financial and Monetary Stability.”  The second point in that document states, “Actions taken by the Federal Reserve should also aim to improve financial or credit conditions broadly, not to allocate credit to narrowly defined sectors or classes of borrowers.  Government decisions to influence the allocation of credit are the province of fiscal authorities.” So here we are, quite clearly engaged in credit allocation.  Our holdings of Fannie and Freddie securities are lowering mortgage rates by 10 basis points and raising borrowing costs outside the home mortgage arena by 17 basis points, and yet the official policy of the Federal Reserve and the Treasury is that influencing the allocation of credit is the province of fiscal authorities and not the Federal Reserve.  I don’t see how to reconcile these two.  I don’t see how we can justify deciding on our very own that more housing activity and less business investment would be a good thing.  I don’t think we can claim we are ameliorating a dysfunctional market for mortgage-backed securities, as we might have plausibly claimed at the end of 2008.  I don’t see us arguing that we should hold onto Fannie and Freddie securities to avoid realizing capital losses and impairing our remittances to Treasury.  I also don’t see how to ignore the political risks associated with continuing to hold Fannie and Freddie securities indefinitely.  The longer we hold them, the longer the door is open to what I think are mischievous efforts to involve us more deeply or permanently in housing finance. GSE legislation came close to passing in the Senate earlier this year, and it failed because of an apparent inability to bridge the gap between the desire of affordable housing advocates for more resources and the desire of others to limit the resources extracted from the housing finance sector for that purpose.  It seems plausible to me that some bright minds on the Hill will turn to the Fed’s balance sheet to attempt to bridge that gap.  After all, our balance sheet has been raided in the past to provide ersatz solutions to fiscal problems. So I continue to believe it’s a mistake for us to buy and hold securities issued by or backed by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac.  I recognize I may be out of step with the brave new world of central bank activism.  I recognize that our long journey into housing finance is less troublesome to many of the participants in this Committee, but from a broader historical perspective, this strikes me as an important component of our deliberations today, one that deserves careful thought.  Should we continue along the path we seem to be on, of holding Fannie and Freddie securities to maturity, I believe some public explanation of our stance on credit allocation is necessary.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, argues that there is tension and disagreement within the Federal Reserve regarding their policy of holding Fannie and Freddie securities. He argues that this policy goes against the official policy of the Federal Reserve and the Treasury, which states that influencing the allocation of credit is the province of fiscal authorities, not the Federal Reserve. He believes that the Federal Reserve should not be involved in credit allocation and that their current policy is a mistake.


Passage number 202.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 203.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  First, my compliments, too, to the staff for their outstanding work in preparing us for this discussion.  I’ve come to the view at this point in our deliberations on normalization that the wisest posture is to limit the role of the overnight reverse repo tool as much as possible.  That puts me in sympathy with the thrust of the broad concerns expressed by Governors Tarullo and Powell in their memo, President Plosser in his memo and his remarks, and the concern of President Kocherlakota in his memo.  Considering what I know now, I am comfortable with a limited and possibly transitional role for an overnight reverse repo facility, but I’m not comfortable with the prospect of a major, permanent, and institutionalized element of the short-term money markets and monetary control architecture. To the extent that we’re firming up today, and in the near future, our thinking about the preferred approach, I favor a phased approach to implementation of an overnight reverse repo tool.  I prefer starting with an increase of the IOER rate and the federal funds rate range while holding the overnight reverse repo rate at or near current levels to see if IOER is strong enough to do the job.  I am not yet convinced that IOER will not work.  In reality, we won’t know for sure until we start to execute, and we’ll be learning by doing.  I acknowledge that the Committee’s credibility may be put in the balance by opting for measured escalation, but at this point, my sense is that a situation involving some trial and error can be managed. Now I’ll respond to the questions.  I’ll start with question 3, on principles.  For the most part, I think the revised draft of normalization principles is workable for September dissemination.  As I said a moment ago, at the outset, I prefer that the heavy use of an overnight reverse repo facility be positioned as conditioned on necessity.  Prior to the recent revisions, I was going to propose one change in the wording to downplay reliance on the overnight reverse repo tool.  I wanted “if needed” inserted in the sentence on the tool, along with reference to other tools.  Mission accomplished, without even resorting rhetorically to some suggestion of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own views and preferences, but there is no indication of disagreement with others.


Passage number 204.
 MR. LACKER.  Telepathic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 205.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you.  Though I am satisfied on that point, I think the statement may go too far by laying down the principle that the overnight reverse repo facility will be phased out as soon as it is not needed for this purpose.  I don’t see the need to lock ourselves in to this degree.  I’d prefer to maintain some optionality. I like the clean presentation of the reorganized version that distinguishes between principles and tactics.  Under tactics, in the bullet point on normalization of the size and composition of the portfolio, if this statement is interpreted as taking asset sales off the table, I would try to avoid that interpretation.  I would suggest that the word “mostly” could be substituted for “primarily” to avoid this interpretation. On the first question on approach, I think the approach described in the memo is a good starting point for the Committee’s decisionmaking as we get closer to actual liftoff.  That said, I have concerns about immediate implementation at liftoff, as I’ve already said, of a $500 billion facility priced at 25 basis points.  I think we should consider the option of not raising the overnight reverse repo rate for the first move.  I believe President Lacker proposed this at an earlier meeting.  Such an approach would imply, based on current reverse repo transactions, a starting spread to IOER of about 40 basis points versus the 50 basis points that President Plosser suggested.  By initially holding the overnight reverse repo rate at its current level or close to that, we can see if the IOER increase alone has the hoped-for effect.  Apparently I have more confidence than others that IOER will work to raise the effective federal funds rate.  If IOER proves insufficient, the Committee or the Chair can walk the overnight reverse repo rate up based on assessment of timing requirements. On the question of giving the Chair authority to make intermeeting period adjustments to IOER and overnight reverse repo rates as well as daily circuit breaker caps and an overall limit on take-up, I have no problem with tactical adjustments made at the discretion of the Chair to address intermittent, sporadic issues in the federal funds market.  If we experience persistent and material failures to maintain the funds rate within the target range, we would have deeper issues to address as a Committee, in my opinion. Finally, I’ll conclude with some comments on further testing.  I think the Desk should proceed to test the auction mechanism at a lower cap chosen specifically for that purpose.  But more generally my thinking is the Desk should design and come back to the Committee with tests in the spirit of moving the program to a point of operational readiness as a contingent tool.  This may fall short of the complete readiness and comprehensive communication to market participants the Desk feels is needed to protect against the perception of tentativeness that might undermine credibility. Crafting guidance to the Desk and staff at this stage involves tradeoff judgments.  There is a tension between ensuring effectiveness of the tool and putting constraints on the program to balance off other concerns.  Boiled down, the effectiveness concern is the argument that if you take a tentative approach, it may not work.  I’m not convinced of that.  My starting point is the presumption that with effective communication that prepares markets for liftoff, followed by the decision to raise IOER and the federal funds rate range, the FOMC will get what it wants.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker expressing their opinions and suggestions.


Passage number 206.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, thank the staff, and I think given the range of views and discussion today, I’m going to hit my answers to the questions at a generally high level.  I do support the approach to conducting monetary policy during normalization that’s described in the first staff memo, using a range for the federal funds rate.  If adjustments to that approach are needed to respond to substantive deviations, intermeeting calls, especially at the beginning of normalization, to consult with the Board and the Committee would seem appropriate.  However, once we have some experience, or if these adjustments are really of a technical nature, I would be comfortable providing the Chair authority to make intermeeting adjustments. I support the revised normalization principles and the clarity they offer regarding the role of the overnight reverse repos and the long-run balance sheet size and characteristics, but I would be more comfortable if those principles allowed for asset sales under some circumstances; we might want to have that flexibility. I’m comfortable with the broad design of the ON RRP.  I view the wide spread and the use of caps as important.  The proposed 25 basis point spread between the IOER and the ON RRP rates seems to be an appropriate starting point, realizing that narrowing that spread may be needed at some point to control rates. I share the concerns that several have noted regarding market structure, financial stability, and expanding the Federal Reserve’s role in financial markets, and to that end, I think the changes proposed by Governors Tarullo and Powell could be effective in addressing those concerns.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses some concerns and preferences, but does not openly disagree or argue with any of the ideas presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 207.
 MR. FISHER.  If I may, Madam Chair, Vice Chairman Dudley, I’m not quite sure I understand why, if we are to reduce or taper reinvestments, it forestalls our raising rates.  Could you walk me through that, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: Mr. Fisher is expressing confusion and seeking clarification on why reducing or tapering reinvestments would prevent the raising of rates. This suggests a disagreement or contention with the idea being discussed.


Passage number 208.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, the question is, what is the market going to take as the timing of the first move to tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply posing a question and does not express any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 209.
  If we were to end reinvestment before the tightening of short-term rates— MR. FISHER.  Not end, but begin to taper.  But either point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers are discussing the same concept of tapering reinvestment, but there is a clarification made by Mr. Fisher about the terminology used.


Passage number 210.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The market is going to say, “Okay.  Now they are about to lift off.”  There could be a significant tightening of financial conditions.  We just don’t know how big the reaction is going to be to that decision.  And if it was a very large reaction like we had last summer, we might not actually feel comfortable, then, actually raising short-term rates.  And so I think it is cleaner just to raise short-term rates first, and then leave the redemption decision for later, having the ability to judge what the market reaction is to that initial lift.  I mean, in theory, if everything went very smoothly and the market fully anticipated our actions, and there was no market mispositioning, when we lift off it should be a very trivial event and there is not going to be much change in financial conditions.  But, as we saw last summer, even non-moves toward monetary policy tightening can lead to pretty significant moves in financial conditions.  So I think we just want to be cautious as we go through that transition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing potential reactions to a decision and the need for caution in making that decision.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 211.
 MR. FISHER.  We have a difference of opinion, though, because I think it really is a function of communication, what we signal ahead of time.  On the second point, if I may, Madam Chair, still, “at some point” is a very broad hole you can drive a truck through.  One possibility, just drop that and say “after it begins increasing.”  I just want to consider that.  It may not be “shortly,” but when we say “at some point” it’s indefinite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, expresses a different opinion from someone else on the topic of whether something is a function of communication. He also suggests an alternative viewpoint by proposing a change in wording.


Passage number 212.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage merely states the position or title of Vice Chairman Dudley without providing any additional information or context that could potentially indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 213.
  I understand that “at some point” is— MR. FISHER.  You might—I would just ask that you give some thought to that, and I apologize for interrupting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The person speaking is asking someone to give some thought to a statement, but there is no disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 214.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think we can look for language that was a little bit in between the indefiniteness of “some time” and not quite as automatic as “shortly after.”  There is probably some language in between.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is discussing finding a language that falls between the definiteness of "some time" and the immediacy of "shortly after." It does not express disagreement or contention; it is simply stating that there is likely an intermediate type of language.


Passage number 215.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple exchange of gratitude and acknowledgment.


Passage number 216.
  MR. FISCHER.  If that’s what we have to do, and if we wanted to do that, we would have to make sure that that was done in a way which didn’t frighten the heck out of everybody.  And that would be why we wouldn’t start right there at the moment. I understand the argument that’s made about why we shouldn’t hang on to the MBS, but there are two problems there.  Number one is—and here we are really into politics.  Number one is, we’d better not be in a situation in which we have to use this creative accounting to explain how we are actually returning remittances to the Treasury when we are having difficulty doing that.  And we’d be in much better shape if we could actually be making remittances to the Treasury throughout. The second is, everybody gets used to everything.  We are very used to good, old-fashioned neutral monetary policy.  Well, it isn’t neutral.  When you raise the interest rate, you hit housing, you hit investment, and it is not neutral.  It is just something we got used to and talk about it as if it’s neutral, but it isn’t.  We face that problem all the time.  Fortunately, it is accepted that that’s the way we do business, but we have to make that choice all the time.  And so I think there is some logic to the “let’s keep the MBS until we don’t need them any longer for revenue purposes, and let’s hope that the housing market comes back sooner” approach. Just to go through the questions—number 1, yes, I support the approach to conducting monetary policy during normalization.  I would support giving the Chair the authority to make intermeeting—I had written down a series of adjectives and somebody came up with almost the identical set.  I said small, technical changes, and we will have to define what is small and technical.  First of all, I trust the judgment of the Chair, and the issue should be if we have to make a change that is “substantive”—I don’t know how you would define that—but where we feel or you feel, the members of the Committee, that we are doing more than just a technical change.  Then, we need to have a meeting to discuss that.  I would ask the staff, who have been terrific in generating the statements of principles, to think about whether we can find a way of describing that. The draft directive and postmeeting statement, fine.  The draft statement of normalization principles, also fine.  Now, there are things here—I’m sure we’ve done it in the Fed—that a lot of banks do, and institutions do, FAQs, frequently asked questions.  And there are a lot of things around this facility which invite a set of answers to questions that people would ask—many of which questions have arisen around this table, incidentally.  You could go through today’s transcript and find out what people want to know.  So that might be useful. On the overnight RRP facility, 25 basis points, yes.  Circuit breaker, I agree with those people who say it sounds too complicated and too finicky.  Propose $500 billion, I guess I would prefer $400 billion, but somewhere around there.  I do not think we should go on testing.  Too much testing and we’ll get more confused.  I mean, everyone will be confused and we will each be all confused.  I support going with the system we have now, and those are my answers.  And like everyone else, I really do want to thank the staff.  This is a very difficult set of issues, and it has been distilled to something we have been able to discuss in a very constructive way.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fischer, is expressing his support for certain approaches and proposals without any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 217.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Madam Chair, I thought that was a very helpful summary of the, as you said yourself, wide range of perspectives we heard.  The one question I had is the question that Simon raised during his presentation about the extension of counterparties.  Not everyone commented on that, and I was just wondering what the sense of the Committee was on that. CHAIR YELLEN.  I think my sense was that we would wait.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and asking for the Committee's opinion on a specific issue.


Passage number 218.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes, I think that was clear that we can wait six more weeks.  It takes longer for them to be there, but just to be clear, this is a limited set of money funds and FHLBs who might want to relook at the facility.  It’s not an expansion to a different class of counterparties whatsoever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement made by Mr. Potter to clarify that there is no expansion to a different class of counterparties in consideration.


Passage number 219.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s helpful.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.   Okay.  Thank you very much.  Let me just state that this concludes our Board meeting, and now we’re just an FOMC meeting.  That’s plenty, but that’s it.  The next thing is, we have a little bit of the changing of the guard at the table, and we’ll go to the staff now and turn to economic and financial developments.  We will take a 15-minute break, and then we’ll return. [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let me turn things over to David Wilcox for discussion of the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a transition from one part of a meeting to another.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
 MS. MESTER.  This is a question for David Wilcox.  I notice that in the Tealbook you basically assumed that the weakness in health-care spending is going to be temporary, and then you adjusted your potential growth accordingly.  We have a lot of business contacts from health care in our District, and they think there may be something more fundamental going on.  Revenue growth at hospitals is way down, and one contact said there’s consumerism going on and, even though there’s the Affordable Care Act, people are now shopping for medical care and may be refraining from taking procedures. So I was wondering, if you assumed in the Tealbook that it was a more permanent decline in the rate of spending on medical care, how would that show up in the forecast.  Would it basically be a reduction in GDP growth.  Would it affect potential.  And then what does it mean for the gap, in your estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker, MS. MESTER, is suggesting that there may be a more fundamental issue affecting health-care spending, while David Wilcox in the Tealbook is assuming it is temporary. This disagreement is evident in the mention of hospitals experiencing reduced revenue growth and the consumerism trend in medical care.


Passage number 221.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t have a full analysis of that, but let me give you a few pieces of it.  First of all, essentially we assumed that the enormous surprise that we experienced in health-care spending in the first half is permanent in the level.  So we just absorbed it into the level of consumer spending, and we absorbed it into a number of other economic variables of interest.  So, for example, that’s a component of our downward revision to potential GDP growth.  It also results in a much higher saving rate in this current projection because we’ve taken the level of PCE spending down, but for all intents and purposes, we didn’t get any news about disposable personal income. So we’ve assumed that it’s permanent in the level.  You’re right, essentially, on the growth rates.  We’re in a state of high uncertainty.  We don’t know what to expect.  We think the reality is that that utilization that had earlier been assumed by the BEA will eventually show up later on.  We didn’t have the courage to write that down right now because really the first time that could show up is when the next installment of the Quarterly Services Survey is published, and that will be, I think, a day or two after the September FOMC meeting, and we didn’t want to be hanging out there between now and then, apparently being demonstrated to be wrong. So we took a different approach and said, we’re going to assume that the lackluster growth of health spending that the BEA has penciled in at the moment just continues, and then if the Quarterly Services Survey reveals that hospital revenues, doctor revenues, and other measures of medical utilization have in fact moved up, we’ll just take our estimate of potential GDP back up again, and that way we’ll attempt to insulate the gap in GDP from these vagaries in measurement and timing. My best guess is that what’s going on right now is that this is like a pig in the measurement python that hasn’t quite shown up yet.  Our fiscal colleagues have seen the increase in ACA subsidies go out the government door.  We just haven’t seen it show up yet in hospital revenues.  We still expect that it will, but your contact may be quite right that there’s something more fundamental going on.  At the moment we’ve taken an approach that attempts to cut through all of that and deliver to you an assessment of resource utilization that we tried to hold harmless from these kinds of buffeting factors. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about assumptions and uncertainties related to health-care spending and potential GDP growth. The speakers are discussing different approaches and potential outcomes.


Passage number 222.
 MR. FISCHER.  I just want to continue—oh, sorry—did you mean President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about who the other person is referring to.


Passage number 223.
 MR. FISHER.  No, you’re the superior Fischer. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher is next after the governor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher acknowledges Chair Yellen's superior position and Chair Yellen confirms that President Fisher is next in line to speak.


Passage number 224.
 MR. FISCHER.  This is a continuation of a question I started asking you yesterday.  You say here you have sort of ignored this downward bump, or pothole.  Actually, you haven’t.  You’ve shifted the whole path of future GDP down by 2.9 percent at an annual rate, so by ¾ percentage point.  What would happen if you hadn’t done that.  Where would we see it showing up—in higher interest rates, and what else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is simply asking for clarification and further explanation.


Passage number 225.
 MR. WILCOX.  Andrew Figura’s briefing yesterday tried to provide a little back-of-the-envelope illustration of what would have happened if we hadn’t taken potential GDP growth down.  We would have shown, in that case, an unemployment rate gap that was a little narrower this time because of the 0.2 percentage point lower unemployment rate in the June Tealbook.  And simultaneously, we would have shown a GDP gap that was considerably wider this time because there was about a point and a half further downward surprise in the first quarter in GDP growth relative to our June assumption and another ¾ percentage point.  Dividing by four, that would have meant a GDP gap that was about ½ percentage point wider if we hadn’t done anything to potential GDP. So we would have had our two measures of resource utilization going in opposite directions, and one source of discomfort there is that most, if not all, of our monetary policy rules respond to the output gap, and so the implication would have been that, for example, in Tealbook, Book B, in the Monetary Policy Strategies section, we would have been showing you prescriptions from the monetary policy rules calling for a considerably easier stance of monetary policy, and we just didn’t think that comported with our assessment of where resource utilization stands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is explaining the potential impact of not taking potential GDP growth down.


Passage number 226.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of individuals acknowledging and thanking each other.


Passage number 227.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have a couple of questions for David Wilcox, if I may.  In Tealbook, Book A, there’s a box on page 12.  It shows the headline unemployment rate is a bit out of line with an assortment of other indicators of labor market conditions, and I was hoping you could enlighten me a little bit on the analysis. I’m curious about a couple of things.  My first question has to do with the gap that currently exists between the labor market conditions index and the index excluding the unemployment rate.  I was wondering whether you had compared those two indexes over other periods of time—during other economic recovery periods, say—and if so, to what extent that gap is large, normal, or small and, whether it’s large or not, to what extent it can be expected to close as the recovery continues and as the unemployment rate gets closer to estimates of the natural rate. That’s the question on that particular observation, and then I’m curious as to whether the index provides information beyond that captured by the unemployment rate or the unemployment gap, information on wage and salary growth and price inflation or future revisions to the estimated unemployment gap.  This is central to some of our discussion, and I would like you to expand on that a little bit.  Again, if you’ve studied that from a historical perspective, that would be helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a request for information and clarification from David Wilcox.


Passage number 228.
 MR. WASCHER.  We have not done that.  I think that’s a good suggestion.  We have not gone back to earlier recoveries and compared the LMCI with and without the unemployment rate information. As to your second question, the index does, in fact, include other measures of wages, measures of hiring, layoffs, people working part time for economic reasons, and things like that.  So it is trying to capture a broader set of indicators of labor market slack than the unemployment rate alone.  Some of those other indicators are what is driving that prediction for the unemployment rate in the right-hand side of that box.  It would show less decline than the actual unemployment rate over the past year. The LMCI is really meant to measure the change in the unemployment rate over time or the change of labor market conditions over time.  It hasn’t proven to be a very good measure of the level of labor market slack.  It’s difficult to interpret in that context.  So what we’ve emphasized here is the change.  And the change in labor market conditions according to this index hasn’t been as strong as the decline in the unemployment rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and explaining the limitations of the LMCI as a measure of labor market slack.


Passage number 229.
 MR. FISHER.  Could we go back and look at the first question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request to review the first question.


Passage number 230.
 MR. WASCHER.  Yes, I think we could.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 231.
 MR. FISHER.  And then the other thing I wanted to ask about is something I’ve raised before.  I’m going to try to raise it more gently if I can.  I’ll first observe that the new Tealbook projection is very close to my previous forecast views on the path of GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and job growth over the next year or so, and also the differences of our views on inflation have narrowed considerably. I also noted, though, that the baseline policy path eventually drives the unemployment rate ¾ percentage point below the staff’s estimate of the natural rate, and a full percentage point below the CBO’s estimate of the natural rate, and thereafter the simulations show a smooth, gradual convergence to full employment under price stability.  And I wonder, when is the last time that we were able to pull something like that off.  Have we ever managed to achieve a 1 percentage point, or ¾ percentage point, or even ½ percentage point increase in the quarterly unemployment rate without triggering a recession.  Because we go down and come back up.  That’s my question here—and how much confidence does the staff have that we can overshoot full employment, as we estimate it, by such a large margin and then pull it back and achieve a soft landing. Am I missing something here.  Did I overstate it.  David, you and I have talked about this a little bit before.  Am I misinterpreting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is observing that the new projection aligns closely with their previous forecasts and notes the narrowing differences in views on inflation. They then express curiosity about the feasibility of achieving a significant decrease in the unemployment rate without triggering a recession, asking for clarification and whether they may have misinterpreted the situation.


Passage number 232.
 MR. WILCOX.  I have tremendous confidence in the ability of the Committee to pull that off.  [Laughter]  We do have a period of subnormal growth.  As you can see on page 27 of the Tealbook, during that period when the unemployment rate is coming back up from about 4½ percent to the assumed natural rate, GDP growth is running in the neighborhood of about 1½ percent for a period of time. If zero is a benchmark of special significance, then you’re running closer to zero, and if there are fragilities associated with that—fragilities are nonlinearities that are associated with running an economy that is growing more slowly—as some statistical analysis suggests that there might be, and here I’m referring to some of the research that posits the possibility of something like a stall speed, then there could be a greater risk of falling into a recession. By the same token, in our baseline projection, this period of overshooting is what’s required to boost the inflation rate up to your target objective of 2 percent.  And without that period of overshooting, in our projection we would be showing you an inflation rate that would be continuing to run in the neighborhood of about 1¾ percent. As you suggest, there are, no doubt, control fragilities associated with that period of the unemployment rate coming back up to the natural rate, but without it, again, in our baseline you’d have an inflation rate that was languishing a little bit below your objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 233.
 MR. FISHER.  As you know, I’m still worried about whether we can achieve it.  I understand these tradeoffs, and your attempts to get at it mathematically, but I still worry about the capacity to achieve that.  It was just a question—I noticed it documented more this time in the Tealbook. Just one more comment.  I’m not sure if you raised in your summary a comment about food prices, about the differences between CPI and PCE.  I’m not going to mention this in my overview of what I’m hearing in my soundings from my interlocutors, but it’s very interesting to notice that we have retraced on all of the proteins—if you look at wheat, for example, its price has retraced from $8 per bushel to $5 per bushel.  Corn, soybeans—this is beginning to work its way through now very slowly into pork, and especially chicken, which is fastest, and very slowly into beef.  There’s usually a lag, as you know, into retail food and then into the restaurant end. But it’s pretty clear that a turn has taken place.  We have world-record crops, and the budgeting for next year is likely to be the same, despite the drought that we had here in the United States.  For what it’s worth, my interlocutors at Archer Daniels and at the other big food companies are saying that we’ve seen almost a five-year turn.  Their argument is that this was largely driven by speculative money, mainly the funds, and then also the algorithm of trading that took it from $5 to $8. I think that’s probably good news, because we heard Governor Fischer mention last time that he was seeing, in terms of his own family market basket, considerable price pressures at least on the food side and the energy side.  But there seems to be, at least in the minds of those that are in the physical markets, some retracement taking place, and I just wanted to mention that.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is expressing his concerns and observations, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 234.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I had just one observation entirely on President Fisher’s comment.  If I remember the data right, I think there has rarely been a rise in the three-month moving average of the unemployment rate—if it rises 0.3 percentage point or more, you always get a recession, going back a very long period of time.  So it is unlikely that you would actually get an uptick in unemployment and not get some bad outcome. The second question I have relates to the assumption that inflation expectations stay well anchored even as you go well below the so-called full employment rate.  How realistic is that.  At what point is it reasonable to expect that the short-run Phillips curve is still really flat because inflation expectations are anchored.  Presumably you couldn’t drive the unemployment rate to 2 percent.  At some point it would give way, and how does that affect your thinking about the risk to the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It includes observations and questions, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention between different viewpoints or parties.


Passage number 235.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think it’s a risk.  If somebody had asked me five years ago how realistic is it that we would have the unemployment rate so many percentage points above the natural rate and so little disinflation—we were initially pretty wrong about that.  We expected much more disinflation until we adopted this assumption that inflation expectations were well anchored. Now, that was on the downside, and it could well be, as you suggest, that different mechanisms might apply once the economy is running hotter.  It could be that considerations like downward nominal wage rigidity were providing some support to inflation that wouldn’t operate on the upside. So I can’t offer a whole lot of reassurance there.  I would note, though, that just for our inflation projection to come true we think—without a huge amount of conviction—it’s a better bet than not that we need to see some material acceleration in compensation, and if we just continue with compensation sort of trundling along in the neighborhood of 2 percent or so, that in itself won’t be enough to get inflation back up.  So we do need to see some acceleration in compensation.  Now, whether it’s going to be contained, modest like we have, obviously I can’t say for sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing their own uncertainty and lack of conviction regarding future inflation projections.


Passage number 236.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a thank you and the speaker, Chair Yellen, and President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 237.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  The Vice Chairman’s first comment was the same as what I was going to say. CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there further comments.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, Mr. Kocherlakota simply agrees with the Vice Chairman's comment and Chair Yellen asks if there are any further comments. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 238.
 MR. EVANS.  This observation has come up a couple of times.  The—what is it, 0.3 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate in history is always associated with a recession, and yet statistical models don’t live by that rule.  Do you have any guidance for us on how to think about those types of anomalies, David.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans suggests that statistical models do not always align with the historical association of a 0.3 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate and a recession. He expresses his need for guidance on how to interpret such anomalies.


Passage number 239.
 MR. WILCOX.  Well, for one thing I’d note the sample is pretty darn small.  In small samples you get peculiar results.  There was an extremely nice illustration of this on the radio the other day, where they had the really terrific example that small states are always the ones that have unusual health outcomes, and they pointed out that some cancer incidence was the highest in the nation in North Dakota and the lowest in the nation in South Dakota.  Go figure.  Well, the answer is, they’re both really small samples.  This was of a rare brain cancer. Now, during the postwar period, we don’t have that many observations of recessions and increases in unemployment, thank goodness.  So in conducting statistical inference, I think you want to exercise some care before declaring it can’t happen.  That said, many of our models presume a linear structure, and there are deep uncertainties, which I think it would be presumptuous at best to pretend might not exist, about whether there could be some sort of nonlinear dynamics that could be triggering a greater fragility in those sorts of circumstances.  So I think it’s an interesting regularity.  Whether it’s more than that is really hard to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing small sample sizes and the limitations of drawing conclusions from them, as well as the uncertainty surrounding statistical modeling. They are not presenting conflicting viewpoints or engaging in debate.


Passage number 240.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions for the staff.  [No response]  If not, we have an opportunity for those who are interested to comment on financial stability.  We don’t intend a full go-round, but I have a list of people who’d like to speak and anyone else can add themselves to the list.  I’d like to start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply provides an opportunity for individuals to comment on financial stability.


Passage number 241.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  While it’s well understood that monetary policy operates with long and variable lags, as we think about financial-stability issues and the potential substitutability or complementarity of supervisory and monetary tools, it’s important to remind ourselves that long and variable lags are just as applicable to our supervisory tools, particularly given the long lags that frequently occur in instituting new rules. For example, the draft guidance on leveraged lending was released for public comment in March 2012.  Two years later a number of institutions, particularly some of the foreign institutions, are still reluctant to address the concerns raised in the guidance.  Given the importance of this market segment to the business model of some foreign banks, it’s not a complete surprise they are reluctant to tighten standards in an area that generates substantial fees. There are probably ways we can shorten the timeline in regulatory and supervisory tools and be more creative in writing rules that provide more flexibility to make changes without going through additional rounds of comments.  Still, this very recent experience certainly raises the question of whether we have fully considered how promptly we can address financial-stability concerns and which tools will be most timely and effective. In a similar vein, we should consider how we would address the problems currently facing the Bank of England and the Riksbank regarding real estate prices.  Choice of homebuyers would be influenced by higher rates generated by monetary policy, higher interest rates generated by imposing higher capital charges on banks through bank regulation, or higher underwriting standards through bank supervision.  While I don’t expect that this is an immediate area of concern, it may be an area in which considering the tradeoffs between relying on monetary policy tools or relying on supervisory or regulatory tools would be particularly instructive.   In principle, we could use targeted monetary policy tools to address real estate excesses, such as selling long-term mortgages, MBS, or Treasury securities to directly raise mortgage and other long-term rates.  Our ability to use such tools will be influenced by our decisions about how long-run balance sheet size and composition are decided.  But such decisions should also be informed by how confident we are that supervisory or regulatory tools will be effective in addressing some of the issues already being confronted elsewhere.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a discussion about the potential effectiveness of different tools in addressing financial-stability concerns.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 242.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As usual, I found the financial stability report to be very useful.  I’d like to especially thank the staff for the incorporation of financial-stability risks into the analysis of macroeconomic risks, and here I’m thinking of the discussions of low equity volatility, on page 46 of Tealbook, Book A; credit market turbulence, on page 58 of Tealbook, Book A; and the China crisis memo. I really like the dashboard in the QS report.  This was on page 2.  I think it could be enhanced even further by reducing the number of words in it and just having colors—simplifying it further for policymakers.  You know, it could be highlighted even more.  I don’t think it was brought forward in the presentation today, and I think it’s a great way to frame the assessment of financial-stability risks. Madam Chair, I have three comments about three financial-stability issues.  The first is about bank legal risk.  The second is about a way to incorporate more information into the financial-stability briefing.  And the third is about the overnight reverse repo facility.  The last two are very brief. In terms of legal risk, the QS report noted the potential for legal risk, which is exemplified by recent misconduct findings against very large banks, to shock the financial system.  This legal risk kind of shock could raise concerns about counterparty risk, which in turn could lead to liquidity shortages.  I think we’ve made good steps to bolster the financial system against these kinds of episodes, but such liquidity threats have to be seen as remaining very serious in the context of resolution regimes that still are in need of substantial enhancements. Now, I think this legal risk is a nice example of how possible financial instability need not imply that we should keep monetary policy less accommodative than otherwise.  After all, there is no sense in which you can reduce legal risk by raising interest rates or reducing the size of our balance sheet.  In fact, the presence of this risk could actually be seen as arguing for more accommodation, not less.  Here’s what I mean by that.  A negative systemic shock caused by the realization of legal risk that occurs after liftoff could lead us back to the zero lower bound, and at that point, definitionally, we would be unable to provide as much stimulus as we would like in order to offset the shock. How should monetary policy respond to the risk of hitting the zero lower bound in the future.  Well, the basic conclusion of the macro literature is that risk of insufficient stimulus in the future implies that it’s optimal to preemptively provide additional current stimulus.  So potential instability due to legal risk is actually a reason to keep interest rates lower than otherwise, not a reason to keep monetary policy tighter than otherwise. In terms of additional information, again, here I’m going to be brief.  The QS financial stability report is based only on public information.  I think the stability analysis coming to the FOMC could benefit from more direct incorporation of assessments based on supervisory evaluations.  Now, these assessments are based on information that’s private to the Fed, and I’m sure that the public pretty much expects the FOMC to be able to use this private information to inform our assessments of financial-stability risks. To be clear, if we so desired, this analysis based on supervisory information could be entirely separate from the current QS analysis, and it could, if so desired, remain at the aggregate level to avoid discussions of specific firms.  I think it could be very helpful to have this kind of information brought in at an aggregate level.  There’s no reason necessarily to be discussing specific firms.  So that’s the additional information piece. In terms of the overnight reverse repo facility, what I took away from the thrust of the dialogue we heard earlier today is that the overnight facility will end up being used during the course of liftoff.  At the same time, I think both the staff and participants have pointed to potential financial-stability risks associated with the usage of that facility.  It would be useful, I think, to begin the process of incorporating those kinds of risks into the financial stability report that the Committee receives.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. President Kocherlakota disagrees with the idea that potential financial instability due to legal risk is a reason to keep monetary policy tighter than otherwise. He argues that it is actually a reason to keep interest rates lower than otherwise.


Passage number 243.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The comments that I had prepared really were in substance along the lines of what President Rosengren already raised, and so I will forgo those, except to say to Nellie and the staff that I did think the heat map was a helpful way to think about that.  When I thought about the comparison with 2004, when I was head of bank supervision, it reminded me that even though you may have seen the risk, the timing, speed, and ultimate consequence were far less clear. So the questions that President Rosengren raised were ones that, as we evolve this process, thinking about the interplay of monetary policy versus whatever we decide our macroprudential tools will be and the role of bank supervision and how successful it is in the guidance that it’s trying to accomplish will make this process even better.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. George is simply thanking Chair Yellen and adding her thoughts on the topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 244.
 MR. FISHER.  I agree with President George.  This is developed so well.  I think it is much more helpful and gives us greater insight.  I just want to turn to the report on China very quickly, which I thought was superb, and I’m going to counter what my respected colleague, President Kocherlakota, just argued.  I’ll use that as an example, because a couple of things leapt out at me from that report. One is residential investment as a percentage of GDP going from 3 to 10 percent.  That’s comparable with what happened in Ireland, by the way, even though it’s a tinier country, and we know what the consequences were.  But it also strikes me that the overall increase in credit in China over the period of 2007 to 2013 is actually larger than what happened in Korea prior to the 1997 crisis, in Mexico prior to the crisis of 1994, and in Thailand prior to the crisis in 1997.  Here we have a much more integrated relationship with China, a deeper relationship between China and two of the countries that I just mentioned and the rest of that part of the world. Now, this just makes me pray that we will have lessened the amount of accommodation we have.  We will have tightened, however slightly, toward a more hawkish direction, whatever tiny bit, so that perhaps, if this were to lead to the kind of reaction that is illustrated by the graph that you presented in this summary this afternoon, we’d have a few bullets to shoot, because we are at risk here, having become as integrated as we have. So I want to thank you especially for the report on China.  That was thoroughly done.  It does raise the risk of globalization.  If anything, it makes me want to push even further on tightening the screws a little bit so we have something in reserve, just in case things fall apart.  It doesn’t lead me to conclude we should be more accommodative.  It leads me to conclude that we should be better prepared.  That’s the point, and I wanted to thank you for that report.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

In the passage, Mr. Fisher expresses agreement with President George and praises the report on China. However, he counters President Kocherlakota's argument and argues for less accommodation and more tightening in monetary policy. This shows a disagreement between Mr. Fisher and President Kocherlakota on the appropriate approach to take.


Passage number 245.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  I thought the staff memo was terrific.  The QS report was terrific, and I liked the heat maps a lot, and I liked the fact that the staff reached firm conclusions—it’s hard to decide whether it’s green, yellow, orange, or red, but I really appreciate it. One risk that the QS report doesn’t focus on, because it’s a pretty narrow risk, is the situation in Puerto Rico, and since that sits in our District I thought I would comment on it.  Unfortunately, the island economy has been essentially in recession for years, and during this period there’s been a rapid buildup in the debt burden of the island, particularly among the public corporations that are there.  As a result, the island is losing market access.  There was a large general obligation issuance this spring that was funded mainly by hedge funds at around an 8 percent yield.  So that sort of tells you the degree of extremis. Recently the government attempted to differentiate between the obligations of the commonwealth and the obligations of the public corporations by passing bankruptcy legislation that would apply only to the public corporations.  This did not work in achieving the desired differentiation.  The rating agencies downgraded both the government and the public corporate obligations.  Also, utilizing this new law and putting a public corporation into bankruptcy doesn’t seem to be viable in fact, because there’s legal uncertainty about how such a bankruptcy filing would work, given the absence of legal precedents. We also have a situation of liquidity being drained.  They made this big bond issuance, but the liquidity is getting exhausted relatively quickly, both seasonally—because tax receipts in Puerto Rico are back-loaded in the fiscal year, and the fiscal year starts July 1—and by the fact that energy suppliers to the island’s public utility are demanding much tougher trade terms.  So what’s happening is the government is trying to negotiate a restructuring of the public utility company’s obligations, and if that were to succeed, it would provide some additional liquid resources and buy some time. Also, it will be very important to see if the government could actually issue tax anticipation notes, which it typically does this time of year.  If it can’t do this and it can’t do the public utility restructuring, then the cushion of liquid resources may not be adequate to meet its obligations for very much longer. So the bottom line is, the outlook is pretty grim.  If things go well, so that they get the public utility restructuring and the government issues tax anticipation notes, that will probably get them into next year, but if those efforts fail, then Puerto Rico might be either unable or unwilling to meet its obligations much sooner. There are over $70 billion of tax-exempt securities outstanding from Puerto Rico—both the government and the public corporations.  So if this thing sped up, this would be a pretty significant shock to the U.S. tax-exempt market.  That said, I do think even if this worst case were to occur, the systemic effect probably would be pretty modest in the sense that the Puerto Rico situation does appear to be quite unique.  It’s not like there are a lot of other Puerto Ricos lurking around, and the fact is the prices for much of the island’s obligations already are depressed.  So it’s not like the elevated level of risk in terms of the island is not known.  But this is something that could happen potentially very soon—even as early as next week.  I just want to flag that. The second issue I’d like to discuss is whether the Fed should flag incipient bubbles in those asset classes that are sufficiently small in size that they’re unlikely to pose systemic risk.  I was struck by the reaction of market analysts and others to the Monetary Policy Report’s observation that valuations were “substantially stretched” for small biotechnology and small media stocks.  Many analysts argued that it was inappropriate for the Fed to offer up its opinion as this was interfering with the market pricing of such obligations. I have to respectfully disagree with this argument.  It strikes me that there’s a pretty important asymmetry in markets.  Many more market participants favor rising stock prices than the opposite.  [Laughter]  And that really does create an impetus for bubbles, and I think it’s appropriate for someone without a dog in that fight to comment when valuations appear to be excessive. Also, I think it’s useful to opine on such issues of valuation on a regular basis because I think this is an aspect of keeping a watchful eye on financial-stability issues.  This is a space in which we need to be credible.  Silence does not build credibility.  I think we have to condition market participants that it’s completely appropriate for us to offer up our views, especially when pricing becomes substantially stretched in our eyes. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of statements and opinions given by the speaker.


Passage number 246.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So hang in there. CHAIR YELLEN.  You should see some of the e-mails that I got.  [Laughter]  Yes, Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a light-hearted comment about receiving some interesting emails, which is met with laughter.


Passage number 247.
 MR. FISCHER.  Opening your mouth is a good idea if you’re right, and I don’t know exactly how good we are at spotting bubbles and saying which stocks are overvalued.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a general opinion that opening one's mouth is a good idea if one is confident in being able to spot bubbles and identify overvalued stocks. However, there is no explicit disagreement or opposing viewpoint stated.


Passage number 248.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The valuations are pretty extreme in those two areas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not present any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the valuations in those two areas are extremely high.


Passage number 249.
 MR. FISCHER.  But that area is one that’s habitually had extreme values for even small and medium-sized firms. CHAIR YELLEN.  They’re high relative to their own history.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen are both discussing the fact that the area in question (referring to the extreme values for small and medium-sized firms) has consistently shown high values historically.


Passage number 250.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes, but we’ve got zero interest rates now, and when you divide the future stream of profits by zero, you get a large number. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other comments on financial stability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fischer's statement about zero interest rates leading to a large number when dividing future profits is not challenged or contradicted by Chair Yellen's request for other comments on financial stability.


Passage number 251.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  This is something for us to potentially debate.  I think it’s an important issue that was raised by those comments. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that there is potential for debate and expressing their opinion that the issue raised by the comments is important. The mention of CHAIR YELLEN does not indicate disagreement, as it is likely a continuation of the conversation or a change in speaker.


Passage number 252.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As difficult as it is to evaluate geopolitical risk, we have in Governor Fischer someone who can give some perspective on risk associated with the Middle East, and I think we would be interested in your views on how this could develop into something that we have to be concerned about here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges Governor Fischer's expertise in evaluating geopolitical risk and expresses interest in hearing their views on the potential development of a concerning situation in the Middle East.


Passage number 253.
 MR. FISCHER.  Well, I used to explain in Israel that they brought me because I knew economics, not because I knew strategy.  It’s a very complex situation.  It’s far more complex than it has been in a long time because the Arab world is changing completely and is in its own battle.  This is a side battle that is deeply related to what’s going on between the Sunnis and the Shias, with Hamas being supported by Turkey and Qatar, and Egypt being on Israel’s side in its dealings with Hamas. It’s clear that Israel did not know about the extent of these tunnels—they knew about tunnels, as there has been previous incidents where people came out of tunnels from Gaza, but they didn’t know about the extent of these tunnels, and that changed the story completely. I haven’t spoken to anybody in the Israeli government.  I don’t know what their plans are.  They’re in a period in which they’re trying to make it clear to Hamas that they’d better stop.   The war with Hezbollah in Lebanon in 2006 was thought to be a failure, but Hezbollah has not come out of its bunkers since 2006.  So there is a deterrent power in these very tough and ugly battles. But how is that going to affect the global oil markets.  Well, there’s a lot going on in the Arab world that will.  I doubt that this is one of the things.  It’s now very localized.  It wouldn’t have been four years ago or three years ago, but it is now. But I really don’t want to go into this because I just don’t know any more than a well-informed reader of the New York Times.  I do read some Israeli papers, but I don’t know more than that.  It’s clear that this prime minister has decided he’s going to go after Hamas in a big way, having not wanted to go in, in the first place.  And one of the things that surprises people about Netanyahu is that actually he’s fought relatively few wars for his period in office.  He doesn’t jump into them.  He didn’t want to get into this one.  But once he was in it, he decided he might as well try and do something with it. The underlying Israeli view is, we cannot live forever with the southern one-third of the country under rocket attack whenever our neighbor decides that that’s what they want to do.  Hamas has been firing rockets.  A few have come over.  They’re well protected.  You don’t usually have many casualties.  But I’ve spoken enough, so I’m going to stop. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.  Any further comments on financial stability.  [No response]  David.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 254.
 MR. WILCOX.  If there are no further comments on financial stability, I wanted to come back just briefly to the unemployment rate increase question that Vice Chairman Dudley raised. I had mentioned that the sample of relevant events was small.  Bill Wascher makes the smart observation that it’s probably a lot smaller than I suggested, since several of the postwar episodes that were increases in unemployment were deliberately engineered for the express purpose of bringing inflation down.  So you probably don’t want to think about those as proving the case that having a soft landing is impossible, and you probably also want to throw out the most recent episode, given the historically unprecedented dynamics that were associated with the financial crisis. So I think when you come down to it, the sample of actually relevant episodes is extremely small, and we just don’t have the empirical basis for determining that a soft landing is not possible to be engineered.  I think the fairest summary is, we don’t know.  In a simple linear model, it’s doable, but in the real world, no doubt it’s hazardous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the sample size of relevant events is small and suggests that certain episodes should be excluded from consideration. They conclude that we do not have enough empirical evidence to determine whether a soft landing is possible and suggest that it may be hazardous in the real world. Overall, the passage presents a neutral and cautious perspective.


Passage number 255.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage consists of two individuals speaking, Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen. There is no indication of contention or disagreement between the two.


Passage number 256.
 MR. EVANS.  That’s a good point because it reminds me that I think the intuition in the question is, if we had a single increase of 0.3 percentage point on unemployment, it’s always led to a recession, but it’s almost always the case that you get the 0.3 percentage point on the way to a point and a half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging and agreeing with a point made by someone else.


Passage number 257.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, it doesn’t stop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 258.
 MR. EVANS.  Or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "Or something like that" is not expressing any disagreement, but rather suggesting a similar idea.


Passage number 259.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There’s a huge gap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply states the existence of a "huge gap" without presenting any opposing perspectives.


Passage number 260.
 MR. WILCOX.  The point we were making is, it was the point and a half that, at least in some cases, might very well have been the intended result.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents a point being made by Mr. Wilcox, without any contradicting viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 261.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes, yes.  That’s very helpful to me.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans expresses gratitude for the helpful information provided by Chair Yellen.


Passage number 262.
 MR. FISHER.  Just for the point, so that we’re all on the same wavelength, in terms of our estimated natural rate, where does it fall in the historical range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and consensus on the estimated natural rate.


Passage number 263.
 MR. WASCHER.  Well, it’s clearly lower than it was in the ’70s and for most of the ’80s.  I’d guess it’s not as low as it was in the ’50s and ’60s, so maybe in the middle, but certainly low by comparison with the ’70s and ’80s—and then it came down over the ’90s.  Between the early ’80s and 2000, it came down quite a bit, and we think it leveled off after that at around 5¼ percent.  That’s our estimate.  It has a wide confidence band around it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing historical data and the speaker is giving their own estimate, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 264.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Why don’t we begin our economic round and go, I guess, until six and then go to dinner.  And maybe we’ll finish or, alternatively, I think we’ll have a chance to finish tomorrow morning if not now.  So let’s start off with President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is simply discussing the schedule for an economic round.


Passage number 265.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The recent employment report was quite encouraging.  I was once again surprised by how much the unemployment rate has declined and pleasantly surprised by the number of jobs created.  Has this changed my view of the degree of labor market slack in the economy.  The short answer is yes, somewhat, but I still view labor markets as having substantial slack. The U-3 measure of unemployment, at 6.1 percent, is well above my measure of full employment at 5¼ percent.  In addition, I think the U-3 measure of unemployment is not a sufficient statistic for labor market slack.  The combination of a significant number working part time for economic reasons, elevated long-term unemployment, and still-limited compensation pressures makes me comfortable pushing U-3 a bit lower than my estimate of full employment until these other factors are normalized as well. For example, while New Hampshire and Vermont have unemployment rates well below 5 percent and Maine and Massachusetts are at 5½ percent, I’m not hearing any concerns of large wage pressures from employers.  Consistent with this, I would note that in all four states the percentage of workers in the labor force who are working part time for economic reasons is roughly double the rate it was in 2005. Turning to my real GDP forecast, like the Tealbook I’m anticipating that growth will pick up during the second half of this year.  However, given that I and others have been overpredicting real GDP growth for some time, I will need to see signs that the pickup is really happening this time before I can have much confidence in that outlook. I would note that the models we run in Boston have been expecting stronger residential investment and consumption than has occurred.  Both equations have a desired, or target, level in their econometric specification.  With actual spending significantly below these target levels, the equations imply an acceleration of growth in the forecast as residential investment and consumption catch up to their target levels. However, there’s an alternative explanation that is becoming more difficult to dismiss.  Consumers and homebuyers may have become more risk-averse as a result of the financial crisis, or they may have significantly revised down their perceptions of lifetime resources.  In this scenario, the desired or target levels of consumption and residential investment, whose estimates cannot yet adequately capture this structural change, may be too optimistic.  For this reason, I still see some important downside risks to my modal forecast of a pickup in real GDP growth during the second half of this year. My forecast for inflation is for a very slow return to our 2 percent goal.  I expect core PCE inflation to remain below 2 percent into 2016, roughly in line with the Tealbook forecast.  If inflation continues to come in as expected—below target, as it has been for the past five years—we should have the latitude to be sure we get maximum employment before we fully normalize interest rates.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing their own views and opinions on the labor market and economic forecast.


Passage number 266.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of disagreement or contention in the given passage.


Passage number 267.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Growth in the Seventh District was relatively strong in the second quarter.  The auto sector was a source of strength for the District, as well as industries supplying the aerospace and energy sectors.  Activity also is picking up in the steel and heavy equipment sectors, although the latter is still being held back by weakness in global mining. Business contacts reported that capital expenditures and plans for future expansions continued to increase.  Most expenditures remain concentrated on equipment for industrial and IT uses.  But our sources also noted modest capacity expansions, especially by auto suppliers. As President Lacker reported, our banking directors reported stronger loan demand, and that’s a good sign if it continues.  By the way, one of my bankers went down to Texas and reported back that things are really booming, before I could stop him to say I already get a report on that [laughter].  It seems to be confirmation of that. Hiring in the Seventh District picked up, particularly in the service industries.  One of the big staffing firms noted that its clients have been experiencing higher turnover in skilled positions.  In addition, the firms are pushing to fill empty positions faster. The continued improvement in the tone of my business contacts’ commentary strongly suggests that second-quarter growth was quite robust.  Most CEOs I talk with note their improved economic performance, but they don’t readily see their improvement translating into an economy with national growth above 3 percent.  Perhaps an abundance of caution is continuing to weigh on CEOs and prevent them from articulating stronger growth scenarios. After all, one such storyline could be in housing.  We have been expecting housing to improve more, but as the special Board staff memo discussed, housing has yet to gain much traction.  Indeed, our housing finance contacts are not optimistic that the pool of potential first-time homebuyers will be able to gain adequate access to mortgage credit over the near term. And, as one of my banker directors noted, when commenting on the stability of his deposit base, households still have a relatively high propensity to save.  Without a stronger consumer, there is no reason for business investment to ramp up.  I think businesses still have concerns about the strength of future consumption.  I hope this is just hand-wringing, but I still think we should avoid getting overconfident about our growth forecast. Meanwhile, I still don’t see a lot going on with regard to inflation.  My contacts did report some initial signs of upward wage pressures.  Most were small, and many were for skilled labor.  Nonwage labor costs were little changed, although energy costs remained elevated.  However, my contacts say prices at the wholesale level have changed little, and that competition is putting downward pressure on retail prices, compressing margins. To be sure, we have seen some higher inflation numbers this spring, and the Tealbook quite reasonably has revised up its inflation projection.  But we need to keep in mind that the Tealbook forecast is still below target beyond 2016.  My own inflation forecast is a bit below the Tealbook.  Most of our Chicago Fed statistical models are projecting inflation lower than the Tealbook forecast.  Notably, our model that extracts inflation forecasts from the term structure of interest rates is looking for core PCE prices to increase only 1.3 percent in 2016.  My inflation outlook is higher than 1.3 percent for 2016, but these inflation indicator forecasts should remind us that we are not yet clearly on a sustained path toward our 2 percent target.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and opinions, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 268.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Eighth District economy continues to expand at a modest pace.  Retail activity in the District has expanded, especially in the restaurant sector.  Activity in residential real estate markets has been tepid, but commercial real estate markets have shown improvement. Labor market conditions in the District are improving but continue to lag the nation.  Recent reports on hiring plans in manufacturing and services have been positive on balance.  One example is Big River Steel, which plans to open a $1.1 billion steel mill in northeastern Arkansas with approximately 500 employees and an average salary of $75,000 per year.  Another example is an Amazon expansion.  They are building a new distribution center in Shepherdsville, Kentucky, with 500 new full-time employees, in order to meet increasing demand. Turning to the national economy, I continue to believe that we are in a wait-and-see mode, especially with respect to economic growth.  We need confirmation that the underlying strength that seems to be apparent in anecdotal reports on the economy as well as in labor market data is actually showing through in GDP performance.  But I largely agree with the Tealbook’s baseline interpretation that growth will be relatively strong in the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2014 and into 2016.  In conjunction with this scenario, I see unemployment continuing to fall, other labor market indicators continuing to show improvement, and inflation continuing to rise to eventually exceed our 2 percent inflation target in 2015. I want to pause and acknowledge the box on multiple equilibriums in the Tealbook.  I’m an advocate of multiple-equilibrium stories, and I appreciated the appearance of this in the Tealbook.  I think the Tealbook gave a fair characterization that this continues to be a risk to any scenario—mine in particular, but anybody’s scenario about the U.S. economy. I have become more concerned that something of a mismatch is developing between the distance of macroeconomic outcomes from Committee goals, on the one hand, and the distance of policy tools from normal settings, on the other.  In short, we are quite close in terms of macroeconomic goals, but as distanced as we have been in the postwar era from normal in terms of policy tool settings. In terms of macroeconomic goals, inflation is just a few ticks from target, and unemployment, at 6.1 percent, is only somewhat higher than many of the estimates of the long-run rate put forward by members of this Committee.  If one puts these numbers into a loss function based on squared deviations from long-run values with equal weight on unemployment and inflation—the type of loss function often used in staff assessments of optimal policy—one finds that current goal variables are quite close to target compared with historical experience since 1960.  In fact, we are closer to goals today than we have been most of the time historically.  Of all of the months since 1960, we’re doing better today by this criterion than we have approximately 80 percent of the time. Policy tool settings, in contrast, are nowhere near normal.  The policy rate, at near zero, is 350 to 400 basis points below normal.  The size of the balance sheet was on the order of 5 to 6 percent of GDP before the crisis but today is on the order of 25 percent of GDP.  If one puts numbers like this into a similar quadratic objective based on squared deviations of the policy rate from normal and the balance sheet from normal with equal weight on the two dimensions, one finds that the current values are as far from normal as we have ever been in the postwar era since 1960. These simple calculations indicate a growing mismatch between what monetary policy is doing and the reality on the ground for the U.S. economy.  If the economy confirms the relatively strong growth expectations that I have and that are contained in the Tealbook in the months and quarters ahead, this mismatch between policy settings and actual macroeconomic outcomes will become a more pressing issue for this Committee.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing information and the speaker's opinion on the current state of the economy and monetary policy. There is no explicit contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 269.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Tenth District economy expanded modestly since the previous meeting, with unemployment rates falling near or below historical averages in most District states.  Our contacts reported labor shortages and wage pressures for certain positions in trucking, construction, high tech, and high-skilled areas, although actual wage increases have been modest in most industries. Current high oil prices continue to support strong oil-drilling activity in the District, and production activity has started to create positive spillovers.  Rail activity has been particularly strong this year.  A large railroad headquartered in the District plans to add some 1,000 jobs and to significantly boost capital spending.  A senior executive at this firm noted that it was the first significant midyear spending increase he has seen during his lengthy tenure with the company.  At a national level, of course, employment in the rail industry has hit its highest level in over two decades. Crop prices continue to fall alongside favorable growing conditions this summer, which have reduced profit margins for producers.  The profitability of livestock operations, however, continues to improve.  Cattle and hog prices both set new records amid persistently low inventories and relatively strong demand. Turning to the national economy, I share the Tealbook’s view that the feeble growth readings during the first half of the year largely reflect influences that should not persist in the second half.  Although forecast misses and data surprises have been the norm over the past few years, I do see something different this year in the labor market data that gives me growing confidence in the economy’s ability to sustain growth. Not only has job growth been strong over the past six months, but average payroll growth this year has exceeded the average of the top 10 most optimistic forecasts from this past January’s Blue Chip survey.  Job openings have surged and are back to their post-crisis peak, while the private quits rate has moved higher. I wanted to highlight three aspects of the labor market that I think corroborate the current level of the unemployment rate and point to less slack.  The first is that the labor market seems to be better allocating labor in terms of matching high-skilled workers with high-skilled jobs.  My staff has done analysis showing job growth has been strong this year for workers with a college education entering high-skilled occupations, which has occurred alongside their declining employment in middle-skill occupations.  This rotation has coincided with a sharp rise in employment for high school graduates into these middle-skill jobs.  This suggests to me that labor markets are functioning much better, as we are now seeing signs of workers moving up the job ladder. Second, I’m encouraged by the flow rates of the unemployed back into jobs.  While the probability of reemployment of the short-term unemployed is back to normal levels, the reemployment probability for the longer-term unemployed also has moved higher.  For example, the probability of reemployment of those unemployed longer than 52 weeks is near its pre-crisis average.  While the data can be volatile and subject to revision, I still view this as a positive development.  Along these same lines, the U-6 measure of unemployment has fallen at its fastest pace compared with any other time in the past two decades. My third point is my staff’s labor market index, which considers 24 labor market indicators, shows slack continues to diminish.  Of these 24 indicators, 19 are currently making a positive contribution to the headline index over the past six months, indicating broad-based improvement.  In addition, the momentum indicator they pull from this data remains near its highest levels over the past two decades. While the improvements in the labor market are encouraging, there is still the question of wage growth, but even here, growth in average hourly earnings for production and nonsupervisory workers has moved higher since late 2012, and the number of firms reporting few or no qualified applicants for job openings in the NFIB survey is back to pre-crisis levels.  So while we still wait to see firmer data indicating rising wages, these indicators and the general improvement in the labor market suggest to me stronger wage growth could be in the pipeline. Turning to inflation, longer-term inflation expectations, of course, appear to remain well anchored.  A five-year, five-year-ahead tradable measure of inflation has fluctuated tightly in a range that can be viewed as consistent with our 2 percent goal.  Nearer-term measures of inflation expectations, such as one-year, one-year-ahead implied inflation from CPI swaps, have moved higher over the past few months.  These financial market indicators, along with firmer inflation data and strengthening labor markets, suggest inflation is likely to continue moving toward target and downside risks have diminished. With the economy approaching full employment within the next year and inflation nearing the Committee’s target, both factors raise issues for the current stance of monetary policy, which I’ll comment on tomorrow.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an overview of the economy and discussing various indicators that suggest positive trends in the labor market and inflation.


Passage number 270.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The news for the Ninth District has generally been good.  Our business contacts generally expect moderate growth in the second half of the year, although we continue to hear reports of a sense of suppressed confidence about the medium and longer run. The unemployment rate in the District has fallen below 4½ percent.  However, outside North Dakota, there is evidence of continued underutilization of human resources in the District.  For example, in Minnesota, which has over half the population of the District, the latest measures of U-6 remain well above what they were seven or eight years ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the Ninth District and the current state of the economy.


Passage number 271.
 In earlier meetings I’ve reported on work that my staff has done documenting that the fraction of the labor force that is working part time for economic reasons helps explain the behavior of inflation across MSAs.  Consistent with that analysis, wage pressures remain muted in much of the District, and this echoes President Rosengren’s observations from his own District. I’ll turn next to the national economy.  In terms of quantities, my outlook for the national economy has changed a lot since the beginning of the year.  My outlook for growth is considerably lower, around 1½ percent over 2014 as opposed to around 3 percent.  And here I’ll pick up a point that Governor Fischer made.  A lot of participants around the table and members of the staff have commented that we’re downweighting the observations from the first quarter in terms of GDP, but in fact, that lower realization of GDP is being carried forward all the way through, so that, at least for myself, my estimate for GDP at the end of 2014 is now 1½ percent lower than it was at the beginning of 2014.  That’s largely being driven by what happened in the first quarter, and I don’t have any reversal of that in the last three quarters of the year. Now, on the other hand, if you go to the labor markets, my outlook for unemployment is considerably lower than it was at the beginning of the year and now is down to around 5.8 percent by the fourth quarter of 2014, slightly lower than President Lockhart’s.  But certainly I’ve been surprised before by the rapid decline in unemployment. In terms of prices, my outlook has changed little since the beginning of the year.  I expect PCE inflation and core PCE inflation to be around 1.6 percent over the course of 2014.  I’ll spend a little more time on my inflation outlook because it is central to what I’m going to be saying tomorrow about policy. To be clear, like the Tealbook, I do expect PCE inflation to rise back to 2 percent, which echoes what many of you have already said around the table, but that rate of return, as in the Tealbook, is only slow.  It gets back to target by around 2018.  Unlike the Tealbook, I don’t have inflation overshooting in the latter part of the decade, and in part this is because I would assign more of the weak real GDP number in the first quarter to higher slack as opposed to lower potential. Now, I would say—as is true of any forecast, and David Wilcox’s pictures illustrate this very clearly—there are uncertainties around any forecast, and so there is a risk that under the Tealbook’s assumed policy stance, inflation could run above 2 percent.  What matters for policy is that I do see these uncertainties as broadly balanced around my modal outlook.  So what this means is that under the Tealbook’s policy assumption, I see inflation as considerably more likely to be below 2 percent over the medium term than over 2 percent.  You could see this in David Wilcox’s pictures from the forecast summary, that the likelihood of inflation being under 2 percent over the medium term is considerably higher than being over 2 percent. Such an inflation outlook does not seem to me to be consistent with the balanced approach that we articulated in the fifth paragraph of our long-run goals statement.  Thus, as you will hear in the next go-round, my inflation outlook leads me to believe that policy should be more accommodative than the Tealbook assumes.  We’ve heard very passionate discussions of credibility of this organization.  One aspect of credibility that matters a lot, I think, is the credibility of our inflation target and our ability to hit that, and that will be influencing what I say about policy tomorrow, Madam Chair.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply a report on the speaker's outlook for the national economy and his views on inflation.


Passage number 272.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My views about the economic outlook haven’t changed much since the previous meeting.  Like everybody else, I strongly discount the first-quarter GDP decline and anticipate the underlying growth rate will be about 3 percent on a going-forward basis.  It strikes me that if you exclude the GDP data and you exclude the payroll data, everything else is pretty close to what we were anticipating, and so it doesn’t feel like there’s really a big change in the going-forward outlook. With respect to the disparity between growth in the first half of the year and the degree of tightening in the labor market, obviously, I put more weight on the labor market developments, but I don’t want to completely rule out the possibility that payroll growth could slow again.  We’ve been disappointed a number of times over the past few years.  We’ve seen these little spurts in payroll employment, and then they’ve died out. That said, I do think the time has come when we have to acknowledge that the labor market has continued to tighten more rapidly than we anticipated.  I think the way we acknowledge that in the monetary policy statement tomorrow seems about right for this meeting, and if we get two more strong employment reports between now and the next meeting, then I think we’d have to take another step to even further underscore that development. With respect to inflation, I was never that worried about inflation being too low, and I’m not particularly concerned that inflation is moving somewhat more quickly back to 2 percent than we’ve anticipated.  I think there isn’t much signal in the upturn, especially given the fact that the underlying compensation trends don’t seem to have changed much.  Most indicators suggest that compensation is still increasing at only about a 2 percent annual rate.  Assuming that productivity growth improves from the dismal first-half performance, I think we need to see a considerable rise in labor compensation from here to really get worried about inflation. I want to turn to housing.  I thought the staff memo on housing was really good, and I thought it was very germane.  Why has the housing recovery been so disappointing.  My own view is that the weakness is mainly on the demand side and doesn’t stem from the perceived core fundamentals of owning a home, but instead reflects the difficulty of obtaining financing. In a recent New York Fed survey, we asked renters why they would not purchase a home if they were to move within the next three years, and the three most common reasons that they cited were 1) do not have enough money saved or too much debt, 2) do not make enough money, and 3) my credit is not good enough.  About two-thirds of the renters thought it would be either somewhat difficult or very difficult to obtain a mortgage.  In contrast, when asked about the attractiveness of buying a home—so, “Would you like to buy a home.”—60 percent said it was a somewhat good or very good investment, and half the respondents said that buying property in their Zip code today is a better investment idea now than it will be a year from now, compared with 7 percent who think it would be better to wait for a year before thinking about it. In contrast, for owners, buying a new home and qualifying for a new mortgage doesn’t seem to be that difficult.  Only about 10 percent of owners have FICO scores below 680, and most, but not all, have considerable equity in their current homes. With respect to student loan debt, there is evidence that this is important.  Prior to the financial crisis, for people who were aged 27 to 30, those with student debt were more likely to have debt secured by a home.  If you had a student loan, you were more educated, so you were making more income, and you were more likely to be a homeowner.  In contrast, currently, those without student loan debt now have a greater likelihood of having home-secured debt.  That’s a pretty significant shift.  The fact that the proportion of younger adults with student loan debt is rising and the amount of this debt is also increasing suggests that student loan debt is an issue impeding the first-time homebuyer.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.  I am going to suggest that we, after having a long day, call it quits at this point, go have some dinner, and resume tomorrow morning.  We’ll finish off the go-round tomorrow with the Board, I will do a little bit of summing up, and then we’ll start the policy go-round. [Meeting recessed]   July 30 Session CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  I’d like to turn first to David Wilcox for a discussion of the statistics from this morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their views and opinions, but there is no indication of conflict or disagreement with others.


Passage number 273.
 MR. WILCOX.6  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As I hope you can appreciate, we haven’t had an enormous amount of time to engage in a deep excavation of the GDP data that were released this morning, but what we know at this point is that there was a little more GDP growth than we’d been expecting over the first half of this year.  The first-half growth figure now averages about 1 percent at an annual rate rather than the ¼ percent that we’d been projecting in the Tealbook.  Before there’s any sense of satisfaction or celebration about that, it still is, obviously, an anomalously low rate of growth of GDP, given all of the other indicators that we have.  So, what I’m going to tell you this morning is, the picture hasn’t changed much.  One percent is still a very weak GDP figure, given what else we know.  The upward revision to GDP growth of eight-tenths of 1 percentage point that you see reflected in the next-to-rightmost column does not reflect any reconsideration of medical care spending in the first quarter.  Instead, it’s in inventory investment. As you can see, in the next block down, real GDI growth was also revised up in the first quarter, quite substantially—by nearly 2 percentage points.  Again, here there’s no resolution of any of the puzzle that we had been seeing before.  The upward revision was in real DPI.  The place where we’d been puzzled was in the plunge in corporate profits.  The figure that the BEA wrote down for second-quarter growth of real DPI was weaker than we had expected.  So, on net over the first half of the year, there’s not much positive news about personal income, either. Taking a quick look at the annual revisions, at first glance, they appear to be of little consequence for our outlook.  If you integrate across the italicized rows, you get something very close to zero.  So there’s not much change in the level of either GDP or GDI or in the relationship between the two.  They’re not going to help resolve any of the tensions that we had earlier detected between labor market and output data in recent years.  On net, I don’t expect this information to have any positive implication for our GDP growth outlook in the second half of this year.  In fact, it may be a small negative, as we’ll be entering the second quarter on these estimates with a larger stock of inventories. On inflation, just very briefly, as you can see, the four italicized zeros are not typographical errors.  We happened to get very close on those.  So there’s no news here to speak of on the inflation front that we’ve been able to unearth yet.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Questions for David.  President Bullard.  6 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 6).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and analysis of the GDP data.


Passage number 274.
 MR. BULLARD.  I just want to be clear—President Fisher and I were talking here.  The 2014:Q2 real GDP has a revision here of 0.4.  That’s because it was a benchmark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing clarification about a data revision.


Passage number 275.
  MR. WILCOX.  No—sorry.  The 0.4 upward revision is relative to our Tealbook estimate.  This is the first estimate of 2014:Q2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information about a revision in the estimate.


Passage number 276.
 MR. PLOSSER.  So these other changes are benchmark revisions, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there are other changes, specifically benchmark revisions.


Passage number 277.
 MR. WILCOX.  Well, I’m not sure what the technical meaning of “benchmark” is.  It’s an annual revision, and that’s why earlier quarters were susceptible to revision.  So some years, the annual revision shifts around the pattern on the chessboard quite a lot.  Thus far, it doesn’t look as though that happened this time around. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Seeing no further questions, let’s go back to our economic go-round.  Our next speaker is Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 278.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thanks very much, Madam Chair.  I would like to start by saying that, as I read the Tealbook, I thought I really understood a heck of a lot more on my second go-round than on my first go-round, but then I discovered that this is the simplified Tealbook [laughter], which apparently is produced every two meetings.  But I did ask the people who write it, and you know the old line “I didn’t have enough time to write it short.”  They said that, actually, it took less time to write.  And it sure is a lot clearer.  So could we, at some point, take a poll on whether people prefer this version, which I certainly did on this occasion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 279.
 MR. WILCOX.  We could do that right now before anybody loses the thought [laughter]. CHAIR YELLEN.  If you’d actually like to do that, why don’t we just spend one second, if you don’t mind being interrupted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 280.
 MR. WILCOX.  Could I make a quick comment.  This was the fifth time we’d done the so-called short form of DEDO.  All of the other sections in the Tealbook were in the same format as usual.  It’s the red-tabbed section in the beginning of the book that is condensed. When I went to Chairman Bernanke a year ago and requested permission to try a short-form DEDO, I made several pledges to him.  First, I pledged that we would do it on an experimental basis, and, if it was judged a failure, we’d go back to the long form every time.  Second, I pledged that we would invest the same amount of analytical effort every time regardless of whether the exposition was condensed or full length.  And, third, I pledged that, if circumstances warranted and something came up that seemed to call for a full reset in long-form, and perhaps more confusing, format, we’d stand prepared to do that.  We couldn’t do that overnight, but we could do it on pretty short notice. That was the premise under which this was taken.  We find it, frankly, more conducive to investing in some of the special analytical material that I tried to highlight in some of my comments yesterday.  And I have wondered, indeed, whether it didn’t present the material in a manner that was easier for you to digest as well and therefore might be a value-improving proposition. CHAIR YELLEN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a statement by Mr. Wilcox explaining the reasoning behind using a condensed form of DEDO. There is no argument or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 281.
  Do you want to ask for a quick show of hands of how many people prefer this shortened version to the—or do you want to come back and— MR. WILCOX.  We could do that, or we could do both.  And if participants wanted to send me a comment or—what’s the proper procedure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting two options for gathering feedback or opinions from the participants, and proposing that they could even do both options if desired.


Passage number 282.
—send the Secretariat—  MR. ENGLISH.  That would be fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "That would be fine" shows agreement and approval.


Passage number 283.
 MR. WILCOX.  Send the Secretariat—maybe, why don’t we do that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  We can do that.  Good suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Wilcox and Chair Yellen agree and approve of the idea to send the Secretariat.


Passage number 284.
 MR. FISCHER.  And we’ll take nonvotes as—which way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot provide a yes or no answer without the actual passage in question. Please provide the relevant passage for analysis.


Passage number 285.
 MR. WILCOX.  Well, I’ll need to confer with the Chair, but I certainly would love to interpret silence as indicating approval of the short-form DEDO. CHAIR YELLEN.  Maybe we’ll send something around and ask everybody for a reaction one way or another.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Wilcox and Chair Yellen express a desire for approval and indicate a potential action to gather everyone's reaction.


Passage number 286.
 MR. WILCOX.  That sounds good.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply expresses thanks and appreciation.


Passage number 287.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m looking at “Optimal Control:  PCE Inflation,” which is in the exhibit on policy issues.  This seems like an unusual path for inflation that would come out of a simulation of this nature.  You’ve got it rising in 2015 and falling, and then you’ve got it rising gradually in 2016, with another fall and then another rise.  What’s going on here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is not expressing any disagreement with what is being presented; instead, he is asking for clarification and an explanation of the simulation results.


Passage number 288.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think that this is consistent with the staff view that there’s some temporary factors pushing inflation higher in the near term that will unwind.  As for the wiggle in the end of 2016 and into 2017, I don’t know exactly why that isn’t smoother, but the computer is doing the best it can to minimize the loss function and that’s where it came out [laughter].  So, presumably, there are things going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 289.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, I don’t see similar movements in the panel to the left on unemployment.  So why would inflation be moving around.  I would expect a smoother path if we’re going to do an exercise like this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is expressing his observation and questioning why there is movement in inflation while not seeing similar movements in unemployment. It is more of a statement and inquiry rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 290.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Well, but if you have a very flat Phillips curve and you have shocks that are moving around inflation, I’m not sure that you necessarily want to move the policy rate around and the unemployment rate around in order to smooth out what’s a pretty small bump in inflation.  Remember that the loss function imposes a loss related to the change in the funds rate.  It’s trying to give you a smooth funds rate, and I think the result may be not an entirely smooth path for inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing an explanation and expressing a personal opinion about the potential consequences of using a certain policy approach.


Passage number 291.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  As I understand the simulation, then—because we also have the upper-right panel up here—it’s going to put a premium on a smooth funds rate and a premium on a smooth unemployment rate, and residual variation has to occur in inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the understanding of the simulation.


Passage number 292.
 MR. ENGLISH.  No, I don’t think so.  It puts a premium on a smooth funds rate, and it aims to minimize deviations of unemployment from the natural rate of unemployment and to minimize deviations of inflation from 2 percent. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply provides statements from Mr. English and Chair Yellen without any conflicting or opposing views.


Passage number 293.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes—thank you.  I’m going to ask a question that I think might be hard to answer, but I’m going to try to ask it anyway.  It’s certainly going to be hard to ask.  I don’t know how hard it is to answer. The Tealbook baseline and the optimal control pictures under “Policy Issues” both have the same feature of having unemployment run for some time below the staff’s estimate of the natural rate.  And, as I understand the Tealbook outlook, in both Book A and Book B, this is essential in actually getting inflation back up to 2 percent—that you have to have this feature in order to get back to 2 percent.  At the same time, we’ve heard a level of discomfort from President Fisher and, to a certain extent, from Vice Chairman Dudley and Governor Powell with this feature of the outlook.  So I would be interested in the staff following up on these concerns from Committee participants.  Suppose you forced the Committee to follow something that did not have unemployment going below the natural rate for any period of time or a much shorter period of time.  What would happen then in terms of inflation.  Where would we end up in terms of inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking the staff's opinion on the potential outcomes of a different policy decision.


Passage number 294.
 MR. WILCOX.  Inflation on our baseline analysis would settle in at about 1.75 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of a projected inflation rate without any indication of conflicting opinions.


Passage number 295.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes—okay.  So I understood the staff’s work correctly—that this undershooting of the natural rate is an essential part of our getting back to 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply confirming their understanding of the staff's work.


Passage number 296.
 MR. WILCOX.  That’s right.  Last meeting, we sent the Committee a memo by Deb Lindner that presented estimates of where inflation would settle out if resource utilization gaps were closed quickly and longer-term inflation expectations remained at their current levels.  There was a two-pronged message in that memo.  One is that we think that estimate is centered a little below 2 percent.  There were a range of model-based estimates that we presented.  The number we chose for purposes of putting together the staff forecast, quite frankly, was probably a little at the higher end of the model-based estimates.  We had a fistful of model-based estimates.  We chose to place that resting point for inflation within the envelope of that fistful of model-based estimates, but it was a little toward the upper end of that range.  The other prong of the message was that the confidence intervals around that resting point are very wide, so what we did was not only to give you our best shot at the center of the probability distribution, but also to communicate that we see the probability distribution as being very dispersed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the content of a memo and the reasoning behind the estimates presented in it.


Passage number 297.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  But there is a risk that you could be right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the possibility that the other person's statement or opinion could be correct.


Passage number 298.
 MR. WILCOX.  There’s a risk that we could be right, and I would also note that the probability distribution is two sided.  So we could be wrong.  We will surely be wrong, but the chances are as likely that we could be wrong to the downside as they are that we could be wrong to the upside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges the possibility of being both right and wrong, but there is no disagreement or conflicting views presented.


Passage number 299.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes—question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is thanking Chair Yellen, and Chair Yellen responds by acknowledging the question.


Passage number 300.
 MR. FISCHER.  What is the essential mechanism in the model that produces the overshooting.  Let me guess, and then you’ll tell me I’m wrong so that I can join you in being wrong with certainty.  I assume that it may have something to do with the fact that you’ve got to get the real wage up in order to get to full employment.  So, somewhere along the path, you’re having a rise in wages.  And then there may be a differential response of prices to wages and to aggregate demand that produces this as an essential feature of the model.  I don’t know.  That’s a guess.  Is that what it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply making a guess and acknowledging that they may be incorrect.


Passage number 301.
 MR. WILCOX.  I’m not sure what you’re asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wilcox simply expresses uncertainty about the question being asked.


Passage number 302.
 MR. FISCHER.  There’s something in the model that makes this happen.  What is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification or explanation.


Passage number 303.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes.  At the risk of having a Pogo comic strip moment, it’s you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Wilcox, with no opposing viewpoints or arguments provided.


Passage number 304.
 MR. FISCHER.  If I may say so, the warranty on students ends at 25 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it is a statement made by Mr. Fischer without any response or contradiction from others.


Passage number 305.
  [Laughter] MR. WILCOX.  Degree retracted.  I lost my train of thought.  [Laughter]  Oh—we posit a deliberately mechanical monetary policy, which we believe conforms to the broad contours of what we understand the Committee to have communicated to the public.  That monetary policy succeeds in stabilizing both dimensions of the dual mandate around your objectives eventually.  It is not sufficiently restrictive over the next couple of years to prevent unemployment from undershooting its natural rate.  There’s nothing particularly optimal, of course, about that simple policy rule.  It does have the property, though, that, in the much longer run, it delivers an inflation rate that matches your 2 percent objective, because, given the resting point of inflation—that we place it a little bit below your 2 percent objective—a modest overshoot on the unemployment rate objective is what’s required to boost inflation expectations up so that the resting point of inflation can rise to reach your 2 percent objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a proposed monetary policy and explains its potential outcomes.


Passage number 306.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer is expressing gratitude for the information or response provided by Chair Yellen.


Passage number 307.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  I’ll try to summarize in my own words what you just said, David, which is, in order to get inflation expectations to rise above 1.75 percent, you actually have to have realizations of inflation above 1.75 percent.  And the way to get that is to have unemployment undershoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a summary of someone else's statement and does not express disagreement or contention.


Passage number 308.
 MR. WILCOX.  That’s right.  It is what’s built into our analytics.  It is also built into our analytics with a great deal of humility because we don’t have a fantastic model, for example, of how inflation expectations are formed and that sort of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It discusses the limitations and humility in the analytics model but does not involve any contradictory or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 309.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I absolutely agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker clearly states that they agree with the statement.


Passage number 310.
   MR. WILCOX.  So we put it forward as a reasonable hypothesis, but with no greater assertiveness than that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman—a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement between Mr. Wilcox and Chair Yellen. Mr. Wilcox is presenting a hypothesis without making any strong claims, and Chair Yellen refers to him as the Vice Chairman, suggesting that she is acknowledging his contribution rather than disputing it.


Passage number 311.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thanks.  Yes, I want to build on what President Kocherlakota was discussing.  It seems to me that this is very sensitive to your view about how inflation expectations are formed.  I guess, as a member of the Committee, I would be interested in the following:  If you had different assumptions about the inflation expectations process, how sensitive would the results be to that.  For example, one can imagine a situation in which, if the unemployment rate is running below the natural rate, inflation expectations among some portion of the population might go up pretty rapidly, because people in the economy have different estimates of the full employment rate and some people would probably get pretty nervous as you were driving the unemployment rate down to 4.7 percent.  A question would be, how sensitive, then, are the results to how you characterize that inflation expectations process.  The way I understand the model, you’re assuming that inflation expectations really do stay essentially anchored.  My understanding of your model is, as inflation is above 1.75 percent, it pulls inflation expectations up, but they never get above 2 percent.  I think the reality is that, if you were running the labor market really hot, you could imagine that inflation expectations could go up more rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question or request for clarification and elaboration on a specific topic.


Passage number 312.
  The question is, how would that feed back into it— MR. WILCOX.  Broadly speaking, that’s right, and I’ll let Thomas Laubach fill in the details.  I would say it’s completely sensitive to the assumption about inflation expectations.  At the simplest level, it rests on, among other things, a premise that words alone from the Committee will not be enough, and that some demonstration of action will be required.  Again, recognizing—I want to say it on every intervention that I make—that the confidence intervals are very wide, it rests on a judgment that some element of action will be required. Now, I do also want to clarify one more element of the picture before I turn it over to Thomas.  The largest contributor to the variance of inflation—and I’m going to put this in very clinical terms—is what we antiseptically refer to as the idiosyncratic component, a physician would say “the idiopathic component.”  That is the part we can’t trace to any specific cause.  So random variation matters overwhelmingly for the determination of inflation.  As one of you pointed out yesterday, that’s an important piece of why the confidence intervals around inflation are so large.  The component that we discuss in future inflation determination that you have any leverage over, which is the degree of utilization of resources, explains really quite a small portion of the variance of future inflation.  So I want to be clear that there’s a lot of stuff that will push inflation around that we can’t foresee and over which you have quite little control.  That is why there’s a very good probability that we will, in fact, attain the 2 percent objective without having to overheat the economy.  But, symmetrically, there’s also a very good probability that we could run substantially below the 2 percent objective.  What we’re trying to do, our design objective in putting together the forecast, is to give you a probabilistically evenly weighted outlook, and we try to center that on the baseline projection that we’ve put forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is mainly an explanation and clarification of factors that contribute to inflation and the forecast for achieving the 2 percent objective.


Passage number 313.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  My concern is somewhat different.  My concern is that, by having these very strong assumptions about inflation expectations, you’re minimizing the cost of potentially pushing the unemployment rate too low for an extended period of time.  So if you were to modify that assumption, how would that change the payoff function of pushing the unemployment rate too low.  I’m worried that you’re getting the answer by the particular assumption you’re using.  And I’d love to see how sensitive the results are to that assumption.  That’s all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a concern about potential consequences of strong assumptions about inflation expectations and is suggesting that modifying those assumptions could provide a different perspective. There is no opposition or clash of ideas presented.


Passage number 314.
 MR. WILCOX.  Generically, your point is completely well taken—that a great deal rests on the mechanism that drives inflation expectations.  But there’s not a strong empirical foundation for basing that judgment on something other than what we have.  If there were, we would have adopted it—and now I will turn it over to Thomas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 315.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But you say yourself that your basis for the assumption that you’re making isn’t very strong.  So it would be useful just to see what the alternatives were and how the results might vary.  That’s all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the person they are addressing and suggests exploring alternatives to gain better understanding.


Passage number 316.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes, and what I’ve stated is that—everything.  So if we posited something else, we’d get quite different results.  For example, if we posited that words were enough, we could get you to 2 percent immediately.  Thomas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a hypothetical scenario and the possible outcome that could result from it.


Passage number 317.
  MR. LAUBACH.  All of this is exactly right.  It is indeed our lack of knowledge about how these long-term expectations are formed.  But, effectively, we have two data points—there was the big run-up in inflation in the 1970s, and then inflation and inflation expectations kept coming down.  That’s all of the observational material we have to go by.  Now, it’s a bit sad that, in this Tealbook, we didn’t include the “Low Inflation” alternative scenario, because that was exactly one of these scenarios that took as the starting point that there’s been much more learning about some perception of long-run inflation expectations than we have assumed. In this case, it works in the opposite direction—namely, that from the past observations of lower inflation, people have taken more signal.  But it’s entirely right that, in future, we could see the opposite.  I’m sure that we can try to explore a little bit more the sensitivity to various assumptions but should always remind ourselves that these are really just assumptions, because we don’t have any firm basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging the lack of knowledge about how long-term inflation expectations are formed and discussing different scenarios and assumptions based on limited observational material. They mention the possibility of different outcomes in the future but do not express any disagreement or contention with the previous statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 318.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  That’s my point.  You’re not that attached to this particular assumption, so wouldn’t it make sense to explore a range of assumptions just to see what happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "That’s my point" suggests that the speaker is presenting a different perspective or opposing view to the listener. The phrase "You’re not that attached to this particular assumption" indicates that the listener may hold a different opinion or level of attachment to a specific assumption. The suggestion to explore a range of assumptions further indicates a disagreement or differing views on how to approach the situation.


Passage number 319.
 MR. WILCOX.  We can explore that sort of thing.  We’ve thought about this really carefully.  We think that, among a range of possible assumptions, this is quite a reasonable one.  Among the lot of assumptions for which there’s not a great deal of empirical support, this is the one that strikes us as probably the best choice.  But we agree completely that our likelihood function here is pretty darn flat.  If I could find a 9th or 10th way to say that, I would.  This is an element of great uncertainty for us.  You’re right to highlight the sensitivity, and perhaps we can do some exploration in future editions of the  alternatives simulations section of the Tealbook, for example, about different mechanisms for inflation expectations.  I think I’ve just given Thomas an assignment.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I had two-handers—first from President Bullard and then from President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the uncertainty and agrees with the highlighted sensitivity, suggesting further exploration and research.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I complained last time about this memo that said that long-term inflation expectations are centered at 1.75 percent instead of at 2 percent.  I don’t really think that that’s right.  At least, you should present results for the person who thinks inflation expectations are still centered at 2.  Then what would the optimal policy rate path look like.  That would be helpful.  Or, if you think medium- or longer-term inflation expectations have drifted up, then what would the optimal policy rate path look like here.  That would be a variant on what Vice Chairman Dudley said regarding changing assumptions—but I think of changing assumptions in a somewhat different way than what he was describing and exploring. Also, I have to say, to come into a policy meeting and present this kind of stuff right before we’re looking at the alternatives—I think it would be more helpful to do something that would say, “If you choose alternative C, here’s what you’ll get.  If you choose alternative A, here’s what you’ll get.  And if you choose alternative B”—that would be more appropriate at this point in the meeting than coming with a simulation that stimulates a long debate here.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with a memo that states long-term inflation expectations are centered at 1.75 percent instead of 2 percent. They argue for presenting results for someone who thinks inflation expectations are still centered at 2 percent, which suggests contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 321.
 MR. WILCOX.  President Bullard, we’ll be happy to take a look at that.  It would, I think, really help advance the dialogue if you’d like to put forward evidence that supports your presumption that 2 percent is a better estimate.  We took our best shot in the memo in June at putting forward our evidence, and it would be really constructive to have some dialogue about that.  So I’d very much welcome an alternative statement of empirical judgment.  I recognize that different model specifications will generate different answers, so there’s room for lots of disagreement.  But I think the way to advance the conversation would be to have that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking the other person to provide evidence that supports their presumption, implying that they do not agree with their estimate. They also state that different model specifications can generate different answers, indicating that there may be disagreement about the best approach or method.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 322.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, the Committee has specifically and repeatedly said in public statements that longer-term inflation expectations are stable.  What you’re saying is that they’re drifting down, and, because they’re drifting down, we have to take policy action.  That’s what these things are saying.  That’s why I’m passionate about this.  It’s conflicting with what the Committee has said publicly.  If you think the Committee should say something else, then give that as policy advice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Bullard is presenting his view that longer-term inflation expectations are drifting down and policy action is necessary, which contradicts the Committee's public statements claiming stable inflation expectations. This disagreement is evident when Mr. Bullard mentions that his perspective conflicts with what the Committee has said publicly.


Passage number 323.
 MR. WILCOX.  I’m not absolutely certain what you’re referring to, but the Michigan reading for longer-term inflation expectations in July did move downward.  We noted that.  We also noted that it’s based on a phone survey of 350 households, and we’re certainly on alert to the possibility that that could signal a larger downward move in longer-term inflation expectations.  But I would also point to other measures of longer-term inflation expectations, like the Survey of Professional Forecasters, that are rock steady at their previous readings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 324.
 MR. BULLARD.  I’m referring to paragraph 1 of the FOMC statement, the last sentence:  “Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.”  This is what the Committee has repeatedly said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement. In the passage, Mr. Bullard is referring to a statement made by the FOMC (Federal Open Market Committee). Although he does not directly state his disagreement, his reference to the statement suggests that he may have a different belief or perspective on the stability of longer-term inflation expectations.


Passage number 325.
 MR. WILCOX.  Oh.  That’s true, and that’s not at variance with the observation that we’ve been making.  We’ve been taking as given that longer-term inflation expectations may be steady, but there’s no reason that they’re necessarily pegged at 2 percent.  We’re taking that as a parameter to be estimated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox is simply adding to and expanding on the previous observation without opposing or contradicting it.


Passage number 326.
 MR. BULLARD.  But this is not what I meant, at least, by supporting what’s in the statement here.  CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher, do you have a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is clarifying his intention behind supporting the statement, while Chair Yellen is simply asking President Fisher for his input.


Passage number 327.
 MR. FISHER.  First, I want to thank you for the humility with which you’ve presented it and for the heat with which you’ve just expressed the contrast between the two.  I do want to go back to the interchange I had with Mr. Wascher yesterday.  We went back and did a little research.  This is just to take a snippet of what Vice Chairman Dudley started out with.  I was born in 1949.  It so happens that the CBO’s statistics on the natural rate go back to 1949—just so we are on the same factual basis.  And, very importantly, as the only former market operator in this room, I note that these are the kinds of things you look at for context—the natural rate has never been below 5 percent.  This is with all of the benefit of hindsight that we have from the CBO, going back to 1949.  It did bump along at that level in the first decade of this century.  Its high, of course—in 1978, when things were pretty awful, it was 6.27 percent.  It was 5¼ percent or greater in the 1950s and 1960s.  In fact, it was 5.86 percent in 1969. Now, the Tealbook baseline calls for an unemployment rate falling to 4½ percent.  It’s a reasonable hypothesis, and we can also talk about the confidence bands and so on.  But, as a market operator, if I were to see that against the background of the history, it might certainly affect my expectations or raise the question “Are they going too far.”  And that might be reflected in the financial instruments that we look at, which, we admit, are imperfect in terms of understanding inflationary expectations.   You pointed to the survey data.  That’s one thing.  I noticed yesterday that Esther pointed to the short-term numbers.  But, again, the way market operators think—and this is the beginning, I think, of Bill’s statement, even though that’s not where he came out—it looks a little out of context.  That’s my point.  I don’t know the degree to which we can test this, but this has been my concern:  If we push too far beyond the norm—with a history in which we’ve never been, in at least my lifetime of 65 years, below 5 percent—then that may begin to affect the market expectation or it may raise some eyebrows.  That’s all I’m saying, and that’s why I’ve raised it two meetings in a row.  I wish there was a way to test that.  I don’t know if we can.  But I’m not comfortable—again, it was a humble statement, but whether we say “idiopathic” or “idiosyncratic,” we’re just saying we don’t know.  It’s an important variable, but we can’t really figure out why.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concern and uncertainty about the potential impact of pushing the unemployment rate below 5 percent based on historical data and their experience as a market operator.


Passage number 328.
 MR. WILCOX.  Uncertainty, President Fisher, is pervasive in the monetary policy climate.  It is a fact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents the fact that uncertainty is pervasive in the monetary policy climate without challenging or contradicting any other viewpoint.


Passage number 329.
 MR. FISHER.  It’s what we live with.  That’s true in the investment community, too, and in the business community.  So I wanted to satisfy our little conversation yesterday, because I think it’s an important consideration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the speaker wanted to address a topic discussed previously.


Passage number 330.
 MR. WILCOX.  In some sense—again, premised all on the baseline outlook—running the unemployment rate below the natural rate is precisely, in this analysis, what’s required to get the attention of market operators, business owners, homeowners, households, et cetera, so that they say, “Gee, our inflation expectations”—you know what.  Most people don’t have a clue about what inflation is, but we hypothesize that they think they have a longer-term inflation expectation, which we estimate, as a parameter, to be in the neighborhood of 1¾ percent.  And, in our baseline analysis, in order to get their attention—“Hmm, the FOMC must not be satisfied with 1¾ percent.  How do I know that.  I know that because they are conducting a policy that is consistent with allowing the economy to operate in a slightly overheated state for a temporary period of time.  It must be that their objective is a little higher than I previously thought, and, therefore, I’m going to nudge it up.”  Eventually, through this iterative process, they arrive at 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a hypothesis about inflation expectations and how they can be influenced by running the unemployment rate below the natural rate.


Passage number 331.
 MR. FISHER.  I understand that.  You also understand that I worry about the risks of operating in that manner.  I know you do as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply depicts Mr. Fisher expressing his concern about the risks of operating in a certain manner and acknowledging that the other person understands and shares his worry.


Passage number 332.
 MR. WILCOX.  I can assure you, President Fisher—every night, when I go to bed, and every morning, when I wake up, I worry about the risks as well. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 333.
 MR. WILCOX.  And I worry about the risks in between those two periods.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply states that the speaker has concerns about the risks that may arise during a specific time period. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 334.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  You’re a very worried man.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The laughter suggests a lighthearted or joking tone, but no explicit disagreement or contention is present.


Passage number 335.
 MR. WILCOX.  I am, indeed.  When you’re in my business, it’s all downside.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota—a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a light-hearted moment with Mr. Wilcox making a statement and then Chair Yellen referring to the next speaker.


Passage number 336.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Madam Chair, I’ll be brief with my two-handed intervention because I am worried about leaving you enough time to prepare for your press conference in September.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  I thought I might have enough time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a light-hearted exchange between Mr. Kocherlakota and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 337.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  If you’re going to follow up on President Bullard’s suggestion of having 2 percent be the point at which inflation expectations are centered, I’d encourage you to also follow up with analysis in which you center those expectations at 1.5 percent, which I actually think would be consistent with empirical evidence that was presented in that very memo.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  I have President Evans as having a question, a one-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. Mr. Kocherlakota is suggesting alternative analysis to President Bullard's suggestion, but there is no conflict in their statements.


Passage number 338.
 MR. EVANS.  I did.  It could have been a two-hander, I guess. CHAIR YELLEN.  At any rate, go on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is simply expressing his opinion that the situation could have been handled by two people, and Chair Yellen encourages him to continue speaking.


Passage number 339.
 MR. EVANS.  At any rate, the discussion on the inflation forecast is an important one and interesting.  I would remind everybody that the Board’s staff circulated a memo several meetings ago in which they went into some depth as to how the inflation forecasting relationship behaved.  That memo is at the heart of the discomfort here because it’s more natural in a theoretical sense and all of our intuition to have short-term inflation expectations in there, at least over the medium term.  But, in fact, it’s hard to fit that.  It just doesn’t work so well.  So the Board staff has quite reasonably adopted the specification in which it’s long-term inflation expectations, and those are anchored.  It’s hard to move those.  And all of our intuition is that, well, the short term might be moving around.  So it may be that a little more discussion of that at the relevant time would be good for this. On uncertainty, we’ve raised uncertainty many times.  I believe, David, that every time you made a probabilistic statement, I agreed with the way that you characterized that.  But I want to be very careful.  In response to the chart that was displayed yesterday, “Forecast Summary,” with inflation in the big error bands, one attitude is to say uncertainty is big and throw up your hands.  But, in fact, you can make more-disciplined probabilistic statements.  According to this, unless I’m reading it wrong, it is still the case that the probability that inflation will come in below 2 percent is higher than the probability that it will be above 2 percent.  So there is discipline that needs to be imposed on our probabilistic statements in that regard. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you, all, for your comments and questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing some comments and observations in response to a previous discussion.


Passage number 340.
   MR. FISHER.  It was illuminating.   CHAIR YELLEN.  Let’s go into our policy go-round, starting with President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Fisher and Chair Yellen express agreement or satisfaction with the previous discussion by using the words "illuminating" and "let's go."


Passage number 341.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I was going to make a comment about the last 10 minutes, but maybe I’ll let it go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is expressing gratitude and indicating that he will not comment on something within the last 10 minutes.


Passage number 342.
 MR. WILCOX.  I’m dying to hear it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement indicates curiosity and anticipation, but not disagreement or contention.


Passage number 343.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  As I mentioned yesterday, there remains substantial slack in labor markets, and PCE inflation has and is expected to continue to come in below our 2 percent target. I would make no change in our current policy.  We have communicated clearly to the market that we will continue with the taper program, concluding in October.  At that time, we should have sufficient data to determine how best to interpret “considerable time” in the statement.  The earlier forward guidance in our statement implied that we might wait at least until the middle of 2015.  Our current guidance focuses on a considerable time after the purchase program ends.  I will be reluctant to alter that guidance unless there is strong evidence that inflation is coming in significantly higher than we currently anticipate. Because of the uncertainty surrounding estimates of full employment, even in normal times, and the variety of labor market statistics that currently remain far from their historical norms, we probably should be highly focused on how wages and price pressures are developing.  While it is important to note that wage and price pressures can be lagging indicators of labor and product market tightness, at this time, both are well contained, suggesting that we still have some way to go before we reach full employment.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, expresses support for alternative B and explains his reasoning based on the slack in labor markets and inflation. There is no explicit disagreement or contradiction in his statements.


Passage number 344.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 345.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I fully support alternative B as written.  The incoming data since our last meeting have been favorable, and they indicate that a solid rebound from the first-quarter drop in GDP is well under way.  The improvement in labor market conditions has been especially encouraging, and inflation does appear to be heading back toward our longer-term target.  I think alternative B, the first paragraph, acknowledges these improvements appropriately, and the changes in the second paragraph also nod to the fact that inflation and labor market conditions are moving toward our goals. It will be some time, however, before excess labor market slack is sufficiently reduced and underlying inflation has picked up enough to warrant an outright tightening of policy.  These circumstances call for maintaining the current course of monetary policy, including the further measured reduction in the pace of asset purchases, and maintaining the forward guidance that signals a highly accommodative future path for the funds rate at this time.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Williams expresses his full support for alternative B and provides reasons for his support, including favorable data and improvements in the labor market and inflation. He also acknowledges that it will take some time for conditions to warrant a tightening of policy. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in his statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 346.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support reducing the pace of asset purchases at this meeting as described in alternative B.  I think two aspects of the draft statement for alternative B are likely to garner the most attention in market commentary.  One is the change in our inflation language at the end of paragraph 2.  Those changes make eminent sense because of the firming we’ve seen in the inflation numbers of late. The other focus of attention is going to be the characterization of labor markets in the first paragraph.  I think it makes sense to drop “remains elevated” at this meeting and to note that labor market conditions have improved and the unemployment rate has declined further.  The next sentence gives me pause, however.  We qualify our acknowledgment of labor market improvements by citing “a range of labor market indicators” suggesting that “there remains significant underutilization” of resources.  As I noted in my comments during the economic go-round yesterday afternoon, there is always more underutilization than indicated by U-3.  The question should be whether there’s more underutilization than usually occurs when U-3 equals 6.1 percent, and the answer to that question is ambiguous.  Yesterday I pointed to some research that’s consistent with U-3 being a good summary statistic rather than not, but I realize there are some around the table who disagree.  Clearly, though labor market conditions are improving.  By shifting attention from unemployment to other indicators, we risk confusing the public.  We also risk being seen as cherry-picking the data to bolster a case for stimulus. The key issue we need to face in the coming months is the disparity between the sense of the pace of tightening that we have and the market’s sense of that pace.  Some people have made reference to that around the table here.  I think we’d prefer to see that convergence take place smoothly, and, to me, this is another reason to avoid downplaying labor market improvements by shifting attention away from the unemployment rate. The disparity between our expected funds rate path and the market’s suggests to me that the last sentence in our statement, which says that “economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run,” is having, perhaps, a greater effect than we intended.  Now, if you look at it, it’s going to be a sentence that’s going to be hard to walk away from, in the sense that it’s hard for me to see how we’d be able to explain, at any given juncture, why we’re removing that sentence just then, since it’s about something way out in the longer run, but maybe we can.  But an alternative means of addressing this disparity problem that I talked about between the market’s path and ours would be to avoid downplaying the SEP dot plot in public.  I know it has its limitations.  I know everyone has some complaints about it.  But it’s one of the best vehicles we have for communicating how we expect the funds rate to unfold, particularly the steepness of the path after takeoff.  So in our public communications, I’d urge some support for the dot picture. CHAIR YELLEN.  Could I just mention that I did, in fact, point to the dot plot specifically, voluntarily [laughter], in my recent press conference, for exactly the reason you gave. If I could make one other comment, I recognize, as I said in my summary, that there are disagreements among us about whether U-3 is a sufficient statistic or not, and I did not interpret the new language in paragraph 1 as intending to take any position on that matter at all.  I don’t see it that way.  It’s, I think, a perfectly good sentence even if U-3 is a sufficient statistic.  Even by that metric, one could say there is significant underutilization.  But I wanted to emphasize that I don’t see that sentence as opining on whether U-3 is sufficient or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker expresses disagreement with the characterization of labor market conditions and the focus on "a range of labor market indicators" suggesting significant underutilization of resources. He argues that U-3 is a good summary statistic and that focusing on other indicators risks confusing the public and being seen as cherry-picking data. Chair Yellen responds by mentioning that there are disagreements among the committee members about whether U-3 is a sufficient statistic or not.


Passage number 347.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  I can support the statement here.  I intended my remarks as cautionary in nature regarding what I see as the perhaps incipient movement of a bolder pace away from U-3 toward other labor market indicators, recognizing, as we always do, that we do look at a broad range of data in all of our assessments of economic conditions. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Lacker and Chair Yellen are expressing their support for alternative B and acknowledging the importance of considering a broad range of data in assessing economic conditions.


Passage number 348.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  The characterization of the economy and outlook in alternative B is broadly consistent with my own reading of the situation.  Because of the weight I put on elements of employment slack, such as persons working part time for economic reasons and the participation rate, I actually considered whether the language in alternative A that references these factors specifically would be preferable to the words “range of labor market indicators” in alternative B.  However, I don’t think it’s wise to set off unhelpful market speculation related to the specifics of our reaction function, so I am comfortable—as you are, Madam Chair—with the general language in alternative B. I also like the new verbiage in the last sentence in paragraph 2 acknowledging the firming of inflation and the reduced likelihood of inflation remaining soft.  So I’m comfortable with the statement language as presented.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lockhart states his support for alternative B and explains his agreement with its characterization of the economy and outlook. He also addresses a potential preference for alternative A regarding specific labor market indicators but ultimately agrees with alternative B to avoid speculation. He also expresses approval of the new language in paragraph 2 about inflation. Overall, there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 349.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  To offer a counterpoint to President Fisher’s comment about QE3, I’d like to say I’m very happy that we undertook QE3 and the forward guidance, as I think the economy is better because of that.  I do support alternative B as written.  This is a significant change in language.  Unemployment has come down, and inflation has moved up from its lowest recent readings. Of course, it is still much too early to declare victory.  I think that substantial risks remain.  In alternative B, the language recognizes these developments pretty well.  In paragraph 1, we mention that the unemployment rate has declined further.  We’re not using the term “elevated.”  In my own mind, I still think that 6.1 percent is elevated against my take on the natural rate of 5 to 5¼ percent, but I’m okay with that.  It’s important to acknowledge “significant underutilization,” as the statement indicates.  I believe that’s accurate.  And, in terms of the range of labor market indicators, you’ve talked quite a lot about your dashboard for the labor market, and I think that everyone will understand the language pretty clearly. In paragraph 2, the inflation language removes the phrasing that we’re monitoring for evidence that inflation is moving back to our objective.  That’s fine, but considerable uncertainty does remain.  The inflation uncertainty bands point to that.  As I mentioned in my question-and-answer, I do think that it’s useful to characterize our take on where inflation is going in terms of the probabilities of that.  As President Kocherlakota has noted quite often recently, the probability that inflation is going to underrun our objective is higher than the probability that it will be above 2 percent.  The bands show that. There was some discussion between President Williams and me on the right way to calculate those bands and what they really mean.  It would be nice if, in the Tealbook, they tabulated some of these probabilities with respect to a couple of benchmarks, like 2 percent or something.  I’m not quite sure exactly what the numbers and benchmarks should be, but that would be useful for resolving some of those questions. I do still worry that we’re hoping to thread the needle in terms of getting inflation up to 2 percent by getting it up gradually.  I’d like to get it up there much more quickly and use our policy accommodation to do that.  The Tealbook takes until 2018.  I think we need more confidence that the probability of inflation being above 2 percent is balanced against the downside probability.  But, for today, I certainly support alternative B.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 350.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B today.  There’s not been a significant enough change in the outlook to warrant deviating from the path of tapering asset purchases by another $10 billion per month.  My expectation is that we’ll announce in September that the program will conclude in October. I do have two concerns about the language.  First, as we discussed, we’ve seen considerable improvement in the economy over time—in fact, more improvement in labor market conditions than was anticipated.  And the outlook on labor markets has, if anything, improved since June.  So I’m concerned about introducing the language that there’s “significant underutilization of labor resources” into paragraph 1. Now, we can reasonably disagree about estimates of the level of underutilization.  My concern is more about the message this new language will send.  In particular, to me, the language suggests we’re more concerned about labor market developments now than we were in June or earlier in the year—and perhaps even then, our estimates of the degree of underutilization increased—yet the data, our forecasts, and our discussion belie that.  So I would suggest we drop the qualifier “significant” and not give any characterization of the degree of underutilization, saying simply that “there remains underutilization.” Omitting any qualifier provides a wide umbrella for different views on the Committee about the amount of underutilization.  I don’t view that as inconsistent with the Chair’s testimony.  I also believe it would set us up better for the next meeting.  We will have two employment reports before our September meeting, one coming out this Friday, as well as a new round of FOMC projections.  A qualifier on the degree of underutilization could become obsolete as early as our next meeting.  But a change in that statement language will get noticed.  In fact, our statements are a little bit like Hotel California—words check in, but it’s hard to get them to check out.  [Laughter]  So I think we’d better take that into account and not create a future communications issue for ourselves. My second concern, which I talked about last time, is with our forward guidance on the federal funds rate.  The end of the asset purchase program is looming, and a rate increase is anticipated sometime next year.  Pretty soon, it’s going to be both necessary and desirable for us to change that forward guidance that indicates the first increase will be “a considerable time” after the purchase program ends.  Liftoff has been moving closer, not further away.  We’ve seen more rapid improvement in the economy than many anticipated, and both the Tealbook federal funds rate path and the June SEP path are steeper than market expectations.  That’s true of the dealer survey.  It’s true of the federal funds futures and Eurodollar futures paths.  So I think what we should be doing is to do our best to better align the public’s expectations with our own view about the path, and we should do that before we get too close to the liftoff date.  My hope is that the combination of a press conference, the release of the new SEP numbers, and the probable release of normalization principles will make the September meeting a good one to revise our forward guidance.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Mester disagrees with the language used to describe the level of underutilization of labor resources and suggests dropping the qualifier "significant." She also disagrees with the current forward guidance on the federal funds rate and believes it should be revised sooner rather than later.


Passage number 351.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  President Fisher, I may have generated some heat a moment ago, but there’s nothing like the heat that was between you and President Lacker yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 352.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m so sorry I said that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is apologizing for something he said, indicating remorse or regret.


Passage number 353.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Sorry, I can’t remember that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is simply a statement expressing a personal limitation or inability to remember something.


Passage number 354.
 MR. LACKER.  There goes the transcript.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the transcript is being released or provided.


Passage number 355.
  [Laughter] MR. LOCKHART.  Wait until the historians get hold of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement about historians in a lighthearted manner, as indicated by the laughter.


Passage number 356.
 MR. LACKER.  Try to keep it off www.federalreservehistory.org.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any specific statements or arguments that can be considered as contentious or in disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 357.
 MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair, I agree with Governor Fischer that we are well ahead of where we expected to be.  Last year at this time, we expected to be at 7 percent unemployment, and we expected to be done with the QE program.  Instead, we’re at 6.1 percent unemployment, and the QE program has not been completed yet.  I’m willing to support alternative B for today with a change to the phrase “significant underutilization of labor resources.”  And I’m agreeing with President Mester.  I propose that we simply eliminate the word “significant.”  To me, the word “significant” would apply to a situation in which we have 8 percent unemployment or 9 percent unemployment.  We’ve come down to a much lower level, and, even on the other dimensions of labor market performance, things have improved.  So I think we can just say “underutilization” and get the point across.  I like President Mester’s characterization that we don’t want to set ourselves up for difficulties in changing the language, as we have more labor reports coming and we are expecting reasonably good news, we hope, in those reports.  So you would eliminate one word.  The phrase would be “there remains underutilization of labor resources,” which I think is a perfectly fine characterization of what’s going on.  This would better reflect the labor market situation, in my view.  That’s my only suggested change to the statement today.   Let me make a few comments on alternative A, which was more direct in noting alternative labor market indicators.  If we go in this direction in the future, I would encourage the Committee not to cite the labor force participation rate.  Some of you know that I gave a speech called “The Rise and Fall of Labor Force Participation in the United States.”  That was a review of the literature on labor force participation.  My take on this is that demographic models explain nearly all of the decline in labor force participation since 2000.  Demographically-based models developed in 2006 are basically spot-on with their predictions of where labor force participation would be today.  And most of these models predict that labor force participation will continue to decline in the quarters and years ahead.  That’s basically on a downward path.  Labor force participation has not historically had a significant cyclical component.  So I think that, if we would lean more on that interpretation of the labor force participation rate, we would get better unemployment forecasts.  That’s what I’ve been doing in recent years.  I’ve been fortunate enough to be more accurate on what was going to happen with unemployment.  The other labor market indicators, other than labor force participation, might be reasonable—persons working part time for economic reasons, for instance.  But labor force participation, I think, is a special category that is driven by factors outside of the control of monetary policy. I would also say this about other indicators of the labor market health, other than the unemployment rate:  I think we need better empirical evidence that would justify citing these particular measures in the statement as they are in alternative A, if we ever wanted to go in that direction.  I’m doubtful that we can get improved empirical performance by adding one of the lesser-cited labor market indicators to variables in a VAR or a related empirical model.  In other words, the marginal contribution of adding a labor market indicator of that nature is probably small or zero.  So I think that, until we have some evidence of that nature, I would not raise those kinds of indicators to the level of putting them in the statement.  I understand that we, of course, want to talk about all information that’s in front of the Committee, but to raise it to that level says that it’s a variable that can really explain a lot about what’s going on in the macroeconomy.  And I don’t think the lesser-cited labor market indicators can do that or can meet that kind of test.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, agrees with Governor Fischer and President Mester on certain points, but disagrees on the use of the word "significant" in describing underutilization of labor resources. He proposes eliminating the word "significant" and believes that "underutilization" alone is a more accurate characterization. He also disagrees with the use of the labor force participation rate as a labor market indicator and does not believe it should be cited in future statements.


Passage number 358.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B in terms of a further reduction in asset purchases.  Compared with the June statement, I had a similar reaction to the language in paragraph 1—that it seems to downplay labor market improvements.  And I, too, would prefer to reframe that characterization by dropping the word “significant” so that the Committee’s acknowledgment of the broad improvement in labor markets is clear. I think the language we use is increasingly important as we steer toward normalization.  Policy rules and the Tealbook, Book B, prescribe less accommodation than they did at the June meeting, even as the gap between the Committee’s views and those of the market remains wide.  The federal funds futures market shows a much more gradual trajectory for the funds rate following liftoff.  Threading the communication needle will be challenging to avoid either surprising markets by moving faster than expected or delaying policy normalization at the risk of falling behind the curve and jeopardizing our long-run objectives.  In this regard, I remain concerned that we may already be behind the curve.  The current unemployment rate gap, looking at the difference between the unemployment rate and the CBO’s long-term estimate, is currently just over ½ percentage point.  This gap is the same as it was in June 2004 at the time of liftoff for the last round of policy tightening. I understand the arguments for delaying liftoff longer than in the past, but we should not complicate this risk by letting markets expect that we will also move slower than in the past.  Most research on monetary policy at the zero lower bound finds that, if liftoff is to be delayed because of the constraint on rates at zero, short-term rates should return to normal faster, not slower, following liftoff.  Of course, these models generally do not incorporate the important role of financial stability for markets.  So my own preference would be to lift off sooner and move more slowly.  At a minimum, however, I would like to avoid painting ourselves into a corner by letting financial markets think we’re going to both delay liftoff and move exceptionally slowly following liftoff.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B in terms of a reduction in asset purchases and providing their own opinion on the language used in the statement. They also express their concern about potentially being behind the curve and offer their preference for lifting off sooner and moving more slowly. However, there is no mention of any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 359.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  I would be opposed to removing the word “significant” in paragraph 1.  I think, especially since that word appeared in your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, it’s appropriate to leave it in at this time. I do agree with some of the comments from participants around the table that we will need to revisit the words “considerable time” in the very near term and try to provide more clarity about what exactly we mean by that.  I would hope we do that in terms of economic conditions and not so much in terms of dates, but I think that, very soon, in the September–October time frame, we’re really going to be put in a position of having to try to answer some tough questions about that. For a long period of time, this Committee has been struggling with the employment mandate and focused on the employment mandate as really the main challenge facing us.  I’m increasingly thinking that the big challenge for us is really on price stability, and the perhaps overly extended dialogue that we had leading into this round highlights some of those challenges.  Staff estimates right now are that inflation expectations are 1¾ percent.  I think that, if you carefully read the memo that we received in June, this estimate is unduly generous to this Committee.  If you actually read the numbers behind the assessment, you could have gone with a lower number, as Mr. Wilcox mentioned earlier, in fact. We heard lots of passion yesterday about the loss of credibility associated with missing the federal funds rate target range by 10 basis points for one day.  We need to bring that same level of passion, or even more, to the prospect of missing our inflation target by 25 basis points or more over an extended period.  When we have a flat Phillips curve, that miss of 25 basis points represents lots of resource loss and lots of underutilization.  And I’m concerned that FOMC participants seem comfortable with long-run misses of inflation.  Maybe I’m misreading the conversation—I apologize if I am.  But I am concerned that I’m hearing a degree of sanguineness about having inflation underrun our target for a very long period of time. President Evans asked me if I had some good points to make, and I said I didn’t, but I do have a lot of points.  [Laughter]  President Plosser, I think, raised a good point about how our behavior is likely to deviate from rules as we move forward.  One reason for that lies in the behavior of inflation.  Inflation has been so low for so long relative to target that we’re starting to see these estimates of what inflation expectations are drift downward.  That really forces us to be more accommodative than we’d otherwise be, given the current metrics. As we contemplate how to interpret those words “considerable time,” my own thinking about how we should be formulating the conditions governing liftoff is really in terms of the inflation mandate and the price stability mandate.  It’s very hard to justify liftoff taking place when the one- to two-year-ahead outlook for inflation is below 2 percent.  In my mind, there’s no reason for us to be lowering rates simply because unemployment has gotten too low.  That’s built into Tealbook objectives—that there’s a loss associated with unemployment being too low.  I don’t read our statutory mandate as saying that you should not have unemployment be too low.  I don’t read our communications from our long-run goals statement as saying, “We don’t want unemployment to be too low.”  So I would not be supportive of raising rates simply because unemployment has fallen too low. The other piece that’s built into Tealbook objectives is a desire to keep interest rates smooth.  In fact, as the Tealbook, Book B, notes, a lot of weight is put on that.  I don’t see that in our statutory mandates.  I don’t see it in our long-run goals or communications.  For those reasons, I don’t put weight on that in my objective. Accordingly, I would see no reason for us to be raising rates as long as the inflation outlook remained below 2 percent.  I say “no reason.”  There is one reason—potential financial instability concerns, which I’ve talked about in the past.  But I agree with Governor Fischer here.  As long as housing is not being affected by this, it’s really hard for me to see how this is going to get into the broader economy.  That’s where you’re going to see it—in housing.  Until we see it there—and we’re a long way from that, unfortunately—I don’t think that’s going to be a risk. When I think about how to reframe “considerable time,” it would be to frame it in terms of the necessary condition for liftoff being a one- to two-year-ahead outlook for inflation of 2 percent.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with some of the statements made by other participants in the conversation.


Passage number 360.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you very much, Madam Chair.  I don’t want to go back over, essentially, the previous round, so let me just address alternative B, which I support, and make a few comments.  But I would like to start by addressing a point that President Plosser raised. It is clear that, if we were using the Taylor rule, or any rule, with this level of unemployment and this rate of inflation, we’d be well above zero.  That’s clear.  But I think that doesn’t take into account the history dependence of how we got here.  We have only recently reached the conclusion—and when I say “we,” you’ll have to include me in some metaphysical sense—that we are making progress, in which the risk of deflation has fallen off the table and in which, at least in the labor market, we seem to be seeing significant, sustained improvements in performance.  We haven’t seen it in growth yet, and it may just be that we won’t see it in growth, because it’s entirely possible that we may reach the unfortunate conclusion that the rate of productivity growth has declined.  If that’s it, so be it.  That’s one of the many things that monetary policy can’t particularly deal with. It’s that we’re starting from a zero interest rate that causes us to be so significantly away from almost every monetary rule that would have applied if we had come to this point as a result of some normal business cycle, in which we’d gone up to 7½ percent unemployment and started coming down, and we hadn’t had a huge financial crisis and so forth.  Then we wouldn’t be in this situation.  But we did go through a financial crisis of massive proportions, and I’m glad that the Committee voted for QE3, because I think that made a significant difference.  But it’s just an intra-Fischer/Fisher disagreement.  [Laughter]  We don’t have to worry about that too much. Let’s go to the issues.  I’ve also toyed with the issue that you’re dealing with, President Plosser, and have tried to explain to myself why I wouldn’t want to do what the Taylor rule says or what you recommend, and that’s my answer to that. Now, let’s look ahead a few months and ask what could happen.  Well, we could continue to get good news out of the labor market, and that would almost certainly mean that we’d want to raise the interest rate sooner than late in the second quarter of next year or even early in the third quarter.  If that were to happen, we would want to send—by September, for sure—a fairly strong signal.  Sending a fairly strong signal raises the risk of a “taper tantrum 2.”  We went through QE1, QE2, and QE3.  We really don’t want to get that series going on taper tantrums, and I think we should avoid it. If that were to happen, we would want to have sent some signal that we already got an internal estimate that liftoff will be sooner than the markets think.  Alternative B sends that signal pretty well.  This is going to be noticed, and people will say, “Oh, yes.  Okay.  They are worried about inflation.  They continue to be worried about unemployment.  But there’s a very significant change, particularly at the end of paragraph 2.”  But, in fact, the whole of paragraph 2 is a significant change, and I think that will have been enough. Well, why don’t we say, “It could be in the first quarter of 2015”.  The reason is, we could get some bad news, and we don’t want to go too far.  We don’t want to do something that we’ll regret having done.  So my sense is, this language is about right.  It sends a signal that will be noticed, for sure, but it doesn’t send a signal of massive change.  If we get another two good labor market reports—or even another one—before the next meeting, I’m pretty sure we’ll want to change this statement, as President Fisher and others have suggested, in a far more definite direction.  And we will have given some warning that that’s on its way.  If we get really bad news, we don’t have to do any changes in the next meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fischer, states that he supports alternative B and makes comments about the current economic situation and potential future actions. He also mentions an "intra-Fischer/Fisher disagreement" but dismisses it as not significant.


Passage number 361.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I don’t hear any disagreement around the table with respect to the policy action we’re going to take today, so it all seems to be a matter of wording.  More precisely, as I think Stan has just tried to frame the issue, it’s one of strategic planning for how we’re going to word what we say now and over the course of the next several meetings. I believe we have two sets of aims.  One is the aim that the Chair began with, which is an indication of wanting to move market expectations closer to where we all evaluate that a critical mass of next year’s voters probably occupies right now.  And it doesn’t seem to a lot of us as though there’s the degree of alignment in markets that we would like.  I think a second aim—which, again, Stan was just alluding to—is to maintain some optionality on our part, depending on what the data show over the course of the next several meetings, as to whether that critical mass is going to change its own set of expectations—that is, to pull forward the date of the first liftoff or, conceivably, depending on what I don’t think any of us expect—maybe getting some very bad data—to push it back.  We’ve got to have both of those aims in mind, not just in crafting today’s statement, but also in thinking about how today’s statement affects what we say over the next few meetings. With that perspective in mind, I’ll begin by saying that, even if I agreed with Charlie Plosser’s substantive views, which he knows I don’t, I really wouldn’t want to make a change in the forward guidance today, because I think it would be more than bumpy—it would feel like one of those air pockets you hit over the Rockies sometimes.  It would be a complete reversal of expectations by markets as to what we may do.  We need to move more incrementally, and I believe the Chair tried, in her monetary policy testimony, to move incrementally.  I think most of us agree that what we’d like to see this statement today do is, again, to take a baby step further along the way to changing market expectations without some kind of giant leap forward, because those of us who feel that we don’t have a strong view as to whether we are going to pull forward or not do want to maintain some of that optionality, and we also don’t want to unnecessarily roil markets along the way.  With that in mind, with respect to the sentence that several of you have talked about, it seems to me there are three options there.  One, you leave it in as it is.  Two, you take it out.  And, three, you either delete “significant” or change it to some softer adjective.  We all need to borrow David’s cloak of humility in trying to project how markets are going to react to any of this stuff.  But we should probably think it through roughly along the following lines:  If we put it in, it is, to my mind, a statement of fact.  I agree with it as a factual matter.  What it’s basically doing is trying to warn that the critical mass is not moving too rapidly to the conclusion that some might reach—and, I think, some of us around the table have already reached—that we’re on the way to liftoff.  Changing “significant” is the hardest to figure out.  I’d be a little concerned about changing “significant,” either deleting it or changing it to something else, because everybody will just compare it with what the Chair said at her monetary policy testimony.  And that creates the largest chance of there being an excessive reaction, from our point of view. The third option, obviously, is to omit it, and Loretta made the case for that.  President Mester made a dynamic case for it, which is, what do you do with it once it’s in there.  My own view is that, ultimately, this is the Chair’s call to make, because she’s the one who’s got to navigate this along the way.  But I do think that, right now, we probably do need that baby step forward in terms of market perceptions.  So the way I would try to judge this is, what’s our level of confidence that the statement with the sentence will move that baby step, but only a baby step, forward, as opposed to the statement without the sentence moving that baby step forward, bearing in mind what Loretta said about the future.  In some sense, Madam Chair, I’m throwing this back on you, but I do think this is a pretty important decision right now, precisely because of what Stan said.  It’s taking us one step at a time, and whatever we do in September is going to build on what we’ve done today.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a discussion among the participants about the wording of a statement and the aims they have in mind for their policy action.


Passage number 362.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B today as written.  It does seem to me that the margin of slack is significantly smaller, and that it’s been disappearing significantly faster than I had expected.  I was pleased to see that the primary dealer survey put some significant probability on a March liftoff.  The actual market readings are not so well aligned with that view, and I think the first rate increase needs to be well telegraphed in advance, obviously, and not a surprise to markets.  So if data come in as expected or better, we seem to have some work to do on that front. On the statement language today, I want to think ahead.  If the modal case is realized and we get 250,000 jobs in each of the next two months, it seems to me that a couple of things will happen.  First of all, I think the SEP will start to show liftoff in the first quarter—on the part of some, at least—which would be appropriate at that time.  But, in addition, that would put significant pressure on the language in the statement in at least three places.  First, the word “significant,” at that point, will come under a lot of pressure.  I subscribe to David Wilcox’s and Governor Tarullo’s belief in the need for humility on this, but I do think that that will be the most noticed word in this statement, and that it will be the word that characterizes the overall thrust of this statement.  So that would come under tremendous pressure in September.  Second, I do think that, with respect to the “considerable time” language, at the end of paragraph 5, you would be under a lot of pressure. Finally, I believe that the next SEP will include 2017.  The Tealbook has the federal funds rate at 3.8 percent.  So I don’t know that that last sentence in the whole statement—which, I guess, President Lacker referred to—is going to be true any longer at that point.  In other words, it may not be correct that the federal funds rate is below normal levels at that point.  I think there is an opportunity to drop that, but the bottom line is, this is a risk-management call that the Chair really gets to make.  There’s risk in leaning too far forward now.  The risk is that there will be a lot more pressure on the September statement, and I’ll be happy to support your conclusions on that.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 363.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Let me start by saying I support alternative B.  In reflecting on the changes in alternative B from the June statement, obviously the new news for all of us is the accelerated pace at which slack is diminishing in the labor market.  That’s really the biggest piece of data that came in well ahead of expectations.  Of course, we’re also seeing signs of a healthier inflation rate and now a lower likelihood that we will not be able to reach 2 percent for a very protracted period of time.  We also don’t see, I think, anything on the financial-stability side that would materially change our inclinations on monetary policy. The anomalous performance, though—the poorly understood performance on GDP and GDI—should give us some pause and, if nothing else, injects considerable uncertainty—and uncertainty that does matter, I think importantly, for monetary policy.  I don’t believe that uncertainty is likely to be greatly resolved at least until the QSS revisions, and possibly not even at that juncture, in September.  Because it’s very difficult to reverse course once liftoff is initiated and because this recovery has proven unusually susceptible to false dawns, I think that, if we have the breathing space to wait for a clear pattern of signals—and the inflation data suggest that we do have that luxury—the prudent course is to digest that additional data before committing decisively. I will say that, on the other side of those considerations, I am troubled that market participant expectations on the date of liftoff and on the path of the federal funds rate seem both late and shallow relative even to the June SEP.  The June SEP path itself is below the July Tealbook projection for the funds rate.  And, as was said earlier, while a policy rule is not particularly binding for these sets of circumstances, I think that, nonetheless, we should be looking at a range of policy rules.  The Tealbook projections, in turn, are later and shallow than prescribed paths from a whole set of policy rules. That growing divergence between market expectations and our internal projections argues in favor of altering the description of economic conditions, as is reflected in the proposed alternative B statement.  I would hope the market would have put greater weight, actually, on the data relative to the forward guidance, based on the statement made by the Chair in her Humphrey-Hawkins testimony.  Here I’m referring to the statement that “if the labor market continues to improve more quickly than anticipated . . . , then increases in the federal funds rate target likely would occur sooner and be more rapid.”  That does not seem to have gotten much traction.  And I would think we would want to see that sentiment, the data dependency, start to dominate the market’s thinking. It’s worth thinking a little bit about the tradeoff between waiting a little longer with a possibly steeper path of rates thereafter, versus moving a little sooner and thinking that we could actually see a somewhat shallower path.  If the dominant consideration is not moving prematurely in the context of considerable uncertainty about the extent of slack, then the later time of liftoff and possibly steeper path thereafter probably are preferable.  If, instead, we were particularly worried about risks to financial stability, then perhaps we would be more inclined toward the sooner, shallower path. It’s helpful, as many people have done here, to discipline our discussions about this thinking forward to a sequence of signals that we would be sending over the next few meetings as more data come in—especially, again, because it’s going to be very difficult to reverse course once that alteration is made.  So I think we would want to tilt toward a more positive read on the elimination of slack and inflation in this statement.  In September, we’ll have the new SEP numbers, which will move considerably—if I hear people around the table correctly—and the market will see that.  The Chair will be giving a press conference, and we’ll also have the principles on exit.  Those things together will give us the potential for adjustments based on the data that we’ll have in the intervening period.  Thereafter, if, in fact, we continue to see this acceleration of the elimination of slack, I do think we have to start moving away from the “considerable time” language and altering the forward guidance. With regard to the actual characterization of underutilization, I have to say I share the concerns that have been articulated that the characterization of slack as “significant underutilization” does seem a bit strong in relation to the data that we’ve seen.  The real concern is, how do you move off of that without sending too strong a signal.  I think Governor Tarullo has suggested two alternatives, and President Mester stated that tradeoff nicely.  Again, I would defer to the Chair, but that is something that I would give a little bit more thought to.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses support for "alternative B" but also raises concerns and uncertainties about the timing and path of interest rate increases. They also mention a divergence between market expectations and internal projections, suggesting that the market may not be weighing data heavily enough in their decision-making. Overall, the speaker seems to have mixed feelings and is advocating for further consideration and evaluation of the data before committing to a decision.


Passage number 364.
 MR. LUECKE.  I’ll call the roll. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  Go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Luecke is simply stating that he will call the roll, and Chair Yellen is acknowledging his statement.


