Passage number 1.
 Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 13, 2012 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 13, 2012, at 8:30 a.m.  Those present were the following: Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Elizabeth Duke Jeffrey M. Lacker Dennis P. Lockhart Sandra Pianalto Sarah Bloom Raskin Daniel K. Tarullo John C. Williams Janet L. Yellen James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively William B. English, Secretary and Economist Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, David Reifschneider, Glenn D. Rudebusch, William Wascher, and John A. Weinberg, Associate Economists Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors   Jon W. Faust and Andrew T. Levin, Special Advisors to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Ellen E. Meade, Stephen A. Meyer, and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Eric M. Engen, Michael T. Kiley, and Michael G. Palumbo, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Edward Nelson, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Harvey Rosenblum and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Chicago, respectively Craig S. Hakkio, Geoffrey Tootell, and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and Minneapolis, respectively Michael Dotsey, Joseph G. Haubrich, Lorie K. Logan, and David C. Wheelock, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, New York, and St.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a listing of the people present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Louis, respectively Marc Giannoni, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of New York  Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on March 13, 2012 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, and let me turn to Brian Sack for the presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply provides information about the people participating in a meeting.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there questions for Brian. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite exchange between two individuals.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 4.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you.  Brian, in your discussion of exhibit 1, you said that survey participants understand that our forward guidance is not an absolute commitment.  Complete absolute commitment suggests a polar case of an entirely noncontingent exit date and one that represents a commitment; at the other extreme is something that’s merely a forecast.  And it seems as though there would be something in between.  So do they think it’s something of a commitment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The person being addressed suggests that there is a range between a complete absolute commitment and just a forecast, while the speaker mentioned in the passage refers to the forward guidance as not being an absolute commitment. This suggests a difference in opinion or understanding about the level of commitment implied by the forward guidance.


Passage number 5.
 MR. SACK. My best guess is that market participants regard it as somewhat of a commitment, if you mean by having made the statement that there’s a slightly higher threshold to deviating from it.  There’s clear recognition that if economic conditions move sufficiently, the Committee will not be bound by that language. But I’m not sure it’s regarded as purely a forecast.  It may be seen, as I said, as raising the threshold for deviating, at least a touch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing an explanation of market participants' views on a certain topic.


Passage number 6.
 MR. LACKER.  I think we’ve tried to communicate clearly that it’s a forecast, merely a forecast.  So we’re not getting through to them somehow.  They view this as likely to inhibit our future action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is acknowledging that they have tried to communicate that the forecast is just a forecast, indicating they have made previous attempts to convey this message. He is expressing confusion about why they are not able to successfully get through to "them," likely referring to a different group or individuals. There is no indication of any opposition or conflict in the passage.


Passage number 7.
 MR. SACK.  Well, that’s my best interpretation of the reading.  It’s hard, exactly, to determine just how much higher that threshold is.  And they clearly see risk around the policy path.  You can see that because the futures curve bends up to well above the current target range well before late 2014, and the implied volatility of that shown in chart 4 is obviously well above zero, so they clearly see meaningful risk that the funds rate could increase before late 2014.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a speaker's interpretation of a reading and discussing the potential risks seen in the policy path. There is no explicit disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 8.
 MR. LACKER.  As do we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "As do we" indicates agreement with the previous statement made by an unidentified person.


Passage number 9.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, because the phrase "Vice Chairman" does not provide enough context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 10.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I interpret it as not a commitment, but you need to have evidence to change your mind.  So the data have to be definitive enough to change your view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that in order to change their mind or interpretation of something, they would require compelling evidence or definitive data.


Passage number 11.
 MR. LACKER.  And that’s a different characterization than we’d characterize it if we hadn’t made the forward guidance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the different characterization of something.


Passage number 12.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, it says that the Committee has a prior, and to change the prior, they need evidence that suggests that that prior is incorrect.  That’s all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining the conditions under which the Committee's prior can be changed.


Passage number 13.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me just observe that we’ll be getting into this in some depth later on today.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the speaker will discuss a topic in more detail later on. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 14.
 MR. FISHER.  First, I want to thank Brian for his work.  You’ve been under enormous pressure for a long time, and every one of your reports is outstanding.  I know this is way premature, and we talked about what market expectations appear to be, given the presentation you made of further actions we might take.  My question has to do with—again, very prematurely—what market expectations are for how we might go about draining when we want to drain.  And I’ve heard, at least in terms of the presentations made by the New York Desk staff, that the focus would be on reverse repos and the Term Deposit Facility.  I have a question about that, but do you have a sense of what markets are looking for.  Most investors don’t just look at one scenario; they look way down the road if they’re good, particularly the sophisticated folks that analyze us.  What do you sense they expect us to do once we get to this position that we’ve articulated.  Assuming, and it may be too big an assumption, that we decide we might want to start draining rather than just keep adding on—we get to that point in the economy—what would you say is their expectation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of thanks and a question about market expectations.


Passage number 15.
  MR. SACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context. The passage is incomplete and only contains the name "MR. SACK."


Passage number 16.
  I think market expectations on this question have been shaped mainly by the June 2011 exit principles that were in the FOMC minutes— MR. FISHER.  Still out there in the ether.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states a perspective that market expectations have been shaped by certain principles.


Passage number 17.
 MR. SACK. —which stated that temporary draining tools may be used, essentially, right before beginning to increase the target federal funds rate.  So I think market participants anticipate that tools will be used, but they’ll be used in that sequence stated in those exit principles.  Now, that leaves a lot of questions that aren’t clear—for example, how the tools will be used, just how much draining will be done, and so on.  So at this point, it’s hard to judge; I think they anticipate that tools will be used in some size, but that the System will still have a lot of reserves, even at the time that the target funds rate is lifted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there are still unclear aspects regarding the use and amount of draining tools, but there is no argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 18.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, at some point I’d like us to have a fulsome discussion of this.  I don’t want to be cheeky, but I think of Professor Harold Hill in The Music Man; it’s the “Think System.”  No need to practice playing the instrument—if you just think through the tune, you will play the tune.  And of course, if you remember that movie, it ends up well.  The River City Boys’ Band marches into the room and plays Minuet in G.  It’s not perfectly tuned, but it works.  We’ve never done this before.  We have a substantially sized balance sheet.  And I hope we can have—the timing is not right now—a very fulsome discussion of this because executing this is going to be quite an exercise. I do have one suggestion, as we go through time, in terms of looking at the effect of the outcomes here on our balance sheet and our income statement.  Most of the discussions and the articulations I’ve seen are on the baseline scenario.  It might be helpful now to provide for a view on the balance sheet and income statement according to the alternative scenarios we have that have been laid out by the staff.  I don’t believe that’s been done—at least I have not seen it. I  think that would be very helpful, just with respect to what the sensitivities are going forward. And then eventually, think through aloud how this might actually happen—working with you all, because you have all of the information or most of the information.  Again, I hope that we all can march into that room and at least play a decent tune, and it works out beautifully, and we end up with Marian, because she was the star. But I am concerned that we can do a great deal of academic work here.  I don’t know how we’re going to test the system.  I know you’ve been tweaking a little bit to try to see how it responds.  I want to express my concern that, having not done this before, we’re going to have to think through very carefully, using the expertise of the Desk, which, again, I would argue is unparalleled.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses his desire for a thorough discussion and suggests that alternative scenarios should be considered. He also expresses concern about the potential challenges of implementing the plan but acknowledges the expertise of the Desk. Overall, the speaker's tone is cooperative and supportive.


Passage number 19.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Was your question about the balance sheet in reference to income and capital losses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 20.
 MR. FISHER.  There are two points.  One is in terms of how we execute a draining strategy when we are ready, and we’re not there.  The second point is understanding better, under alternative scenarios, what the impact is on our balance sheet and income statement of those scenarios obtaining, because right now, I believe, we base everything on the baseline scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents two points for discussion but does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 21.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, that’s not correct.  We’ve done lots of alternative scenarios with much higher interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, that's not correct. We've done lots of alternative scenarios with much higher interest rates. 

Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "No, that's not correct" indicates that the speaker disagrees with something that was said previously.


Passage number 22.
 MR. FISHER.  Have we shared it with the group.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. It is a simple question about sharing something with a group.


Passage number 23.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, I think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: and here's why:

In the absence of the actual passage, it is impossible to determine conclusively whether there is contention or disagreement. However, based on the statement alone, the use of the phrase "and here's why" suggests that the speaker will provide reasons or evidence to support their viewpoint. This implies that there may be a differing opinion or an argument to be made. Thus, it is likely that there is some level of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 24.
 MR. SACK.  Yes, it was in an FOMC memo.  We actually update those projections every round for our own internal purposes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the projections are updated every round for internal purposes.


Passage number 25.
 MR. FISHER.  If you could share those, I would be grateful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is expressing gratitude for something the speaker said they would do.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 26.
MR. SACK.  Could I make a few comments about the reserve draining part of your question. I think it is important to realize that we face a considerable amount of uncertainty about how markets will behave as we drain and what the right strategy should be.  And that uncertainty comes because we’ve never observed how markets act with our ability to pay interest on reserves, except for when we’ve been pinned against the zero bound.  So we don’t know the strength of that magnet for other short-term interest rates, and we’ve never used these tools in large size before.  And not only that—I would add to the list that there are many regulatory reform efforts under way that could substantially affect the structure and functioning of money markets.  So I agree that we face many areas of uncertainty, and I think in some sense, those uncertainties are going to require us to learn along the way and to figure this out.  That’s not to say that we shouldn’t do as much advance planning as possible, but some of this is going to be inherently unpredictable in terms of how markets react, and we’ll have to make adjustments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there is uncertainty about how markets will behave as they drain reserves and what the right strategy should be. This indicates a lack of agreement or consensus on the best approach to take.


Passage number 27.
 MR. FISHER.  And if I recall correctly, we were starting to test a little bit the reverse repos, fleshing out our muscle, developing that capability.  I was just making the simple point that you obviously realize, but we’re going to have to do a little bit more testing because right now, it’s mostly theoretical, and yet we’re going to have to exercise it at some point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a point about the need for more testing before implementing a new capability, which is a practical and logical statement.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me observe a couple of things.  First, we have three distinct approaches to exiting.  We have the various tools for draining reserves, including the time deposits and the reverse repos.  We have the interest rate on excess reserves, which, in theory, should work all by itself.  And then, third, of course, we have asset sales, which will always work.  So we know we’ve got a set of different tools that are complementary, and we can use them in different combinations. The other observation is, while we haven’t done this in the United States—and, obviously, there are institutional differences and so on—these are very widely used around the world.  The Bank of Japan, the ECB, and others, of course, use tools like this quite successfully.  So, again, there may be institutional factors we have to take into account, but I don’t want to overstate the uncertainty about whether we can drain, even if there is some bumpiness at some point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making observations and stating that there are different tools available for exiting, which have been used successfully by other central banks around the world.


Passage number 29.
 MR. FISHER.  That was one of the reasons I was curious as to what the market seems to be expecting us to do, too, because we have to deal with that factor as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply expressing his curiosity about the market's expectations and acknowledging that they need to consider those expectations in their decision-making.


Passage number 30.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 31.
 MR. FISHER.  And perhaps provide—maybe “guidance” is too strong a word—at least some orientation for fleshing out those expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Fisher is suggesting providing orientation or guidance for better understanding and implementing expectations.


Passage number 32.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. The signaling problem is very difficult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "The signaling problem is very difficult" is a statement of fact and does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 33.
 I note that when we put out last summer the principles of exit, which we intended just to reassure— MR. FISHER.  Provide a framework.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about something they did in the past.


Passage number 34.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. —the general view is that we were basically ready to exit at that point.  And so we have to be very careful about how we communicate.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a general view and emphasizing the need for careful communication. There is no conflicting opinion or debate presented.


Passage number 35.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, as usual, a crisp and excellent presentation here.  I have a couple of questions on exhibit 1, panel 3, “Macroeconomic Conditions That Would Prompt First Rate Hike.”  I’m looking at this lower-left corner here, which says that the market, I guess, thinks that we would raise rates if headline inflation was 1 percent and unemployment was 6½ percent.  I’m not sure how to interpret that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a speaker's questions regarding a particular exhibit and asks for clarification on its interpretation.


Passage number 36.
 MR. SACK.  I think you interpreted it correctly.  As I said in my remarks, the slope of this line could be seen as reflecting the type of tradeoff you would have in a Taylor rule.  Andactually, in terms of magnitude, the slope is not that different from what you would get if you apply the Taylor (1999) rule to this. So I think that just reflects the tradeoff that the FOMC would wait until the unemployment rate got relatively low if inflation were running at that low level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with the interpretation and providing further explanation for their assertion.


Passage number 37.
 MR. BULLARD.  All right. It just strikes me as a bit of a mismatch between, maybe, market expectations and what I think the Committee would actually do in that circumstance, because we have talked a lot about disinflation pressures or deflationary pressures.  When we’ve gotten close to 1 percent in the past, that’s made everybody nervous, including me.  And so I don’t know if it’s a mismatch or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 38.
 MR. SACK.  Well, to state the obvious, this is a very oversimplified version of the reaction function, which was noted in the written comments.  So, clearly, market participants see a number of other factors affecting the timing, not just these two variables.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges that the stated version of the reaction function is oversimplified and points out that market participants consider other factors that affect timing.


Passage number 39.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  On exhibit 1, panel 6, “Breakeven Inflation Rates,” five-year rates have gone up.  You cited energy prices in part.  I think that over a five-year time horizon, like us, they would see through energy price movements that are perceived to be transitory.  So I’m not sure you can cite energy prices over a five-year time horizon as driving those inflation expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is expressing his uncertainty and questioning the validity of citing energy prices as the driving force behind inflation expectations over a five-year time horizon.


Passage number 40.
 MR. SACK. Well, if you just mechanically measure the effects on headline CPI from the rise in futures prices, and don’t assume a full reversal of those energy prices, then you get some effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement about the methodology of measuring the effects on headline CPI and the potential outcome.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 41.
 MR. BULLARD.  So you’d say, to the extent that energy price increases are very persistent or permanent, that would feed through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is stating his point of view, but it is not clear whether the other person agrees with him or has a different opinion.


Passage number 42.
 MR. SACK.  Right—and have some persistence.  Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 43.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What’s happened to the forward prices for one to five years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a question about the forward prices for one to five years without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 44.
 MR. SACK.  Of breakevens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Of breakevens" is not enough to determine any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 45.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of the breakevens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions the concept of "breakevens" without providing any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 46.
 MR. SACK. Clearly, the biggest effects are at the very short end of the breakeven curve, the first year or two, which is consistent with that story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a fact about the biggest effects being at the very short end of the breakeven curve. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 47.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  And then my third quick question here—exhibit 3, panel 15, “Shorter-Term Interest Rates.”  We’ve got the three-month Treasury bill rate coming off zero, which is the first time that’s happened in a while.  What’s the potential for that to go higher.  Or I guess the question would be, what’s the future of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question and seeking information about the potential future of the three-month Treasury bill rate.


Passage number 48.
 MR. SACK.  Well, it’s hard to say. I wouldn’t anticipate that it will continue to drift up substantially from here. And especially if it is, in part, a supply-related story, we would expect those supply effects not to continue to work in this direction.  Both the sales from our portfolio and the bulge in the issuance of bills will come to an end by the middle of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and making conclusions based on their understanding of the situation.


Passage number 49.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Brian, isn’t there a slightly seasonal effect as you go into the tax season.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply asking if there is a seasonal effect that occurs during tax season.


Passage number 50.
 MR. SACK.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The text does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 51.
  The increase in bill supply is—I didn’t say that—a seasonal effect, so it should— MR. BULLARD.  Did that happen last year as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question and clarification being sought.


Passage number 52.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It typically happens as you’re going into the tax season.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something typically happens during tax season.


Passage number 53.
 MR. SACK.  Yes, it’s just a bit more aggressive and earlier this year than the market estimated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing a difference in timing and intensity compared to the market estimates.


Passage number 54.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 55.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In order to answer the question, I need a specific passage or context where President Williams is mentioned.


Passage number 56.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 57.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes, I have a question on exhibit 1, panel 5—on the term premium on the 10-year Treasury.  Brian, I think you said that currently, your staff estimate is that the LSAPs are pushing down the term premium on the 10-year Treasury by 60 basis points.  So my question, then, is, given our baseline scenario for what our balance sheet is going to look like over the next several years, with exit at, say, late 2014 for the funds rate, how do you see the path for this effect of the LSAPs over the next couple of years.  Or specifically, what do you think the effect of the LSAPs will be on the 10-year Treasury yield, say, at the end of 2014.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Williams is questioning Brian's statement about the effect of LSAPs on the 10-year Treasury yield and asking for more clarification on the path and potential future effects of LSAPs.


Passage number 58.
 MR. SACK. The staff model will have a trajectory of these effects, and without further balance sheet actions, they would gradually diminish from this point.  I don’t know exactly how much is unwound by the end of 2014, but I would guess about half or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Sack without any opposing views or arguments being presented.


Passage number 59.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Your question was about the end of 2014.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement of fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 60.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or expressing any opinions that could lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 61.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without having access to the specific passage mentioned, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the dialogue between the individuals identified as "Williams."


Passage number 62.
 MR. ENGLISH.  The staff estimates have, at the end of 2014, an effect under the Tealbook assumptions of about 25 basis points, down from about 60.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the staff estimates for the effect under the Tealbook assumptions.


Passage number 63.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. However, without the actual passage provided, it is impossible to accurately determine if there is any contention or disagreement between parties.


Passage number 64.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply shows gratitude and agreement.


Passage number 65.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing no further questions, let’s turn to the economic situation.  Oh, I’m sorry.  Without Debbie, I don’t know what would happen to this place.  Could I have a motion to ratify domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 66.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that someone named Ms. Yellen has moved. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 67.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Item 2, “Economic Situation.” Let me turn to Bill Wascher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 68.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions. President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and then asking questions to President Lockhart.


Passage number 69.
 MR. LOCKHART.  We have some, I think, good research about the sensitivity of the U.S. economy to spikes in oil prices.  Jim Hamilton has done good work.  Do you have an equivalent sense of the sensitivity of the European economy to strong spikes coming from geopolitical events.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Lockhart acknowledges the good research on the sensitivity of the U.S. economy to oil price spikes and asks if there is an equivalent understanding for the European economy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 70.
 MR. KAMIN. We have indeed done some analysis on that.  And I should say that there are some different crosscurrents in terms of the effects that make it difficult to be very certain about these effects.  On the one hand, the United States’ economy is more oil-dependent than is Europe’s in terms of efficiency of oil use.  It’s also true that the United States has lower specific taxes on oil use, so a given increment to oil prices results in a smaller percentage increase in retail gasoline prices in Europe than in the United States.  On the other hand, the United States has less import dependence than Europe.  Europe imports just about all of its oil, while in the U.S., it’s not a full 100 percent.  So these factors offset each other. I guess the analysis that we’ve done to date suggests that the U.S. economy is probably more vulnerable to an oil price shock than the advanced foreign economies, in general.  And that likely applies to Europe, too.  We’ll probably need to do more analysis on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents different factors that make it difficult to determine the exact effects of an oil price shock on the U.S. economy compared to Europe's. There is contention or disagreement about the vulnerability of the U.S. economy compared to advanced foreign economies, but more analysis is needed to reach a conclusive answer.


Passage number 71.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any questions or topics that would indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are "other questions" without providing any further details.


Passage number 72.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On the forecast summary, the bottom-right panel, “Q4/Q4 Changes in Real GDP and Unemployment since 1990”—this is a statement of Okun’s law. I’m going to do some ocular regression here.  One thing that has struck me about the data is that unemployment obviously goes very high during recessions and drifts down slowly during expansions.  And you can see that in this picture to some degree because the two dots that are far up in the left part of this panel, plus probably the three black dots that are not labeled, are likely all recession years in this picture.  So one hypothesis that you might have is just that a lot of the fit of this regression is coming from a few data points that are really the recession data points.  And if you throw those five points out, you’d probably get a horizontal line that would say that there’s not much of a relationship for the expansion periods.  So I would see recessions as a time when labor market relationships are disturbed a lot, and things break down, and then they just slowly recover during the expansion periods.  But it doesn’t matter too much whether you’re growing at 2 percent or 3 percent or 4 percent.  What do you think of that. Probably not much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their observations and a hypothesis but does not express any disagreement with anyone else's views or opinions.


Passage number 73.
 MR. WASCHER.  I think your observation that, obviously, unemployment goes up a lot during recessions and has come down more slowly is certainly true.  Over the last three recessions, we saw the jobless recovery in the early 1990s, the jobless recovery after the 2001 recession, and then again this time as well.  And that contrasts with earlier recessions, where you saw unemployment come down much more quickly.  So there is a question of whether there’s been some sort of regime change in this Okun’s law relationship since, say, the late 1980s or the 1990s.  And that’s something we’re thinking about and working on. At this point, the other thing I’d note is that for each of those recessions, we can point to idiosyncratic factors that may have resulted in that kind of pattern.  For example, in the 2001period, running up to that, there was this big high-tech boom, and it looked as though there were some adjustment costs for firms putting that high-tech equipment in place.  And so the productivity gains that went along with it came later, and that contributed to a big boost in productivity and a slower rise in employment that period.  It’s not as obvious in the early 1990s, but there are stories of something similar, when firms reorganized their management and organizational systems to eliminate some middle management.  And in this period, obviously— regardless of what you think about whether there’s a regime change or not, I think the most recent period, clearly, is an extraordinary event.  And even if there is a regime change, the story we’re telling about firms becoming so frightened about the prospects that they really slashed employment quite sharply during the recession is probably still there. So, again, we’re thinking about these issues.  Those are good observations that you make.  I would say that this is a work in progress, and we’re still thinking about how we should be modeling our Okun’s law relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the observation that unemployment tends to rise quickly during recessions and come down more slowly during the recovery period. The speaker acknowledges that there may be a change in this relationship in recent years but also points out specific factors that may have influenced the patterns observed in past recessions. The speaker also mentions that the current period is an extraordinary event and that the analysis is still a work in progress.


Passage number 74.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It seems as though it goes the other way, because we’ve seen in recent recessions pretty strong GDP recoveries but surprisingly slow declines in unemployment. Is that fair.  But in this case, we’re getting a weak GDP growth and a sharper decline in unemployment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a perceived discrepancy between GDP recoveries and declines in unemployment during recessions, and then acknowledges that the current situation is different, with weak GDP growth and sharper declines in unemployment. The statement is more of an observation and analysis rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 75.
 MR. WASCHER.  Yes, that’s right.  That’s the extraordinary aspect of this piece that I think is different from the shallow recessions of the 1990 and 2001 piece—that we are seeing some gradual improvement in economic activity, and we’re seeing the reversal of the extreme job cuts that took place in late 2008 and 2009; they’re reversing themselves both in terms of the unemployment rate and in terms of productivity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statement that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply describes the positive aspects of the current economic situation.


Passage number 76.
MR. BULLARD.  But Mr. Chairman, my point is just that if you take out the recession years, you won’t have much of a fit in this regression here.  The fit is coming mostly from those recession years, and because economic growth is slow and unemployment goes way up, in the regression, that contributes a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is making a point about the regression analysis and the influence of recession years on the fit of the regression. He is not challenging or disagreeing with any other person or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 77.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I ask what this looked like when the unemployment rate fell from, say, 5¼ down to 4.4 percent during those periods of relatively strong expansion.  Wouldn’t the relationship hold up. It’s not in the data that you’re looking at, but it’s a regularity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is suggesting that the relationship between the unemployment rate and strong expansion may hold up based on his own reasoning, while the speaker he is addressing is implying that the data they are looking at does not support that regularity.


Passage number 78.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It tracks reasonably well through it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that suggests that something tracks reasonably well through a certain situation.


Passage number 79.
 MR. EVANS. I don’t think it’s just recessions and downturns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 80.
 MR. LACKER.  There’s that research paper by Jon Hilsenrath in yesterday’s Wall Street Journal. That scatterplot suggests a more robust relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply referring to a research paper and presenting information from it without expressing any opposing views or disagreements.


Passage number 81.
 MR. EVANS. We bring more than just our knowledge of the picture to the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they have more than just their knowledge of the picture to contribute to the question.


Passage number 82.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, in estimating these things, you can estimate it over the last 30 years, or you can estimate it over a longer period, and as Bill was alluding to and as you were alluding to, you can get hints in the more recent episodes that the cyclical dynamics may have changed some. But in any event, you can go back over, say, the last 30 years and the relationship fits reasonably well—as President Evans was saying—in those periods when it wasn’t a recession but the unemployment rate was going down to 4½ percent.  That said, your observation that a lot of the identification is given by recessions—well, that’s true for 95 percent of all estimates of cyclical dynamics we get. The recessions are where you get a lot of identification, as the unemployment rate moves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting different ways to estimate cyclical dynamics and acknowledges that recent episodes may have changed these dynamics. They also agree with President Evans' statement about the relationship between unemployment rate and recessions.


Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 84.
  MR. PLOSSER.  Yes, the same theme but going in a little different direction. I may not ask this question quite right, so maybe you’ll interpret it correctly and in a sensible way.  You posed the issue about, well, we’ve gotten stronger employment than we thought but continued weak growth—the issue we’ve been talking about.  So over the last several months—actually, most of the fall—we kept having revisions up in employment data.  They come out with an initial number, and there’s been this string of upward revisions.  When the GDP data come out, we see an upward revision in both income and unit labor costs.  We continue to get the pretty strong employment numbers into the first of the year.  I guess there will be another revision of GDP coming up later this month for the fourth quarter.  I understand the risks that you point out.  What I’m trying to ask is, at what point in your thinking about how the economy is evolving do you begin to shift your view about the forecast into a somewhat more positive framework. Is it going to take until we get final revisions of GDP to convince you that maybe growth was underestimated.  How much longer would you need of 250,000 jobs being created every month. I’m trying to understand where the staff’s tipping point is to begin to take a stronger path on board in your forecast, because right now, you seem to be inching it up, but with some reluctance.  So at what point, and how do you think about taking it on board more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. Mr. Plosser is questioning the Fed's reluctance to adjust their forecast in light of stronger employment and upward revisions in GDP data. He is suggesting that the staff's forecast should reflect the positive indicators and is trying to understand at what point they will acknowledge and incorporate this information.


Passage number 85.
 MR. WASCHER.  Right.  I think we see the tensions as pretty wide this time, and we are fairly uncertain.  What we haven’t seen that we’d like to see is a little more strength on the spending side, the incoming spending data.  The big GDP revisions we’ll get will be in late July when they do the annual revision, and then we’ll know more about 2011 and whether that ends up getting revised up more or not.  But I think we’ve been reluctant to move up the forecast very much just because we haven’t seen the strength in consumer spending, in particular, and in final demand, in general, that we feel we need to justify a stronger growth forecast going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their observations and uncertainties about the economy.


Passage number 86.
MR. PLOSSER.  So in that context, you’re really going to be focusing on the spending side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the focus will be on the spending side in a particular context.


Passage number 87.
 MR. WASCHER. I think that’s right.  Again, as I noted, we’re really uncertain if our story is right in terms of firms doing some catch-up hiring to make up for the big job cuts earlier. That could still be going on, and I would think we’re weighing that as a possible risk. That itself will generate some income gains and some additional consumption, but we’d like to see more support from the spending data in terms of our baseline forecast.  We have, obviously, put in an upside-risk forecast in the Tealbook as an alternative simulation, which I think could be something that’s going on and that we just haven’t picked up yet.  But from the perspective of our baseline forecast, we’ve basically been reluctant to move up a lot because of the lack of supporting information on the spending side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing uncertainties and potential risks in their forecast, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 88.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Just to build on what Bill said, when we put the forecast together and we were deciding how much to revise down potential output to try to make the story hang together more, we could have gone further to try to better align what we saw on the employment side with the spending side, but we didn’t, in part because we were implicitly putting weight on the idea that we could get data revisions.  But, say, come this summer when the BEA does its annual benchmark, we could easily find ourselves having higher output in 2011 than we saw.  So we definitely did not dismiss that possibility.  We’re putting some sort of probability on that event.  We would not be shocked to find out that GDP did grow more strongly in 2011 than the published data now show.  If we had dismissed that entirely, we probably would have had to revise down potential GDP even more.  So we were trying, I think, to do that filtering exercise that you’re describing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 89.
 MR. WASCHER.  Just one more thing, Dave. I think we still also see significant headwinds facing the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the significant challenges or obstacles that the economy is currently facing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 90.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The use of "yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 91.
 MR. WASCHER. So, again, as I mentioned, the uncertainty about Europe, the problems in the housing market, only slow improvement in credit markets, the big fiscal restraint that looks as though it’s going to come on next year—that suggests to us that a moderate pace of recovery is our best baseline forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states his opinion on the matter without any opposing views presented.


Passage number 92.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply a polite expression of gratitude and a formal salutation.


Passage number 93.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I wanted to follow up on this line of questioning, which I think is quite interesting. In some sense, what you’re trying to do is to figure out how much is supply, how much is demand.  That’s a very loose way of characterizing things.  My question is, to what extent do you think about the performance of your inflation forecast relative to actual inflation when you’re thinking about your revisions for potential output.  As I look at page 34 of the Tealbook A, which tracks the evolution of the staff’s forecast, unemployment doesn’t look that bad.  On real GDP, the economy has underperformed relative to what the staff forecast, and inflation has been higher than what the staff forecast. So, to make my question sharp, to what extent does the behavior of inflation enter into your thinking about what potential output is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question seeking clarification on how inflation affects the thinking about potential output.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 94.
 MR. WASCHER.  It does enter in.  I think the problem is that taking much signal from inflation is difficult because the Phillips curve that we use is so flat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "I think the problem is that taking much signal from inflation is difficult because the Phillips curve that we use is so flat" suggests a different perspective or opinion than the previous statement.


Passage number 95.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. It’s very flat, isn’t it.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker simply agrees with the statement that the area is flat. There is no sign of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 96.
 MR. WASCHER. It’s hard to know.  There are other things that are affecting inflation as well. I think it’s just hard to know how much signal to take from that.  So we do look at it; it is part of our system in terms of estimating potential output.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement providing information about how inflation is considered in their system for estimating potential output.


Passage number 97.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Bill, how flat is it.  You’ve probably told me this before.  On page 30, you have the box “Framework for Board Staff Inflation Projections.” What’s the beta in that regression.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple conversation where one person asks a question and the other person acknowledges that they may have answered it before.


Passage number 98.
 MR. WASCHER. The beta in the regression that was actually used to do the simulations is 0.065.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It presents a factual statement about the beta value used in the regression simulations.


Passage number 99.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage presents a simple statement or response without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 100.
 MR. WASCHER.  But I think that’s a little bit hard to interpret. It depends on the lag structure.  In a model that has longer lags of inflation, it’s something closer to 0.2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. Wascher is expressing his opinion about a specific topic (the interpretation of something based on the lag structure) without any contention or disagreement with another party.


Passage number 101.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  There’s another point, I think, worth mentioning on page 34, which shows the evolution of the change in our forecast over time.  I think it’s fair to say that if you went back to the forecasts that were made in 2010, the weights we were putting on different models have evolved since then.  And so the model that we are putting the most weight on now is the one that’s described in the box, which I would describe as saying, look, longer-run inflation expectations are very well anchored. If you go back to 2010, we allowed much more scope to the idea that longer-run inflation expectations would get dragged down in the course of this deep recession.  As we went through the course of 2010, we didn’t see that happen.  We go into 2011, and expectations just stayed remarkably flat no matter what. And so we’ve implicitly shifted our weight.  If you look at that picture, I think that’s a major effect on our thinking.  Plus, there were also incoming data at the time and that sort of stuff.  But at that time, we were thinking that we would end up at 1 percent, as opposed to, once we were in 2011 and today, thinking that it’s just remarkable how well anchored expectations are and that we will tend to—I won’t call it levitate up—just gravitate back to 2 percent as the economy comes out of the slump.  We really upped our weight on that view of the world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is discussing the evolution of their thinking and the shifts in their weight on different models. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 102.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 103.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 104.
 MR. LACKER.  I’d like to follow up on this, if I could, Mr. Chairman.  So despite the evolution you just described, you still are forecasting inflation to return to 1½ pretty soon and stay there a while.  From this box, this analysis on pages 30 and 31, I take it that’s because the size of the gap trumps the stability of expectations still.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is questioning the chairman's forecast for inflation to return to 1½ percent and stay there, suggesting that the size of the gap between the current situation and the expected stability of inflation expectations may be a factor.


Passage number 105.
 MR. WASCHER.  I think that over the 2012–13 period, it’s partly that the gap is still so very large. It’s also the fact that any pass-through from imported energy prices is expected to fade, and so that pushes core inflation back down. If you look at the extension going out farther, it drifts up toward 2 percent as the gap continues to close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is discussing factors that contribute to the widening and narrowing of the inflation gap.


Passage number 106.
 MR. LACKER.  Is expected inflation around 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a statement of fact or expectation without any opposing viewpoint or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 107.
 MR. WASCHER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided a passage for me to analyze. Could you please provide the passage so that I can determine whether there is contention or disagreement?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is a disagreement or contention because it starts with "Mr. Reifschneider. Yes," suggesting that someone named Mr. Reifschneider may have a contrasting opinion or viewpoint.


Passage number 109.
 MR. LACKER.  So I would expect that the fading of those things leads it to go to 2, not to something below 2.  Something is pushing it below 2, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 110.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right, it’s because of the high level of the gap.  So that’s holding down compensation and marginal costs and so on and so forth, and that’s keeping inflation subdued.  But as that fades, you go back to 2 percent. In terms of thinking about the forecast, if you thought that there was less slack than we estimate in the forecast, or alternatively, if you thought the unemployment rate was going to come down a lot faster, you would have a different inflation forecast, assuming that you had our model.  If you had a different model, you’d have another, different inflation forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the relationship between the level of slack in the economy, compensation, marginal costs, and inflation forecast.


Passage number 111.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement stated in the given passage as it only mentions the role or position of a Vice Chairman without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 112.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It doesn’t seem like an unreasonable forecast to me because if you look at labor compensation costs, they’re very subdued.  Average hourly earnings is about 2 percent year over year.  The employment cost index is running about 2¼ percent year over year.  Put in any reasonable productivity number—1, 1½ percent—and you’re going to get labor costs rising at 1 percent a year. So it seems completely reasonable that if the oil price pressures were to abate, you could see inflation somewhat below 2 percent for a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement is based on an analysis of labor compensation costs and suggests that inflation could be somewhat below 2 percent if oil price pressures were to diminish.


Passage number 113.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Just a quick clarification.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply requesting clarification.


Passage number 114.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since the given passage only states "President Plosser" and does not provide any additional context or information, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Further information is needed.


Passage number 115.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Your assumptions about the behavior of oil prices and commodity prices—you’re forecasting core and not headline, in some sense.  I have two questions.  One is, how do you then construct your headline forecast.  And, two, in the Phillips curve model that you have here, regarding the shocks to oil and commodities that may enter into this as special factors, do you assume they are zero-mean shocks, or do they have a mean that’s different than zero. In principle, if your inflation forecast was 2 percent and that was your target, and you treated the inflation movements as a zero-mean-distribution variable, you may have the wrong mean for the distribution of those shocks.  So I’m wondering how those two things interact and then, ultimately, how you construct your headline PCE forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage is a series of questions and statements made by Mr. Plosser. It does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 116.
 MR. WASCHER. To start at the latter question, the headline forecast is, basically, we make a projection of consumer food prices and consumer energy prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement about making projections for consumer food prices and consumer energy prices.


Passage number 117.
 MR. PLOSSER.  And then add it to your forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply suggesting a course of action to add something to the forecast.


Passage number 118.
 MR. WASCHER.  And then we add it to the core figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the mentioned figure is added to the core figures.


Passage number 119.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser's response appears to be a neutral acknowledgement or agreement with the statement or question that was made prior to his response.


Passage number 120.
 MR. WASCHER. In terms of the pass-through of commodity price shocks or energy price shocks, we use relative price shocks—that is, changes in energy prices relative to core.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the method used to measure the pass-through of commodity or energy price shocks.


Passage number 121.
 MR. PLOSSER. Great—thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 122.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are we ready to start our go-round.  Why don’t we start with the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The individuals are discussing the order of their activities, but they do not express any opposing views or disagreement.


Passage number 123.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements or arguments that would suggest contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Rosengren.


Passage number 124.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The data since the last meeting are consistent with improved financial market conditions and continued progress in labor markets.  On the other hand, the spending data have been very weak.  How should we reconcile these differences.  Focusing on financial and labor market conditions, one might conclude that the recovery is gaining traction and that spending will improve as higher personal income and wealth lead to a virtuous cycle that propels us more quickly than the Tealbook forecast to full employment.  Alternatively, a focus on the weak spending data would imply that the improvement in incoming data is temporary and the recent improvements in labor and financial market data are not sustainable if the economy continues to grow at only a 2 percent rate. It may take several quarters before we know which perspective better reflects the current economy. I am certainly hopeful that we are finally beginning to see a more robust recovery. Financial market conditions are clearly improving.  Some of the recent improvements reflect the removal of significant imminent downside tail risk.  At least for now, Europe seems to have reduced the risk of a Lehman moment that had seriously hampered investors’ willingness to commit to a better outlook.  The S&P 500 has risen roughly 8 percent since the beginning of the year.  Bond spreads and CDS spreads have improved.  Bond issuance has been strong.  The financial market recovery has gathered steam and reflects increased optimism about the likely economic outcomes.  However, my enthusiasm is tempered by the fragility of some of the financial pillars, particularly the outlook for Europe.  Peripheral European countries seem to be consistently missing deficit projections, rising unemployment in many European countries threatens both economic and political stability, and there is significant concern that the improvement in financial fundamentals is primarily due to special central bank actions, not changes in the fundamentals of these economies. Labor market conditions have also improved.  Firms seem more confident that the domestic economy is on the mend, which is reflected in the improved payroll employment numbers over the past three months.  Again, however, there are reasons to be cautious.  While residential investment seems to be improving, construction employment declined in February. Government employment in February declined by only 6,000 jobs, but future government cuts remain quite likely and raise the possibility of looming additional cuts in government employment.  Furthermore, the employment-to-population ratio for those aged 25 to 34 in February was 74.7, still more than 4 percentage points lower than it was four years ago.  Finally, these employment figures can turn around quickly if demand doesn’t follow suit soon.  Just witness the beginning of last year. And the spending data have been disappointing.  Since the start of the recovery, real final sales have been growing at only a 1.7 percent rate, not much different than what I expect for this quarter.  However, there are reasons to be optimistic.  Housing and state and local spending, two sectors that have been unusually weak during this recovery, are showing some tentative signs of life.  The improved employment growth and increased equity prices should, I hope, help support consumption, which, outside of the purchase of autos, has remained quite weak.  Furthermore, if firms start hiring, it may be that we will see more business fixed investment than I currently expect. In summary, financial markets and recent employment numbers make me hopeful, but I would be more convinced once we see more evidence of a robust recovery in spending.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting different perspectives on the current state of the economy, acknowledging both positive and negative factors and expressing cautious optimism.


Passage number 125.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There are no indications of contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of President Fisher suggest a polite and positive tone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 126.
 MR. KAMIN.  We’ve heard complaints from Mexican officials about that, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that there have been complaints from Mexican officials, indicating disagreement or contention between the officials and the subject being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
   MR. FISHER.  Yes.  It’s not just from Mexico, though, if you talk to the shippers, for example, which I find interesting. And then, lastly, I think we should probably drill further down in terms of the real effects outside the financial contagion aspect because it’s still not clear to me how much, in terms of trade of goods and services, is with the PIIGS.  Our numbers show it’s a very small amount.  And of course, you have to take into account Rotterdam as a distribution point.  But mainly U.S. exports to Europe, which are 13 percent or so of our exports or whatever the number may be— roughly five-sixths of that goes to the core countries and not to the peripherals.  So I would like to spend some more time on those data.  I don’t wish to discuss it now, but I think we still have an amorphous concern.  You hear less about it with the CEOs and business operators.  It’s very ill defined.  And I don’t want to hang too much of my hat on the downside risk of Europe.  It’s a risk, but we can’t quite put our fingers on exactly what that risk is.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. 

The speaker, Mr. Fisher, expresses skepticism and uncertainty regarding the potential negative impacts of the situation in Europe. He mentions that the data shows a small amount of trade with the PIIGS and suggests that the concerns about Europe are "amorphous" and "ill defined." He also contrasts his views with those of CEOs and business operators who he claims are less concerned. This indicates a disagreement or difference of opinion on the extent and nature of the risks posed by the European situation.


Passage number 128.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude to President Lockhart, and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 129.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the Sixth District, grassroots intelligence suggests more upside potential than is evident in the accumulating data, which themselves have been, on balance, positive and encouraging.  In our most recent cycle of contacts, we heard quite upbeat statements on current conditions and expectations.  Most reports on consumer spending were positive, certainly stronger than the January data indicated.  Sales of home appliances, furniture, and autos were described as especially strong.  Reports by firms of rising order books were consistent with improving measured manufacturing activity in the Southeast.  We heard reports of an uptick in corporate interest and business fixed investment projects, and more of this activity seems to be capital expansion aimed at growth opportunities as opposed to replacement. Lending activities by banks, while still soft, are growing, and especially   lending by larger regional banks to larger companies.  Bankers reported that credit quality of applicants is improving, and businesses noted that availability of credit has improved.  While there is growing optimism, we heard expressions of continuing caution, especially from small and mid-sized businesses.  The reports we heard suggest that businesses continue to carefully weigh all decisions that add to the cost base.  So even though performance and outlook may be improving, we heard that this may not translate into new hiring in the near term for many firms. Turning to the national outlook and the comparison of my forecast to that of the Tealbook, Atlanta’s economic growth projection and the Board staff’s are now essentially the same after the modest upward revision in this meeting’s Tealbook.  We differ from the Tealbook outlook as regarding inflation.  We in Atlanta are more confident of measures of inflation rising to the Committee’s target. We see less influence of economic slack as a restraint on the underlying price trend.  My outlook projects headline and core inflation near our 2 percent objective over the near and medium terms.  In support of this view, it’s worth noting that we heard mention of potential bottlenecks in a number of industries from our pre-meeting business contacts.  We heard growing expectations of price increases coming soon if the upside potential to economic activity materializes.  One of my directors said that prices can be characterized as a coiled spring.  The idea is that businesses that have heretofore been suffering margin squeeze will react quickly to raise prices if the recovery accelerates and demand picks up noticeably. That said, most do not feel they have much pricing power in the current environment. As regards the balance of risks to both economic growth and inflation, I am inclined not to provide a single view that nets the upside and downside factors.  Rather, I am thinking in terms of risk around a base-case scenario and then an additional assessment incorporating tail risk. In my base case, the evidence that economic activity appears to be gaining strength and   scope leads me to a view that there is upside potential over and above my current growth outlook.  As suggested earlier, I also see some upside risk in the inflation outlook.  As regards tail risk, I see less possibility of a financial event emanating from Europe, triggering instability here with a knock-on effect on the real economy.  But the potential for an oil price spike and other disruptive effects tied to geopolitical developments in the Middle East represents a significant and intensifying risk to my outlook.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It provides information and observations from different sources and perspectives, but there is no explicit disagreement between them.


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 131.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The reports from my nonfinancial business contacts continue to be positive.  Much of their commentary began with the statement, “It’s like I discussed last time.”  The reports were good, but they generally were not yet of the kind we’d expect if we were in the midst of a truly significant acceleration in activity.  The possible exception was those comments from the automakers, though, where the recent increases in sales and production were better than the improvements they had been expecting.  Their sales forecasts for 2012 have been up to about 14.5 million units, and they have visions of reaching, before too long, the trend line in sales, which they now estimate at about 15½ million units.  And the equipment manufacturers also continue to do very well.  Global demand for agricultural, mining, and simply dirt-moving equipment remains strong, although there are signs of nervousness about markets in Latin America and China.  Until this round, whenever I asked business contacts if they saw Europe slowing, they generally responded that they were nervous, but they had not yet experienced any slowing in their demand there.  However, this time, most contacts with a presence in Europe cited some deterioration in those business lines.  But they were not seeing anything dramatic, and everyone was hopeful that the most recent European policy actions would prove effective.   Our Chicago financial market contacts were quite upbeat this round.  Concerns about a financial crisis emanating from Europe have abated.  Conditions have improved in corporate credit markets, especially for high-yield bonds and in the secondary market for leveraged loans.  In general, financial participants reported a greater appetite for risk-taking.  So far, however, the risk-taking seems reasonably well controlled, and markets do not appear to be especially frothy. Turning to the outlook, the continued improvements in labor markets are extremely welcome.  More-upbeat consumer sentiment and a greater degree of optimism in financial markets also help.  However, as the Tealbook describes quite well, the good news does not seem to be translating into robust GDP growth over the next few quarters, and I share the concerns of Vice Chairman Dudley and President Rosengren on that count.  In my opinion, we should avoid complacency and the trap of lower expectations. Growth rates that are simply trend-like, or a little better, are nowhere near satisfactory.  Our policy hole continues to be enormous.  The Tealbook’s rather conservative analysis now puts the output gap at 5 percent 33 months after the trough of the Great Recession.  The outlook is seriously inconsistent with our mandate, in my opinion.  GDP growth at 2 percent in the first half of this year makes no progress in closing the output gap, and the pickup in growth that we are projecting after that is so modest that the gap is still 3 percent at the end of 2014.  The Tealbook analysis works hard to provide a fair and balanced approach to estimating the output gap.  Yes, there is uncertainty, but that doesn’t mean the gap is zero.  Uncertainty also means it could be larger.  The Tealbook’s potential output analysis is supported by the lack of inflation projections above our long-run objective; I share that view of projected inflation.  Putting all of this together, it seems like a pretty heavy burden to convincingly demonstrate that the output gap today is much smaller than 5 percentage points, and that it will be acceptably small by late 2014. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a summary of reports from business contacts and expressing their own opinion on the current economic outlook.


Passage number 132.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 133.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just have a few brief remarks on the District and the national economy.  The Eighth District economy continues to expand at a modest pace.  Contacts report increased optimism concerning the remainder of 2012.  Increased gasoline prices are causing some concern but, so far, do not seem to be altering household behavior.  District agricultural businesses are buoyant and expect another good year.  Both used and new equipment sales remain very strong, and land prices continue to show double-digit increases from one year earlier.  Auto sales and manufacturing in the District remain strong.  Firms wishing to hire often state that available workers do not have the appropriate skills.  I agree with Vice Chairman Dudley that unseasonably warm weather seems to have touched nearly all businesses, and it does give me some pause in interpreting the recent data.  I’ve often wondered if we could improve our seasonal adjustment; the wealth of data that we now have on weather wasn’t available in past decades.  I don’t have a good idea about how to proceed on that, but I’ve often wondered why we continue to talk about weather when the data are supposed to be seasonally adjusted already.  However, I do think it’s a factor in this very warm winter here. Housing in the District is showing a few signs of improvement but seems unlikely to rebound in the near term.  District bankers report intense competition for high-quality credits.  Retailers report that price increases definitely stick in the current environment. Nationally, I continue to interpret the data as generally better than expected.  The improved situation in Europe has, at least for now, been very helpful for global financial markets and for the United States in particular.  I am encouraged by improvements in U.S. labor markets, and I hope that we’ll see further progress on that dimension during the remaining months of 2012. I think a key risk going forward for the U.S. economy is the strength of the Chinese economy.  The United States can prosper with the EU in recession, but I’m less sanguine if there is a sharper-than-expected slowdown in China and emerging Asia more generally. Some contacts have cited puzzlingly weak data from China in recent weeks, even before the recent trade report.  However, for now, I remain reasonably confident that economic growth in emerging Asia will continue apace and that any implications for the United States will be minimal. One area that I do not expect to recover quickly is residential housing.  Households are overly indebted, and it will take many years to work off this debt.  This is not a matter of business cycle dynamics, but of medium- and even longer-term adjustment. There were about 50 million homeowners as of the third quarter of 2011 in the United States carrying some amount of mortgage debt.  From 1970 to 2005, the aggregate loan-to-value ratio for this group was about 60 percent.  Today, the loan-to-value ratio is in excess of 90 percent.  If we consider the 60 percent loan-to-value ratio to be the desired level or the steady-state level, households would have to pay off about $3 trillion in mortgage debt.  That’s about one-fourth of one year’s U.S. GDP.  That type of adjustment will take a very long time.  This is absolutely a collapsed housing bubble.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their observations and opinions on various economic indicators and trends.


Passage number 134.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 135.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While the improved economic data are encouraging, I’m reluctant to extrapolate this improvement all the way through the forecast horizon.  I have bumped up my GDP growth projection to 2.8 percent for this year, but my projections for 2013 and 2014 are largely unchanged at around 3 percent. Given the January and February employment reports, I edged down my unemployment rate path, and the revisions to PCE prices and rising gasoline prices have led me to shift up my inflation projection a little.While the incoming data have been encouraging, my business contacts remain cautious about the trajectory for growth.  Here’s how I would sum up their comments.  Earlier in the recovery, they expected things to get better quickly because, from past experience, the economy usually bounces back after a recession.  As this recovery has progressed, they learned not to take the recovery process for granted.  My contacts tell me that only now, in 2012, does a sustainable expansion seem to be taking hold.  Their orders are growing, and they are finally confident enough to resume some hiring.  Still, some have commented that despite the general improvement in business conditions, their customers are still cautious.  Overall, my business contacts have become more confident that the economy is on a stable expansion path, but they don’t anticipate vigorous growth and they remain cautious.  So while the strengthening of incoming data invites some optimism, my projection for the economy is still considerably less robust than it was last year at this time, when we were all forecasting much stronger growth for this year.  On a more hopeful note, I am encouraged that my contacts suggest that economic growth is on firmer footing this time around, even if they expect the trajectory to be lower. The labor market is hinting at the potential for greater resilience in the economy.  Indeed, the employment gains of the last few months have lowered my unemployment rate projection by almost ½ percentage point this year and next, but again, compared with our projections last spring, unemployment still remains high. For some time, I have also been concerned that the unemployment rate could decline more slowly than I had projected, in light of the larger numbers of people out of the labor force who might reenter the labor force as the economy recovers.  To assess this concern, my staff conducted some analysis, including labor force participation and its trend in a standard vector autoregression forecasting model. The interesting result was that, based on past recovery patterns, better GDP growth would likely foster a pickup in labor forceparticipation, but that the more rapid rate of GDP growth would be sufficient to keep the unemployment rate declining gradually. That finding would be an attractive possibility, and it helped address my concern about the unemployment rate path, but unfortunately I don’t have this faster GDP growth in my baseline forecast. On my outlook for inflation, the near-term momentum in price data led me to edge up my near-term projection.  Importantly, following upward revisions to the fourth-quarter data and a 2 percent reading for January, the current year-over-year core PCE inflation rate stands at 1.9 percent. The trimmed mean CPI-based inflation measures have also been drifting up.  Unlike my economic growth projections, when compared with March of last year, I’m expecting slightly higher inflation rates throughout the forecast horizon.  For example, last March, I had expected 2012 core PCE inflation of roughly 1.3 percent, but now I’m projecting 1.8 percent for this year, very close to our stated objective.  As for the recent jump in oil and gasoline prices, so far I’ve seen very little evidence of a repeat of the last big spike that we saw in energy prices in 2008.  Unlike during that period of time, other commodity prices have been near flat, and household energy prices have also been flat.  They have been influenced by an ample supply of natural gas and coal, as President Fisher reported, and they are actually down 1.2 percent over the last six months.  Given that household energy and motor fuel have almost equal weights in the consumer’s market basket, the softness in household energy prices should significantly mitigate the pressures from gasoline prices.  Despite the recent pickup in the inflation rate, financial markets don’t seem to expect rising inflation.  Financial market inflation expectations are well below the levels of a year ago. In assessing the risks to my outlook, I still see risk factors for economic growth being primarily to the downside, while risks to the unemployment rate remain primarily to the upside. On my inflation outlook, I continue to see the risks as broadly balanced.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker mentions that their projections for GDP growth and unemployment rate are different than they were last year. They also mention that while business contacts are more confident in the economy, they are still cautious and do not anticipate vigorous growth. Therefore, there is contention or disagreement about the expectation of stronger economic growth.


Passage number 136.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states "Thank you" and mentions President Plosser without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 137.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Economic activity in the Third District continues to improve.  Our state-coincident indicators show increased activity in each of our three states, and our leading indexes convey an accelerating pace for future activity. Benchmark revisions have slightly improved the labor market picture in Pennsylvania and have significantly improved it in Delaware, whereas New Jersey has been more neutral. Further, many of our contacts in the District appear to be noticeably more optimistic.  Manufacturing activity in the Third District as captured by our Business Outlook Survey continued to expand in March following a string of positive values that began in October after the summer retrenchment.  The March data to be released on Thursday—which, by the way, are not final yet—are likely to show a number similar to, or maybe slightly less than, the February data. Indexes for new orders will be close to zero after very strong numbers in February, indicating that activity in March was similar to that in February.  The employment index suggests further expansion of employment activity.  Also, we are heartened that we continue to see strong readings on our future indexes. These indexes remain at levels consistent with historically strong growth in our region.  General activity, shipments, and new orders are all expected to grow over the next six months.  The improved sentiment we hear among manufacturers is also present more generally. I’ve been surprised by the more upbeat expectations of many of our business contacts, including, believe it or not, some builders.  Building permits have recently shown a small uptick in our region, but the industry remains very depressed.  Some of the optimism in this sector is due to increased activity in January, but, as many people have pointed out, that may be somewhat weather related. In anyevent, I’m getting a very different reading from contacts concerning expectations of future activity. Whether that sentiment is just wishful thinking or a general response to real indicators is not entirely clear, but it is worthy of note that it is quite different from what we’ve seen over the past year. The latest data on U.S. labor markets have led me to be more confident concerning my outlook for the economy.  My January forecast in the SEP was for 3 percent GDP growth in 2012 and the unemployment rate declining about ½ percent to 7.8 percent by the end of the year, one-half of the decline that we experienced this past year, while the Tealbook sees virtually no improvement in unemployment at all this year.  Job growth is solid, and I’m more confident that labor markets will continue to exhibit some strength going forward.  Indeed, my unemployment rate forecast may prove to be too pessimistic, but even if growth in the labor force partially offsets stronger growth in employment and the unemployment metric, the employment numbers themselves, both in the household survey and establishment survey, have been strong and broad based in recent months.  Combined with the current growth in unit labor costs that we heard about for the last quarter of last year, and reinforced by steady upward revisions we have seen in both employment figures and measures of personal income, it appears that the necessary foundations for a stronger consumption growth are improving.  The recent strength in automobile purchases, I think, is just one ramification of the improved household economic fundamentals.  Thus, I remain more optimistic than the Tealbook, which seems to me unduly pessimistic.  Even after their what I would call imperceptible upward revisions in the outlook since January, it remains near the bottom of the projections of FOMC participants.  Even so, the staff’s evolving view has led them to bring forward the beginning of monetary tightening by about six months.  Regarding inflation, I am growing more concerned that it will begin to accelerate at some point rather than decline as the Tealbook continues to indicate in its projections.  As I said, unit labor costs have grown, and the staff has reduced its forecast for labor productivity.  Taken together, these two features imply a rising marginal cost and increasing price pressures in the standard New Keynesian paradigm. I am, therefore, increasingly uncomfortable with the idea that accommodative policy will have little or no consequences for the inflation outlook. To summarize, I’ve been more optimistic than the Tealbook about the strength of the economy and a little more worried about price pressures going forward for a while, but that discrepancy may be widening as the staff forecast continues to downplay recent improvements.  We have been misled before with a “false dawn,” and we can’t be entirely certain it won’t happen again if the world slips into recession because of events in Europe or some other unanticipated shock.  And, by the way, with respect to Europe, I do believe that while there remain risks in Europe, the likelihood of the financial meltdown scenario seems to have been substantially reduced.  Broadly, I think the tail risks of a weakening world economy and a blowing up of Europe, in general, are much lower now than they were in our last two meetings.  In general, then, I think that the staff forecast actually poses a risk that we could fall substantially behind the curve in the adjustment of policy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing information and giving their opinion on the state of the economy and potential risks.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Williams.


Passage number 139.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 140.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Lacker.


Passage number 141.
   MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Recent data and reports from the Fifth Federal Reserve District point to continued improvement this year.  For manufacturing firms, business activities picked up pace despite some headwinds, and revenue growth in the service sector continued in February, although slightly less broadly than in previous months.  According to our surveys, job growth is also broadening in both manufacturing and services.  Our contacts have increasingly reported adding net new workers in recent weeks, particularly in the IT sector but also for other professional jobs and skilled manufacturing positions.  I’m not sure how many of these were formerly construction workers.  We’ll have to ask in a future survey.  As an aside, I found Vice Chairman Dudley’s report on the data fascinating, but I’m not sure that if a lack of skills was restraining employment growth, there’d be a differential effect on different occupations in terms of their unemployment experience.  So I need to think about these data some more. Construction of new residential housing showed signs of improvement.  The mild weather reportedly has allowed for building that normally would await the arrival of spring, but the overall levels of residential activity in our District remained very weak by historical standards.  Contacts also have reported somewhat better conditions for commercial real estate leasing, particularly for office space.  So, on balance, in the Fifth District we’re seeing signs of improvement across a broadening array of sectors, and I’d characterize the reports as similar in tenor to what President Lockhart reported for the Sixth District. The firming we’ve seen in the Fifth District is also apparent in the national data, I think— more than 1.2 million net new jobs added over the last six months.  That should lay a foundation for resumption of consumption growth.  Overall consumer spending may have been flat over the last few months, but consumer confidence must be reasonably decent because we’re now seeingcar and truck sales at the highest level in almost four years, higher even than during the Cash for Clunkers splurge.  Business investment and exports are continuing to support overall activity, and even residential investment is contributing to growth.  All told, real growth prospects have clearly improved in recent weeks, and downside risks have diminished noticeably. The staff was wise to raise the projection for core inflation over the forecast horizon, although, personally, I think they should have gone further.  While core inflation did subside following the string of firm readings in the first half of 2011, the monthly numbers have been steadily increasing since September, and in fact, the latest reading was a shade above 2 percent at an annual rate, in line with the three-month and the year-over-year measures. Despite that, the staff persists in forecasting a decline in core inflation to around 1½ percent, as we discussed earlier.  Personally, I’d be surprised if we actually get such a decline this year and next.  Both the survey- and the market-based measures of inflation expectations seem to me more aligned with 2 percent inflation than with rates below that.  Moreover, we know that overall inflation will move higher this spring, if only because of the gasoline prices that we’ve already seen at the pump and that are in train.  And the broad pattern over the last couple of decades has been for energy prices to bleed into core, as the staff noted in their special box.  So I suspect that core inflation is more likely to rise than fall in coming quarters, in which case we may find it challenging to keep inflation expectations anchored near 2 percent.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President George.


Passage number 143.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Tenth District economy continues to expand moderately.  Although consumer spending growth was modest in the post-holiday period, retailers anticipate rising sales in coming months. District manufacturing activity rebounded in January and February from a soft December, and factory operators expect solid growth inproduction, hiring, and capital spending plans.  Activity in the commodities-producing regions of the District remain solid, and farmland continues to sell at record highs despite a gradual decline in crop prices.  Residential and commercial real estate activity edged up in January and early February.  Existing-home inventories declined as lower prices spurred a modest increase in sales, and new commercial construction increased and was expected to rise further with more projects in the pipeline.  District bankers are reporting increased loan demand, although some readily admit that pricing and underwriting standards suffer from intense competition.  Fourth-quarter data and anecdotal information also suggest banks are extending the maturity of their portfolios, some admitting their reliance on the FOMC’s “late 2014” language. Turning to the national outlook, several spending indicators from consumers and businesses have been a bit weaker than I anticipated at the start of the first quarter, and the recent surge in oil prices is likely to cut into real disposable income and weigh on consumer spending over the next few months.  Longer term, however, signs of a strengthening economy are increasingly positive.  A number of labor market indicators are taking on a brighter tone, and the labor market recovery appears to be progressing more rapidly than I previously expected.  The corresponding increases in labor income should provide important momentum for the economy in the coming year.  I see this strength also reflected in the pace of expansion in service industries and improved consumer sentiment.  And while activity in the housing market remains at very low levels, rebounding household formation should help with the recovery of this important sector. Thus, while I expect that growth in the first half of this year will be a bit more sluggish than in the Tealbook, I have revised up my medium-term forecast and project a brighter outlook for growth than the Tealbook, coupled with substantially more improvement in the unemployment rate over the next few years.   In terms of prices, recent data releases indicate that the apparent decline in inflation at the end of last year was initially overstated, and we are now experiencing another surge in oil prices that will increase inflationary pressures in the near term.  The combination of these factors, along with my stronger path for medium-term growth, has led me to revise up my path for inflation.  I now expect inflation to be above 2 percent in the near term and then stabilize at 2 percent in the medium term. As others have noted, several factors pose headwinds and downside risks for economic activity over the next few years.  The European situation, as well as geopolitical tensions already mentioned in terms of oil, may pose a significant risk for the outlook for inflation and economic growth.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides an overview of various economic indicators and the speaker's forecast for future growth and inflation.


Passage number 144.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  I understand coffee is ready.  Why don’t we take a break and come back at 11 o’clock. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No disagreement or contention is present in the passage. It simply consists of polite expressions of gratitude and a suggestion for a break and a specific time to resume the activity.


Passage number 145.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence.  And let’s turn to President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 146.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Thank you" and "Governor Yellen" are expressions of gratitude and respect towards someone, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 147.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I agree with the view expressed around the table that we’re seeing a genuine and very welcome improvement in the labor market.  A wide range of evidence supports this conclusion.  The pace of employment gains has picked up in both the establishment and household surveys, and job gains appear to be widespread across industries.  Unemployment insurance claims are down, the hourly workweek has returned to pre-crisis levels, and households are telling pollsters that the employment situation is rosier.  For example, the highest proportion of consumers in the history of the Michigan survey spontaneously reported hearing about recent employment gains, and a larger number of consumers expect declines in the jobless rate than at any time since 2004. The Rasmussen Employment Index—another measure of workers’ perceptions of the labor market—jumped 7 points in February to its highest level since September 2008.  And now that layoffs have abated, chief financial officers polled in a long-running survey by Duke’s Fuqua School report that employee morale, a top-ranked concern at the end of 2008, has improved considerably.  Notwithstanding these improvements in the employment picture, we still have a long way to go before labor market conditions could be described as normal.  For example, the quit rate, a reflection of workers’ willingness and ability to change jobs, while up from the trough reached in January 2010, is still nowhere near its pre-recession level.  The pace of hiring has improved, but only slightly, and the duration of unemployment spells remains exceptionally long.   One indicator of the degree of labor market slack is the frequency with which firms report that their ability to attract and retain qualified workers is among their top business concerns.  Of course, many of our Reserve Bank directors and other business contacts routinely cite such concerns because certain skills are chronically in short supply. For example, even at the end of 2009, with unemployment hovering near 10 percent, around 25 percent of firms ranked attracting and retaining workers among their top three business concerns.  That fraction has picked up.  In the first quarter of 2012, about 35 percent of firms listed it among their top three concerns. But 35 percent remains a far cry from the 62 percent that ranked their inability to attract and retain workers as a top concern in June 2008, prior to the failure of Lehman. An important question bearing on policy, and particularly on our guidance concerning the date of liftoff, is whether the unemployment rate is poised to level off from here, as in the staff forecast, or instead decline more rapidly, continuing the pattern we’ve been seeing in recent months.  This is a key question and one that’s hard to answer, because it will depend both on the pace of productivity growth and on the strength of demand.  With respect to the strength of demand, I agree with the staff view that the spending data, while mixed, point overall to only trend-like economic growth in the coming year.  There are certainly bright spots, like auto sales.  With financing readily available, considerable pent-up demand, and improving consumer confidence, sales have turned robust, but consumer spending in most other categories is expanding only moderately.  This is consistent with consumer sentiment readings, which have improved but to levels that are still not high.  For example, the latest Rasmussen survey reveals that 40 percent of American adults still believe the United States is at least somewhat likely to enter an economic depression similar to the one during the 1930s in the next few years.  This finding is down from 52 percent in November, but it’s hardly a ringing expression of confidencein the future.  Moreover, in spite of their improved perceptions concerning the labor market, very few consumers have actually positively altered their own grim evaluations of their personal finances.  Just one in four households anticipated financial gains in the year ahead. Of course, there is the downside risk, too, that consumer sentiment could falter in the face of further rises in gas prices. Business surveys likewise suggest only moderate growth going forward.  Small business owners have become less pessimistic about the outlook for real sales growth.  Even so, optimism in the NFIB survey remains mired at a very low level, suggesting only glacial improvement in the economy in the year ahead.  The CFOs interviewed by the Fuqua School in March were notably more optimistic than in December, but they still pegged the odds of recession in 2012 at one in four. The pace of productivity growth will be another key variable influencing hiring.  Over the last year, productivity growth all but stalled. According to staff estimates, 0.8 percentage point of the decline in unemployment can be attributed to this productivity slowdown, which the staff interprets as an unwinding by firms of unsustainably low labor input following the very aggressive job cuts during the financial crisis. Importantly for the forecast, they see the payback period as now ending, projecting over the medium term that labor input will increase in line with output, reverting toward its trend.  The Tealbook’s modal outlook is by no means an outlier compared with the projections of outside forecasters.  For example, in the latest Blue Chip survey that was published last Friday, the consensus outlook is for real GDP growth to hover around 2½ to 3 percent over the next few years and for the unemployment rate to decline only gradually to 7.2 percent in 2014 and to finally drop below 6 percent in 2018.  Like the staff, the Blue Chip consensus also has a subdued outlook for inflation over the coming years. To summarize, the intermeeting period has brought good news concerning the labor market, but the improvement we’ve seen is puzzling given the evidence we have that demand is growing at only a moderate pace.  How this puzzle is resolved will have important implications for the path of unemployment and for policy over coming years.  For now, I think it’s important to monitor unfolding developments before drawing policy conclusions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides a summary of the current state of the labor market and acknowledges some areas of improvement while also noting areas where there is still room for improvement. There is no conflicting information or contradictory viewpoints presented.


Passage number 148.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The words "Thank you" and "Governor Duke" indicate a gesture of appreciation and respect, suggesting a harmonious tone.


Passage number 149.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll start by talking briefly about general credit conditions, and then I’ll move on to some pretty amazing stories about housing. C&I loan growth is steady but not spectacular.  Unused commitments for C&I loans are also growing and represent potential additional funding that is roughly equal to current balances outstanding.  However, it’s important to remember that C&I represents only about one-fourth of bank core loan portfolios.  And even though every banker talks about the level of competition, while spreads on new loans have come down from their highs, they are still pretty healthy compared with pre-crisis levels.  Most of the growth is in loans to larger companies, and small business lending is pretty flat.  Commercial real estate loans continue to decline gradually, as loans for existing structures are relatively flat, and construction loan portfolios remain in liquidation mode.  Although total consumer credit is increasing, it must be doing so in nonbank portfolios, as balances on bank books declined in January and February.  As I’ve been saying for a while now, with the exception of mortgages, I don’t believe credit availability will hinder the recovery at all, nor do I believe that we have to worry about lending running too hot—demand is just too weak—or about banks lowering standards to get volume because all have been burned by credit problems this cycle, and they will be slow to forget.  I’d like to focus the rest of my comments on housing and, in particular, on the overhang of inventory that’s holding down house prices.  In my last round of calls, community bankers had some pretty surprising stories about excess inventory of lots and houses that had been marked down substantially in some markets.  In support of these anecdotes, I noted that nationally, the inventory of existing homes came down to six months of sales, which meant that some markets were down in the two-to-three-month range, a level that usually indicates a seller’s market. When I made my calls this time, I heard the same kinds of stories about tight supply from regional and national mortgage lenders, leading me to believe that the inventory overhang we’ve been so worried about might have finally disappeared in a lot of markets, and that the prospects of even tighter supply are on the horizon.  A few weeks ago, the GSEs announced a pilot program soliciting investor interest in blocks of single-family homes located in several markets where supply is the largest.  And in a sign that such sales might be successful, at least one large bank told me of strong interest from investors for block purchases of OREO properties.  In fact, the bank had just closed the sale of a $40 million package of residential real estate to a single investor.  Indeed, even in the Miami condo market, a poster child for overbuilding, inventory has reportedly come down from 24,000 units to 2,300 units, a level in line with historical norms.  I found this report so unbelievable that I had to confirm its reasonableness with President Lockhart before I dared repeat it. Sure enough, Latin American buyers and rental conversions have soaked up the excess inventory.  And according to an article in the Wall Street Journal this morning, the same thing is happening in Phoenix, with Canadians playing the role of the Latin Americans. Even if supply is potentially being taken out through bulk sales, foreign buyers, and rental investors, I heard beginning indications that ordinary homebuyer demand is not being met   with existing inventory.  Several of the biggest loan servicers told me that their mortgage lenders across the country are repeatedly reporting borrowers with preapproved credit who cannot find homes to buy.  The lenders say the buyers are making bids on numerous properties before they’re successful.  So I’m beginning to think it’s possible that when prices do turn around—and I’m not sure when that might happen—rather than a gradual recovery, we might see a sharper turnaround, sort of a cork-out-of-the-bottle effect, as frictions in supply and demand make price adjustments somewhat jerky in individual markets and as local markets recover at different rates. Here’s why I think that.  First, prices seem to have really overshot the mark, if you look at measures of affordability, the cost of rental versus ownership, and the price of an existing home relative to the cost to construct a similar home.  And the absolute prices seem really low now.  Consider this: If prices in Las Vegas fall the 10 percent that they’re projected to fall this year, the median home price will be under $100,000. Second, the appraisal rules make it difficult for prices to move back up initially, but when they do move, the change in the assessment of market direction is then factored into the appraisal price and thus accelerates the move. When making an appraisal, appraisers compare the features of homes that have sold recently with those of the house being appraised.  To account for the time that has passed since the comparable sales, the sales price is adjusted in the direction of the price trend, down in declining markets and up in improving markets. So, to make the appraisals move higher, some buyers are going to have to pay more than appraised value.  They can’t finance against more than the appraisal, so they’ll have to put in additional cash.  But once there are enough sales to justify a market characterization of increasing prices, then subsequent appraisals will support higher prices than recent sales.   Third, it’s going to be difficult to coax out additional supply.  Underwater homeowners may not be in a position to sell, and those who are not under water, but don’t need to sell, may hold out for higher prices that meet their expectation of what their house is worth.  And builders won’t provide additional inventory until prices recover to a level that covers construction costs. Finally, the psychology of the market will create upward pressure on prices.  Once prices seem to be rising, and buyers have lost out on homes that they had already imagined as theirs, they stop looking for bargains and focus on the house they really want.  And to illustrate this, in case you think I’m overestimating that, I’m going to offer a final data point.  Friday, I had lunch with Governor Yellen, who expressed that she might be interested in buying rather than renting. Over the weekend, while I was studying my Tealbook, Governor Yellen found a house she was interested in buying. On Monday at lunch, she told me all about how beneficial it would be for her to buy rather than to rent.  And as we sat down for this round, she told me that she was considering making a higher offer because someone had come in and bid higher on her house.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 150.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  She must be worried that interest rates are going up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating that someone (the subject) must be worried about interest rates going up. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 151.
  [Laughter] MS. DUKE.  Now, this is someone with a very informed forecast of economics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 152.
 MR. FISHER.  It’s like the Case-Shiller index—we now have the “Yellen index.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a comparison between two indices, the Case-Shiller index and the "Yellen index."


Passage number 153.
” [Laughter] MS. DUKE. I can’t believe I’m talking about this, I can’t believe I’m saying this, and it may embarrass me when these transcripts finally come out.  But I really believe that rising home prices and inventory shortages are an upside risk somewhere in our future, at least until the prices hit the level of replacement cost and builders are enticed to increase supply.  We aren’t there yet, but we could get there sooner than we think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal belief about the potential future risks and factors affecting home prices and inventory shortages.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You know it was the FOMC blackout period, don’t you. [Laughter]  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement followed by laughter and gratitude.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude to Governor Raskin.


Passage number 156.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, was encouraged to see GDP growth move up above 3 percent in the fourth quarter, and the news from the labor market has also looked more positive.  That said, over all of 2011, GDP rose just 1½ percent, a pace that would be mediocre anytime and is especially so during what is supposed to be a recovery.  If the pace of activity doesn’t pick up, the high level of the unemployment rate is likely to persist for quite a long time.  To me, it seems that we’re still dealing with an economy primarily characterized by a lack of aggregate demand, and the prognosis for faster growth seems poor.  Wage income rose   last year, but with gas prices high and transfer payments flattening out, real disposable income was stagnant.  Consumer confidence levels are inching up, but really, they’ve only returned to the level of a year ago.  So households appear to have neither the income nor the confidence to provide a significant boost to aggregate demand anytime soon.  At the same time, real business investment has slowed considerably and is not contributing much to a pickup in aggregate demand.  And of course, the government sector isn’t filling the shortfall.  Instead, real government expenditures declined sharply last quarter and seem to be falling further.  State and local governments continue to lay off workers. Only the net export sector really seems to be carrying its own weight, and that is, of course, highly dependent on developments in Europe, China, and Japan. In addition, the uncertainties about how the economy is functioning in the wake of the financial crisis are profound, and I am humbled by our lack of understanding.  The source of this humility comes from the fact that behind our macro data points are millions of microchannels rich with information, most of which we can’t glimpse but many of which could have been significantly altered by the experience of the depth and breadth of the financial crisis. If we understood these microchannels, we would have, it seems to me, more confidence about the output gap and thereby the pace and strength of this recovery.  For example, what does it mean that more daycare centers are operating 24–7 because both parents are now working second and third jobs and going to school at night and can’t pick up their children until the middle of the night. What does it mean that a 14-year-old girl in Detroit recently renovated and now is a landlord for a house that she bought for $12,000 with money she saved by selling cribs and torn rugs on Craigslist. What does it mean that more college graduates are opting to buy land and cultivate it and farm it rather than face the prospect of receiving more rejection letters from  potential employers. With wages rising anemically for most people, what does it mean that young people must pay down their college debts and still have enough left over to contribute to the revival of the economy. I think of how much, indeed, our understanding is enhanced by the reports around this table, which provide a texture to our aggregate data but which the homo economicus part of our brains and backgrounds reminds us are mere anecdotes that we discreetly push away in favor of the aggregate macrodata.  But still, the uncertainty lingers.  Will the economy find its typical recovery path in the months ahead, or was the financial crisis so deep and so painful that there have been myriad adaptations in household and business behavior, suggesting that the economy has shifted in fundamental ways and found other, different ways to recover. I’ll stop there, in the midst of what appears to be an existential crisis, and attempt a catharsis in the policy go-round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily presents the author's analysis and observations about the state of the economy and raises questions about its recovery path.


Passage number 157.
   MR. EVANS.  Mr. Chairman, after that very careful discussion about the labor market data, I’m reminded that I, in my own comments, put a lot of weight on the staff’s estimate of the output gap.  President Kocherlakota presented some very interesting and provocative observations on different measures of the unemployment rate.  I wonder if the Board staff has any thoughts about those distinctions between the unemployment rate of those unemployed longer than six months and under six months, and what that might portend for your gap analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that the speaker is reminded of a previous discussion and asks if the Board staff has any thoughts on a particular topic.


Passage number 158.
 MR. WASCHER.  I think one way to think about it is whether short-term unemployment or longer-term unemployment have different effects on inflation.  When we look at the evidence on that, we don’t find much difference in the effects on inflation between longer-term unemployment and short-term unemployment.  President Kocherlakota’s story, if you focused on just under six months, would be consistent with an increase in structural unemployment and the NAIRU. In our own analysis, because we don’t find much difference between the effects on inflation of those different groups, we tend to focus more on the published unemployment gap as our measure of slack than on, say, the short-term unemployment gap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents different perspectives on the effects of short-term and long-term unemployment on inflation. There is no clear contention or disagreement between the speakers.


Passage number 159.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think it would be fair to say, though, that if you look at the historical evidence, it’s hard to find periods where we’ve seen such sharp differences in the behavior of those two series.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely making an observation about historical evidence and stating that it is difficult to find periods where there have been sharp differences in the behavior of two series.


Passage number 160.
 MR. WASCHER.  I agree with that.  The long-term unemployment rate is really high right now, and Governor Tarullo’s point, I think, is well taken—that we could be seeing some sort of labor market damage resulting from that.  We don’t see much evidence of that yet in the data, but I would not rule that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with Governor Tarullo's point about the potential labor market damage caused by the high long-term unemployment rate.


Passage number 161.
 MR. EVANS.  So in terms of movement in and out of short-term versus long-term unemployment, do you see unusual behavior there.  Are they truly out of line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is asking a straightforward question without expressing any contradictory opinion.


Passage number 162.
 MR. WASCHER.  Well, I think they’re out of line in the sense that long-term unemployment is still really high.  Layoffs have come down a bunch, and they’re at really low levels at this point, but we’re not seeing the hiring yet that one would need to see to bring down unemployment across the duration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the current state of unemployment and acknowledging that layoffs have decreased but hiring has not yet increased enough to reduce unemployment.


Passage number 163.
 MR. EVANS.  I guess the question is whether or not entry and exit rates into those pools would necessarily differ.  It could be that they would more quickly adjust in the short term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty about whether entry and exit rates into certain pools would differ and suggests that they might adjust quickly in the short term.


Passage number 164.
 MR. KILEY.  We tracked the data on exit rates that you’re referring to, and one might imagine, if people who were unemployed for a long time were having trouble exiting from unemployment and there were a structural problem, that the exit rate would be depressed. That exit rate is depressed, and it’s depressed for all groups.  That was true in the intense phase of the recession, and it’s still true.  We haven’t seen a recovery for some groups and not for others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the observation and analysis of exit rates during and after the recession.


Passage number 165.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough context or information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 166.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’ll just say one word about that.  I think those are very important observations to keep in mind, and it’s useful to bring them forward.  That said, one thing that’s hard to get a handle on from the historical data alone is how responsive exit rates from long-term unemployment are to monetary policy, as opposed to exit rates from short-term unemployment, because right now I think it’s a unique period in terms of how many people we have in the one group versus the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention. It is discussing the difficulty of analyzing historical data regarding exit rates from long-term unemployment compared to short-term unemployment in relation to the effectiveness of monetary policy.


Passage number 167.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided, "President Lacker," does not contain enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. As a standalone phrase, it does not provide any context or indicate any conflicting viewpoints. Therefore, the answer is no, there is no contention or disagreement discernible in the given passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 168.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman, you spoke about your tipping point for consumption and other components of spending as being growth rates rising notably above trend.  So I wondered if you’d comment on the prospect of growth continuing at about trend and a gradual but eventual decline in the unemployment rate. I have in mind here this broader difference of views around   this table—those who view the trend line that lies pretty close to where we were in 2006 and 2007 and extrapolate out from this as the norm we’re returning to, and those who think that we suffered a one-time downward level shock of some sort and that we ought to only expect growth at trend rates from here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The mention of "broader difference of views around this table" indicates that there are different opinions among the individuals present on the outlook for growth and the unemployment rate.


Passage number 169.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s a good point. Implicit in my statement, which was an ad hoc statement, was the notion that if in fact economic growth stays at 2 percent, we will not see much improvement in unemployment going forward other than that attributable to the end of extraordinary unemployment insurance benefits.  If that turns out to be empirically wrong—that is, if we continue to have slow growth and declining unemployment—then obviously, there’s something wrong with my model and we’ll have to look at that. All right.  We have gotten now to item 3, “Current Monetary Policy.” We’re actually doing fine.  Thank you very much, everyone, for efficient use of time. I just would like to note at this juncture, though, that we do have, effectively, two monetary policy go-rounds today.  We have the first, which is focused narrowly on today’s action and today’s statement, and then we’ll have a broader discussion of communications and these issues going forward.  So let me ask you, in the interest of time and efficiency, if you can in the first round, to focus primarily on today’s statement and today’s decision.  Let me turn it over to Bill for an introduction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of statements and instructions for further discussion.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Bill. President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a statement of thanks and a request for questions.


Passage number 171.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My staff philologist charted the difference between “moderate” and “modest” over the last several meetings.  We had three meetings of “moderate,” then we went to “modest,” and now we’re back to “moderate.”  What’s the difference in your mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that his staff has observed a change in the use of the words "moderate" and "modest" during several meetings, and they are asking for clarification about the difference in meaning between the two words.


Passage number 172.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think we made the adjustment because the staff had marked up the outlook for GDP growth—not a lot, but enough that it felt as though it was pretty close to growthof potential—and so it seemed moderate, not a little subpar, which is what we were meaning by “modest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining a decision that was made based on the staff's assessment of GDP growth.


Passage number 173.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only contains the phrase "President Fisher" without any additional context or information.


Passage number 174.
 MR. FISHER.  Bill, I noted one other thing that I don’t think you highlighted.  Maybe I didn’t hear it, but the last paragraphs of A and B talk about promoting “a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.”  A change in the last paragraph of C is its “objectives of maximum employment and price stability.” Why the difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply pointing out a difference in wording and asking for an explanation for the difference.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 175.
 MR. ENGLISH.  We thought in C, if your point was to begin removing policy accommodation, then you’d want that last sentence to be a little bit more balanced between your objectives of maximum employment and price stability.  The language at the end of paragraph 4 last time and in alternative B this time suggests that the adjustment would be to promote a stronger economic recovery.  So it would suggest that there maybe was a little concern about the pace of the economic recovery as opposed to inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. English, is suggesting that there is a lack of balance between the objectives of maximum employment and price stability in the language used. He implies that there may be a concern about the pace of the economic recovery compared to inflation. This implies a difference of opinion or contention regarding the appropriate policy approach.


Passage number 176.
 MR. FISHER.  But we’ve been using that language for a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The person mentioned, Mr. Fisher, is stating a fact about the use of language, without any indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 177.
 MR. ENGLISH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided in the question, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 178.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Fisher is thanking someone, indicating a polite and positive response. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 179.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states the name "President Kocherlakota" without providing any additional context or information that could indicate potential contention or disagreement.


Passage number 180.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I had exactly the same question as President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Kocherlakota and President Fisher have the same question, indicating agreement or alignment of thoughts.


Passage number 181.
 MR. FISHER.  That’s good. Great minds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses approval or admiration for something.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions.  [No response] If not, why don’t we begin our go-round with President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The lack of response to the suggestion indicates that there is no objection or disagreement.


Passage number 183.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 184.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I would, however, like to offer a suggestion for a small modification to the language in the statement   regarding the expected timing of liftoff, and I’ll return to that momentarily. We talked a lot here about simple policy rules, and the Tealbook talked about simple rules in coming up with its own interest rate forecast.  And prescriptions from simple rules can be a useful guide to formulating monetary policy.  I particularly like the outcome-based and the Taylor 1999 rules as good examples of simple rules. But I do think it’s important in the current situation that such simple rules, taken on their own, ignore two important issues:  the LSAPs and the zero lower bound.  LSAPs provide significant monetary stimulus, which can substitute for some conventional monetary accommodation.  So the LSAP program may suggest a higher funds rate path than a simple funds rate rule would recommend otherwise. I say “may” here because I agree with the fine memo by Ed Nelson and John Roberts that an LSAP adjustment is not as straightforward as, and is likely smaller than, the simple correction usually made. Indeed, I would like to see further work along these lines, and it may provide greater clarity in how to best adjust a simple rule for the effects of LSAPs.  Second, and I think much more important, these simple policy rules ignore the zero lower bound.  Research by Gauti Eggertsson and Mike Woodford, Dave Reifschneider and myself, and many others have looked at monetary policy rules and how they should be modified in the context of the zero lower bound.  And the results show consistently that it’s optimal to deviate from the usual simple policy rule and keep the funds rate lower than otherwise for a longer period of time.  Such deviations capture some of the gains of the optimal commitment policy or the nominal GDP targeting policy described in the other memo. This is largely why, relative to the simple rules in the Tealbook, I’m comfortable with a late 2014 liftoff in our current policy guidance.  That said, the hurdle for making changes to the liftoff date from meeting to meeting should not be high.  So I’m taking a different position than Bill outlined in his presentation.  We have conveyed to the public that the projected policy liftoff   date will change when conditions change.  In keeping with that principle, I would prefer small adjustments that appropriately signal changes in the outlook.  For example, from the conversation that we had today, and in the Tealbook, there’s slightly less slack in our projections than before, and many, I think, have slightly higher inflation projections than they had before. So I suggest that the statement should note our intention to maintain a low funds rate at least “until” late 2014 rather than “through” 2014.  Now, this is a very modest change, but one of the ideas here is that we should not have a high hurdle, in general, and I don’t think it would be useful to get into a situation where we modify the language only on very big steps.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Williams, expresses his support for alternative B and offers a suggestion for a small modification to the language in the statement. He also discusses the importance of considering LSAPs and the zero lower bound in monetary policy rules. While he takes a different position than Bill outlined in his presentation on the liftoff date, he suggests small adjustments that appropriately signal changes in the outlook. Overall, the passage reflects Williams' perspective and suggestions, but there is no clear disagreement with others in the discussion.


Passage number 185.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 186.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I indicated in our earlier go-round, a lot of us have said, and you summarized very well, that the outlook for real growth has improved a notch since our last meeting.  My reading of the real data, similar to the staff, is that our forward momentum has picked up a notch, and we face less by way of downside risks than before.  Core inflation seems quite close to 2 percent now, and that’s my expectation going forward—that it’s going to hover around 2 percent in the near term. I, like the Tealbook, brought forward my estimate of the time period at which it’s most likely that our first rate increase will occur.  As I said at the last meeting, it was in the latter half of 2013.  Now I think middle of 2013 would characterize where I am on that dimension. In thinking about the statement, I want to buttress the recommendation of President Williams.  I think it’s useful to compare forward guidance language, and how we think about setting that at every meeting, with interest rate setting.  In particular, it’s useful to really think about this well-documented characteristic that our policy-setting displayed away from the zero bound, which is interest rate smoothing.  This is the idea that our interest rate changes tend to be in a sequence in the same direction, they tend to be persistent, and they’re seldom reversed.  So we strive to avoid raising rates and then at the next meeting cutting them, or cutting rates and then at the next meeting raising them.  Now, this has an obvious advantage to us in that if we behave that way over time, then any given interest rate change conveys much more information relevant to the yield curve.  The yield curve moves more, because a given interest rate change conveys much more information about future settings of the short-term rate. In contrast, you could picture us at every meeting ignoring the current setting for the funds rate and, with a blank sheet of paper, deciding on our optimal rate—deciding anew, as if we had no history before us of what we’ve said.  And we’d likely get fed funds rate changes that were more frequent and variable, but they would carry much less information about future funds rate changes.  So this property of interest rates is something we’ve done for a long time—it’s been well documented.  Now, the point I want to make is that this represents a form of commitment in the sense that we set interest rates taking into account what we did before. If we’ve cut interest rates, we’re not going to reverse them at the next meeting.  We’re going to wait a few meetings to see a trend and then reverse them if we’re going to do that. Now, I started thinking about this because I was considering my decision at this meeting.  And I was thinking, all right, in the usual interest rate setting, if you dissent against a cut in the funds rate, the next meeting you might not want to dissent in favor of raising rates again to undo the cut that the Committee voted at the previous meeting. And a good rationale for that would be to maintain the commitment of the Committee to smoothing interest rates so that in the future, when we do cut interest rates, they have the effect that’s consistent with this.  So that suggests something about this meeting, but first, let’s think about forward guidance.  We’ve been really clear that it’s not a commitment. I think the Chairman has been really clear that it’s not a commitment.  Now, I heard something slightly different from the Vice Chairman, and I’m interested in understanding whether your views are compatible with what the Chairman has said about this not representing a commitment, but instead representing a forecast.  But if we go smoothing forward guidance, if we go holding up changes in forward guidance, not bringing forward the date because we just increased it at the last meeting, over time there’s going to be, meeting to meeting, a little gap opening up between what we really think and what’s in the statement, and that’s going to make it look like a commitment. It’s going to potentially confuse the public.  It’s going to give an inertia to the forward guidance language that makes it more commitment-like and less like truly our forecast at that meeting. I don’t think this is a curiosity.  I think that this is relevant to policy-setting. If we keep it frozen at one date, compared with the extent to which forecasts fluctuate on a six- or eight-week basis, it’s going to look like a promise that we change only every now and then, and that’ll be a mistake. I say this, and as you know, I argued against actually including this forward guidance at the last meeting, and this is one of the pitfalls that I think we’re going to have to wrestle with, having gone down this path.  And putting it in the SEP, of course, would have made it a forward guidance communication we change only every two meetings rather than one meeting—and so, to some extent, would obviate some of this issue. As for how I vote at this meeting, I don’t see a value for smoothing forward guidance.  So to my mind, the logical way for me to vote is whether I think economic conditions are going to warrant exceptionally low interest rates through the date in the statement, and I don’t agree with that.  So I’m going to dissent on that.  I have a couple of editing suggestions for the statement.  I’ll just read them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement and presents an alternative viewpoint regarding the forward guidance language and its potential to create confusion and look like a commitment. They also dissent on the statement's view that economic conditions will warrant exceptionally low interest rates through the stated date.


Passage number 187.
 MR. FISHER.  No one is going to listen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It suggests that the speaker believes no one will pay attention or give importance to something.


Passage number 188.
  [Laughter]   MR. LACKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. [Laughter] is just a indication of the presence of humor or amusement, and does not indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 189.
 The first editing suggestion would be “mid-2013,” but barring that, the other three suggestions I have— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  “Mid-2013”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a suggestion for editing, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 190.
 MR. LACKER. “Mid-2013”—that would be the first suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 191.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Good luck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Good luck" does not express any contention or disagreement. It is simply wishing someone well.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 192.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  So that’s my dissent.  I don’t know your views on these suggestions, but I might have some more success. At the last meeting, we officially adopted an inflation objective of 2 percent, and yet in our statement, we use this complicated circumlocution—what is it.—“the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate.”  It’s like 10 words.  We could just say “2 percent,” right. We’re talking about, “ . . . the Committee anticipates that subsequently inflation will run at or below . . . ” This is the last sentence in paragraph 2.  Why don’t we just say “2 percent”. Or we could phase out this language by putting, after the word “below,” “2 percent,” a comma, and then the circumlocution—and then at the next meeting, delete the circumlocution.  And then there’s a similar issue in the first sentence in paragraph 3.  The statement says “help ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate.”  We could just say “is at 2 percent.”  That would be clear.  This way, people wouldn’t have to go on the Internet to find out what rate we’re talking about there. So that’s one set of changes.  A second editing suggestion I’d like to make is that we drop the word “dual.”  This occurs three places in this statement. It occurs nowhere in our statement of our longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy.  There, we’re careful to mention all three of our statutory mandates.  “Statutory mandate” would be a clearer phrase, a more accurate phrase, one more consistent with the text of the Federal Reserve Act.  So I’d suggest that maybe even if we don’t reduce them all, maybe we could phase them out one at a time, one a meeting. And then the word “significant” in front of “downside risks,” I think, got a little bit of discussion last time, and we seem on the edge of whether we have it in or out.  It might be useful to take the temperature of the Committee on whether those downside risks are still significant in global financial markets.  That’s in the third sentence in paragraph 2.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing his dissent by suggesting changes to the wording of the statement.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or arguments. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 194.
 MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman, can I ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply consists of a person asking if they can ask a question.


Passage number 195.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanantion: Without the actual passage, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 196.
 MR. TARULLO.  Jeff, I don’t quite understand your rationale on the forward guidance, for the following reason. I understand completely why you’re reluctant to engage in forward guidance and your concern that on the spectrum between expectation and projection versus promise, people will read it too far toward the promise side. But if you stipulate that we’ve done what we’ve done, as I was listening to your rationale for not dissenting from last time’s interest rate moves, for example—because you wanted the impact of action to be greater when it was taken by the Committee, you didn’t want so much fluctuation, you wanted more communication—I don’t quite understand why the same rationale doesn’t apply here, that is, why you would distinguish on these grounds between a classic federal funds rate move and putting in guidance with a particular date. It seems to me that the nature of the “commitment” is pretty close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention between Mr. Tarullo and someone else (presumably Jeff) regarding the rationale for forward guidance. Mr. Tarullo is questioning Jeff's rationale and expressing confusion about why the same rationale doesn't apply in this situation.


Passage number 197.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, I view the forward guidance as a forecast.  I don’t think it’s advisable for us to be making a commitment, and I view our collective understanding of what we agreed to as, it’s a forecast and not at all a commitment.  Whether we can communicate that fully   or not is another question.  So I take that as a premise. In the interest rate case, a cut in an interest rate is an implied promise to not reverse rapidly the interest rate cut.  And do I want the Committee to be a Committee that fulfills its promises.  Yes, and so I might vote for that, and that might outweigh my desire to express a preference for a change in interest rates at the next meeting. It’s because an interest rate cut at a given meeting, unlike the forward guidance in January, represents something of a commitment.  So it’s bolstering the Committee’s ability to make commitments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their view on forward guidance and interest rate cuts.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 198.
 MR. TARULLO.  I’m sorry. I won’t belabor this, but that’s what I don’t quite understand. I guess you’re imputing a commitment to the cut in interest rate that is not incorporated into the text of the FOMC statement in any way, shape, or form, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, expresses confusion and disagreement regarding the existence of a commitment to the cut in interest rates that is not mentioned in the FOMC statement.


Passage number 199.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  We’ve just done it.  Markets expect it, I think it’s fair to say. It’s built into market expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker states that markets expect something and believes it to be fair to say so. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 200.
 MR. TARULLO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is any contention or disagreement involving Mr. Tarullo.


Passage number 201.
  Presumably, if things change dramatically from one meeting to another, people— MR. LACKER.  Oh, sure.  There’s exceptions—right.  There would be a higher hurdle, but if you just look at the record, we rarely reverse course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by MR. LACKER is in agreement with the initial statement, stating that there are exceptions but in general, they rarely reverse course.


Passage number 202.
 MR. TARULLO.  Isn’t that for the instrumental reason of maximizing the communications effect of changes when they are made by the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a question reflecting a clarification being sought.


Passage number 203.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provided only includes a response from one individual, Mr. Lacker. Without any other perspectives or conflicting statements mentioned, there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 204.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not suggest any disagreement or contention. It simply introduces a statement or topic without indicating any conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 205.
 MR. LACKER.  To some extent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
Explanation: The use of "to some extent" suggests that there is a partial disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 206.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply shows gratitude or politeness.


Passage number 207.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Okay. President Rosengren" does not involve any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 208.
  MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. While there has been some improvement in recent data, the growth rate of the economy remains disappointing.  At 8.3 percent unemployment, we remain well above the 7 percent unemployment that I view as consistent with starting to remove accommodation. Total and core PCE price indexes are projected to remain below 2 percent in 2013 in the Tealbook, a forecast quite consistent with my own.  I currently anticipate some improvement in labor markets and some pickup in spending over the year.  Should that not occur, further accommodation would be appropriate.  If employment growth and spending falter, with unemployment high and inflation low, I would see no reason to sterilize additional purchases of securities.  For now, we should watch the data closely to determine whether our forecast of improvement in the economic situation materializes. I would not make any change to the language.  We should try to shift the language from a calendar date to economic outcomes, which we will discuss in the next go-round.  I would note that in January, we concluded that we were going to be discussing that. I think we’re revisiting it later in the next go-round, and I would defer any change in the language until we’ve had a full discussion of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 209.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply contains an expression of gratitude from someone named President Plosser.


Passage number 210.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a polite expression of thanks and addressing someone by their title and name.


Passage number 211.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. The current stance of policy, including the forward guidance that refers to late 2014, remains generally appropriate.  Put differently, I don’t think enough has changed to justify altering policy at thismeeting. I also support the language of the statement as presented.  I think it remains serviceable for this meeting. Others have not resisted the temptation to talk generally about communications, so I won’t, either.  [Laughter] As I said in the economy round, absent severe tail risks, I see the risks to the outlooks for economic growth and inflation as being weighted slightly to the upside.  So my sense at this juncture is that the risks, so to speak, around the path to policy are tilted to an earlier rather than later tightening.  And in the minds of the public and market participants, the path of policy is most associated now with the date that the Committee is providing for liftoff in the statement.  Anticipating the upcoming discussion on policy communication, I, like others, am concerned that the date device will become increasingly problematic were the Committee to adopt the practice of moving it back and forth or to and fro with the evolution of the economic outlook.  Both the Tealbook and my updated forecast for this meeting have the start date of tightening considerably earlier in 2014.  So if I were to be consistent with my forecast, I would lean to support an earlier date just one meeting after adopting “late 2014.” By focusing the public on a date, I’m concerned we are conveying much more certainty in forecast precision than is warranted.  So I very much, like others, look forward to the upcoming discussion of communications options.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 212.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude to someone named President Evans. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 213.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just for the record, as I stated in January, I continue to support further accommodation beyond that described in alternative B or even alternative A.  I see the current situation as so far from our dual mandate responsibilities that my opinions will not be altered with just a few months or quarters of better data.  Indeed, just to get the modest pickup in GDP growth projected in the Tealbook and the latest SEP forecasts, we’re   going to have to see much better data.  As I noted earlier, these forecasts leave us falling far short on our mandate. Now, earlier last week, Charlie Plosser, Esther George, and I were preparing for the Senior Leadership Conference that we have in Chicago a couple of times a year, and on the topic we were talking about, it got me thinking.  As the central bank for the United States, the Federal Reserve has two enormous assets:  One, we print money, one way or another, to achieve our dual mandate objectives; and, two, we’re an independent central bank.  Sometimes when I listen to arguments around this table related to the Fed’s independence, I don’t always get the point that the speaker seems to have in mind.  Here’s how I think about it.  Paul Volcker in 1979 used the Fed’s independence to make tough decisions for the U.S. economy that were clearly unpopular— allow the federal funds rate to rise to 18 percent for a time, restrict credit, and break the back of runaway inflation while letting unemployment rise above 10 percent. On the merits of the analysis for the U.S. economy, I believe these were the correct actions in 1979 and 1982.  They were exceedingly brave actions.  For me, independence of monetary policy allows the Fed to do the right thing and take meritorious actions even when they are deeply unpopular.  And here’s the thing:  These unpopular actions can go in either direction—for less accommodation or for more accommodation.  Fed independence is not just a synonym for higher interest rates. On the merits of today’s arguments, I can’t ignore the assessment that the output gap is 5 percent after 33 months of modest recovery from a very deep recession.  And I’m pretty confident that the staff’s assessment of this gap is going to continue to be in this range after they look at some of the labor data along the lines of what President Kocherlakota suggested, but I certainly look forward to that.  Combining this thorough assessment of resource slack with the outlook that inflation will remain below 2 percent over our forecast horizon, the argument forcontinued and stronger accommodation is, for me, overwhelming.  Whenever it’s within our ability to improve a very poor outlook and those actions are within our dual mandate responsibilities, the case is clear. Now, every credible macroeconomic analysis I’ve seen comes to the same conclusion, and Williams, Reifschneider, et al. are consistent with this. It’s highly consistent across lots of different people.  Let me be clear.  Suppose you go out and review the policy conclusions based on models that have, one, general-equilibrium underpinnings and, two, do a reasonable job in their empirical characterization of the macroeconomy.  After all, if they don’t have a good empirical grounding, I don’t know what world they’re telling us about.  These analyses routinely state that further monetary accommodation can improve our economy and reduce our dual mandate misses.  The Board staff memos and Tealbook B policy analyses are examples that are very clear on this.  I thought those were very good memos.  I can’t ignore these lessons.  If others disagree, I’d like to see evidence based on empirically credible general-equilibrium models with those alternative policies embedded.  I’d like to see it—haven’t seen it myself. So I continue to favor substantially more accommodation than recommended in alternative B, and without any consensus on stronger forward guidance—let’s just wait for the afternoon discussion—that would commit us to more accommodation, I favor additional asset purchases larger than suggested in alternative A. After all, President Kocherlakota and others have a very good point that commitment is very hard to do for a central banker who cares about poor inflation outcomes.  We have an incentive once we promise to get things going to take it back and fool people.  How do we overcome that. If we can’t commit to it with a low interest rate beyond a period where we’d want to undo that, maybe we should do larger-scale asset purchases that would make it very difficult to unwind very quickly.  After all, that’s the commentthat I’ve heard around here.  I will leave it at that. I have more comments on “late 2014,” but we’ll talk about that this afternoon.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is just stating the speaker's opinion on the current situation and his support for further accommodation.


Passage number 214.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Thank you. President Bullard" simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard without any conflicting opinions or dissenting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 215.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would just respond to President Evans and say I don’t see any models that tell me that running higher inflation is going to help us.  I don’t see any simulations that say, let’s go to 4 percent inflation and that’s the optimal policy.  Have I got the wrong model.  I don’t see any.  There are none.  Here, I’m looking at them right here. They’ve all got below 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard disagrees with President Evans' statement that running higher inflation could be beneficial, stating that he has not seen any models or simulations that support that claim.


Passage number 216.
 MR. EVANS.  No, they’ve got 2½ percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 217.
 MR. BULLARD.  You say there are no models.  There are a lot of models here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 218.
 MR. EVANS.  They have them in Erceg et al.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more context.


Passage number 219.
 MR. BULLARD.  Why isn’t there a simulation that says, okay, 3 percent inflation or better.  I don’t see one. These are empirical models. Okay.  I counsel patience at this meeting.  I think we should adopt a wait-and-see stance. I do think the “late 2014” language causes problems for this Committee because of the unwillingness to change the date with changes in the forecast.  This tends to create inconsistency between market expectations and the statement over time.  This is unhealthy for the Committee’s credibility. I suggest removing the “late 2014” date and replacing it with the last sentence of paragraph 3 in alternative C.  So we just take alternative B, but we move in the language from alternative C or similar language.  This would remove the need to be moving the date around at each meeting, but otherwise would not change the policy content.  I think this would improve the credibility of the Committee. I also agree with President Lacker’s suggestions for the statement, which I think better reflect the Committee intent and the current situation.  So, as a reminder, he said, just say “2 percent” instead of a bunch of words.  Get rid of the “dual” and just say “mandate.”  And I’d be open to what people think about “significant.”  The tensions in Europe have been reduced, but I’d be interested to hear what others have to say about whether we should take “significant” out or not.  I think if we leave it in there, you’re saying that nothing has improved.  That’s always a delicate thing for the Committee here to accurately reflect changes in the situation without saying the tail risks have gone away completely.  I’d be open to how others want to do that, but I would lean toward taking “significant” out as a way to signal that the Committee understands that the situation in Europe has changed somewhat.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is made up of suggestions and opinions from Mr. Bullard.


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply consists of a polite expression of gratitude and a mention of President Fisher.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 221.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As an independent-thinking independent central banker, my preference would be for alternative C, but I don’t think we should make significant changes at this juncture.  I’m in favor of alternative B. I have heard several things at this table that have affected my thinking.  The first was your comment—which I agree with, by the way—on the broader commodity indexes; the second is what I would call the Lutheran advantage of Minnesota; and the third is the Yellen real estate paradox.  Taking all of those into account, the only things I would recommend changing are a couple.  The statement “the housing sector remains depressed” is a little bit harsh. If I were to change the language there, I would just say, “Indicators of conditions in the housing sector have improved, but amid uncertainty as to when housing prices will stabilize.” Listening to Governor Duke, setting aside Governor Yellen’s personal decision, I think saying that “the housing sector remains depressed” is a little bit too strong and contrary to the data that we’re seeing and have heard around the table.As to the point of “significant downside risks,” we’re saying that global financial markets have “eased somewhat.”  “Continue to pose downside risks to the economic outlook,” I think, is appropriate. “Significant” erases the “having eased somewhat”; I would eliminate it. As to President Lacker’s comments, I think we should, at the very end of that sentence—I wouldn’t change the beginning of the sentence because we do have a statutory mandate, we do foster both—since we did make a formal statement as to our long-term strategy, why not update it and say that “subsequently inflation will run at or below the long-term target of 2 percent” or “our stated long-term target of 2 percent”. With regard to the “at least through late 2014,” I was against it in the beginning.  We’ll talk about that in the next session.  As to President Williams’s suggestion, I don’t think “until” does it.  If I were to argue that point now, the difficult part I have is with “at least.”  So I wouldn’t fiddle with that at this moment. Let’s defer that to the second discussion.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The speaker expresses his disagreement with the statement "the housing sector remains depressed" and suggests changing the language to indicate that conditions in the housing sector have improved. Additionally, he disagrees with using the term "significant downside risks" and suggests eliminating the word "significant" to better align with the statement that global financial markets have "eased somewhat." The speaker also expresses disagreement with using the phrase "at least through late 2014" but suggests deferring further discussion on that point.


Passage number 222.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Pianalto.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 223.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  In broad terms, my outlook is largely unchanged from our last meeting, so I don’t think a change to the current policy stance is warranted.  While some combination of further improvement in the pace of recovery and a pickup in underlying inflation could warrant pulling forward the expected date of policy firming, I don’t think now is the time to make that adjustment. I don’t think the changes in the outlook since our last meeting have been material, and before we adjust the forward guidance, I would prefer to wait for more information on the pace of the recovery and inflation trends.  I would also prefer to avoid making a practice of moving that date guidance at each meeting, because to do so would imply more certainty about the outlook than we really have.  Today, with considerable risks still surrounding the recovery, it’s hard to rule out the possibility of a significant slowing in the pace of the recovery. My final reason for holding off on adjusting the forward guidance is that it would be difficult to explain the change without a new SEP.  While I don’t see having a fresh SEP as a necessary condition for changing the forward guidance, I think the bar to making an adjustment without a new SEP should be fairly high.  In my view, the outlook hasn’t changed enough since our last meeting to meet that bar.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Ms. Pianalto expresses her disagreement with the idea of adjusting the current policy stance and the forward guidance. She believes that the outlook hasn't changed enough to warrant a change in policy and that there are still considerable risks surrounding the recovery. She also mentions the difficulty of explaining the change without a new Summary of Economic Projections (SEP).


Passage number 224.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President George.


Passage number 225.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  While growth in the first half of this year is likely to be slower than I previously thought, I have revised up my growth forecast over the next few years.  The continued decline in initial claims and the last two employment reports have been particularly encouraging.  Inflation, both headline and core, has picked up, and the stronger growth outlook is likely to keep inflation firm.  Moreover, I note that both the Tealbook baseline and the constrained optimal policy simulation now have the first tightening of policy two quarters earlier than they did in January.  In addition, recent research by my own staff and other empirical evidence suggest the output gap may be smaller than the Tealbook estimate of 5 percent. Taken together, this information leads me to believe that we should begin removing some accommodation sooner rather than later.  In particular, I think it warrants consideration of moving forward the “late 2014” language in the statement. Clearly, with a high unemployment rate and only modest improvement thus far in the housing sector, policy will need to remain accommodative for some time.  However, the degree of that accommodation should recognize a persistent recovery, improved economic conditions, inflation near our target, and a return to more-stable financial markets relative to the crisis. In that regard, beginning to remove accommodation also would help reduce the risk of unintended consequences that our policies over the long term might encourage distortions or mispriced risk.  By bringing forward the date specification in the statement, we can also signal to the market that monetary policy really is conditional, while continuing to provide important information about the likely path for policy in conjunction with our SEP.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker supports alternative B and provides reasons for their support, but there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 226.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Kocherlakota. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this statement.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is a direct expression of gratitude, followed by a formal address to Governor Yellen.


Passage number 228.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  Paragraph 1 notes that “labor market conditions have improved further.”  As I discussed in the economic go-round, this improvement is meaningful, and it’s a very welcome development.  That said, unemployment is still elevated, and if the staff is right, absent some unanticipated pickup in spending, further declines in unemployment over the next two years will be modest at best.  There is, of course, some chance that the recent decline in unemployment reflects greater momentum in spending than is incorporated in the staff forecast, a scenario like the “Virtuous Circle” alternative in the Tealbook.  At this point, though, we just don’t know. In light of our considerable uncertainty about the strength of the recovery, I think it makes sense to keep an eye on the incoming data while holding policy unchanged for now.  So I would not support a change in our forward guidance language today.  In particular, I still consider our current forward guidance of “at least through late 2014” appropriate.  My own   assessment regarding the appropriate time of policy liftoff has moved forward slightly in response to the recent data, but that assessment still remains significantly later than the end of 2014. In my view, the appropriate path for the federal funds rate is closer to the Tealbook’s constrained optimal control policy than to the paths implied by the outcome-based rule or Taylor’s 1999 rule.  The constrained optimal policy keeps the funds rate at zero until the fourth quarter of 2015, and its advantages vis-à-vis the baseline are crystal clear from the figures on page 8 of Tealbook B. The unemployment rate under the optimal constrained policy path is notably lower than in the Tealbook baseline.  And the magnitude of the inflation deviations is substantially smaller throughout the remainder of this decade.  Of course, the sign of those deviations is different.  The path for inflation rises to around 2¼ percent for a few years, while the baseline lingers below 2 percent for many years. Indeed, that path seems consistent with our judgment that the 2 percent inflation goal is a target, not a ceiling, and with our commitment to follow a balanced approach in promoting both of our dual objectives. Of course, the strategy of maintaining a highly accommodative policy entails some risks if the recovery proves a lot more robust than the Tealbook anticipates.  We could overshoot our employment and inflation objectives if we respond too slowly to incoming information.  But there are also risks associated with pulling back accommodation too quickly in response to the stronger labor market data.  For example, back in the spring of 2010, and again in spring 2011, we became overly optimistic about the economy’s underlying strength and started heading toward exit a bit prematurely.  Consequently, I’m concerned that we could be misled yet again by hopeful signs early in the year followed by tepid growth later, and that a premature move toward policy firming could end up driving inflation further below our objective and retard what is already a long-delayed return to maximum employment. To me, the proper way to balance   those risks is clear.  We have time-tested tools for fighting back if inflation threatens to move persistently above target.  For example, the Tealbook simulations corresponding to the “Virtuous Circle” scenario suggest that as long as we do respond to incoming evidence, any overshooting of our inflation objective would be brief and mild.  But recent experience makes clear that our toolkit for stimulating the economy at the zero lower bound is much more limited and fraught with uncertainties.  Thus, given the asymmetric risk that we face when policy is constrained by the zero lower bound, I prefer to err on the side of continued accommodation.  In particular, I would want to see much clearer evidence of a durable and robust recovery, or of rising inflation pressures, before I’d advocate moving up the projected date of tightening.  On the downside, I will be watching for evidence that the recovery is faltering or that inflation is heading further below our 2 percent goal, in which case I would be supportive of taking further accommodative steps, such as those presented in alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, expresses support for alternative B and explains her reasoning for maintaining current policy and forward guidance. She also discusses the risks and uncertainties associated with tightening policy too quickly and the need for clearer evidence of a robust recovery before advocating for tightening.


Passage number 229.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 230.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Getting ready for this, I went through the exercise of deciding what my fed funds projections would be if we were submitting them for this meeting.  And I found that they wouldn’t change much, because my forecast was somewhat brighter than the staff’s last time, and so the baseline forecast is now closer to the forecast that I had.  So my estimate of liftoff wouldn’t have moved versus the movement forward of two quarters in the Tealbook. Therefore, I find it really easy to live with no change in policy.  But even if I did feel as though the economy had strengthened, I would still think it wise to wait for additional confirmation that that strength is real. And I’ll discuss more in the communications round, but I do think it’s important that increments in and the sensitivity of changes in this  forward guidance are important discussions of policy.  I went down a thought path similar to the one described by President Lacker.  I just landed in a completely different place. I view the stickiness in the date as similar to the reluctance to begin quarter-point moves until the expectation that they will continue. If we were in an environment where we were talking about moves to the fed funds rate, this might be one where there was some justification for a quarter-point move, but not a justification that would lead you to believe that those moves would be sustained.  And so then when I think about increments, I think in terms of quarters.  And so far, our short history of moving this date is six quarters at a time.  I confess that I hadn’t considered swapping “through late 2014” for “until late 2014” as a possible partial quarter-point move.  But while I’m content to make no change at this meeting, what I worry about is that our preferences on how we change this guidance may end up being defined by our actual behavior while we debate our preferred behavior.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Duke, is discussing her own forecast and her view that no change in policy is necessary at the current time. She also mentions the importance of discussing the sensitivity and increments of changes in forward guidance. While she mentions President Lacker's viewpoint, she states that she landed in a different place but does not elaborate on any specific disagreement.


Passage number 231.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. The passage only introduces a person named Mr. Lacker speaking to the Chairman, but it does not provide any further information to suggest any disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 232.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 233.
 MR. LACKER. Governor Duke, the approach you suggest of waiting to change the forward guidance language until we’re more confident that we’re going to engage in a sequence of moves, or all of the next moves are going to be in the same direction, would you view that as likely to imply that, at times, we have guidance in the statement that’s at variance with our expectation. Wouldn’t that imply that sometimes our expectation would be second quarter, but not enough evidence has accumulated to move off of “late 2014”. Is that consistent with the approach you’re advocating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing skepticism towards Governor Duke's suggestion of waiting to change the forward guidance language. He questions if it would imply having guidance in the statement that is contradictory to their expectation.


Passage number 234.
 MS. DUKE.  I’m not entirely sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement indicates uncertainty on the part of Ms. Duke, but it does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 235.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The federal funds rate doesn’t move in a random-walk way; it moves, obviously, in a directional way—right.—which is the point you were making.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. The speaker is acknowledging and agreeing with the point made by the other person, stating that the federal funds rate does move in a direction.


Passage number 236.
 MR. LACKER.  Right. But we impart persistence to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply emphasizing the idea of giving persistence to something.


Passage number 237.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I think one concern might be, not in terms of what we intend, but in terms of what is interpreted.  Suppose we were to move the late 2014 date to a month earlier, which is a trivial change in itself, but it would be the first time since 2006, 2007, whatever it was, that we had a tightening move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a potential concern and the speaker's thoughts on it, but there is no active disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 238.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply presents a response or statement from Mr. Lacker without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or indication of contention or disagreement regarding Chairman Bernanke. It is a simple statement without any conflicting views or opposing opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 240.
  So would that not risk suggesting to the public— MR. LACKER.  This is what’s wrong with using forward guidance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage suggests there is disagreement or contention regarding the use of forward guidance. The phrase "So would that not risk suggesting to the public" implies that there is a potential problem or disagreement with the approach being discussed.


Passage number 241.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Maybe so, but that’s where we are.  I’m sorry—are you okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about a situation and showing concern for the well-being of the listener, but there is no disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 242.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Duke is expressing gratitude or giving thanks.


Passage number 243.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 244.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  For the reasons well and succinctly stated by Sandy, I favor alternative B.  I would just add that I would be reluctant to make any changes, certainly in the policy parts of this statement, precisely because I think we need to think a few meetings at a time now.  Where do we actually think we’re going with respect to both communications and, potentially, policy. If things stall and additional action is more on the table again, I think we’d want to have thought through where and how we believed we’d be going with additional policy measures, and we haven’t done so.  On the other hand, if things continue to strengthen and there’s no thought of further accommodation, but instead more people begin to talk about tightening, again, we haven’t talked through how that would actually proceed over the course of a couple of meetings.  So I favor a holding pattern right now, and as such, as I said, I would not favor any changes in the policy language.  That’s why, even though John’s change may be a good one at some point, I wouldn’t do it now.  I’m not even in favor of, at the beginning of paragraph 3, changing to “the rate most consistent,” but I already lost that battle, so I won’t belabor it. With respect to the first two paragraphs, I wouldn’t change much here except maybe for the “strains in global financial markets” that some people have mentioned.  I do think they continue to pose significant downside risks.  That is, the magnitude of the potential downside risk is still pretty great, although the likelihood, the probability, of those risks has, at least in the near term, abated somewhat.  And I wonder whether a slight, but only a slight, compromise might be to say, “Strains in global financial markets have eased, though they continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook.”  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker expressing their opinion and explaining their reasoning for favoring a particular course of action.


Passage number 245.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


Passage number 246.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I described in the economic outlook go-round, the forecast seems to me to be swimming in an ocean of uncertainty about how the economy is functioning in the wake of the financial crisis.  I’m hovering between seeing good signs from the labor market, which might signal that a more galloping recovery is around the corner, and seeing income and spending growth, which appears much too modest to support a robust recovery.  This position makes me believe that if we maintain our highly accommodative stance too long in the face of a robust recovery, we face a risk of significantly overshooting our inflation objectives.  If, instead, the increasingly strong employment data lead us to pull back on accommodation, we face the risk of tightening in a weak economy, which could drive inflation well below our objective and further delay what is already a long-delayed return to maximum   employment.  How do we balance these risks. As Governor Yellen mentioned, I think there’s an asymmetric nature to the upside and downside risks.  We know what to do if inflation threatens to move persistently above target.  Our contractionary tools are, if not necessarily time tested, certainly readily available and would be deployed if we see that we are overshooting our inflation objective in a manner that is more than brief and more than mild.  On the other hand, if we had to re-stimulate because we had prematurely tightened, we would have a much more challenging course to follow.  We’ve learned that our policy options are more limited and attenuated when it comes to stimulating the economy when interest rates are at the zero bound. Thus, at the present time, I err on the side of continued accommodation and support alternative B.  It would take much more unequivocal evidence of a durable and sustained recovery, or of rising inflation pressures, to begin a tightening course of action.  On the downside, if 2012 follows the pattern of recent years—hopeful signs early in the year followed by tepid growth later—further accommodative steps may be required.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the author's position on the state of the economy and their recommendation for monetary policy.


Passage number 247.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude and mentions the position of the person addressing the message.


Passage number 248.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. I think we’ve seen a slightly better modal economic growth outlook and less tail risk from Europe, and the maturity extension program is ongoing.  So it doesn’t seem like the right time to engage in further monetary policy easing measures.  That said, though, I think we should keep the alternative B language changes very minimalist.  In terms of changing the date guidance, moving it forward to the present—I would be very strongly opposed to that.  First, it would be inconsistent with how patient we were from “mid-2013” until making the move to “late 2014.” We waited several meetings, and then we moved it a lot.  To make small adjustments now would be inconsistent with what we’ve already done.  Second of all—and I think this is the point you highlighted, Mr. Chairman—it would be seen as the start of a tightening regimen.  The dealer survey suggests that the expectation of future MBS purchases is a probability of 50 percent. I think if you actually move the date inward, you would significantly reduce that probability assessment.  That would lead to higher term premiums and wider MBS spreads.  So I think it would actually lead to a meaningful tightening of financial conditions, and I don’t really see any evidence that this is where we want to go at this point. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any direct disagreement or contention. The speaker expresses their support for alternative B and explains their reasoning for not wanting to make further monetary policy easing measures. They also provide reasons for not changing the date guidance. However, there is no clear disagreement or opposition presented in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 249.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  Thank you for the useful discussion.  Let me just say a word about the broad issue.  I favor alternative B, without a change to the rate guidance, for a couple of reasons.  First, I don’t think it’s clear that there’s been a very large, discrete change since our last meeting.  Yes, things are more positive, but we still don’t have evidence that the recovery is self-sustaining, and the absolute level of conditions remains quite unsatisfactory.  So I think there’s a case, just on the fundamentals here, to take more time to see where the economy is going.  I would raise the related point that if we were to change the date, we don’t know what date to change it to at this point.  We don’t have the guidance of an SEP.  And while we’ve heard some people express views about their changes, we would like to know what the mode is and where the overall change in views is.  So that’s one problem.  A second problem is that, as I hope the second round will help clarify, we need to understand better what this guidance actually means—President Lacker has been at the forefront here of raising this question.  And I think we need to do a better job, perhaps in today’s discussion and in subsequent discussions, of explaining what it means.  Now, it could be, for example, that we do want to include some element of commitment along the lines of the memo on the zero lower bound, where making up for the zero lower bound entails promising to hold rates lower for  longer.  Maybe that’s an outcome we would come to.  I’m not saying we will, but my concern is that we haven’t had the discussion yet. So it’s not clear to me that the outlook has changed radically, and I’m not quite sure how we would go about deciding on where to adjust the date if we were adjusting it today.  But more important, we have very intentionally set up an extra go-round today to really try to get a deeper understanding of how we should be going forward in terms of our communication.  There are some very important issues.  The goal here is to make progress before the next two meetings— both of which happen to be meetings that are two days and have a press conference, and that are therefore much more conducive to making a more subtle determination, a more considered determination, and one that we can explain to the public.  Again, for all those reasons, I think it would be premature to make that change today. With respect to language, let me make a few comments here. I appreciate what President Williams is trying to do with the “until,” but that’s a little too subtle for me, I’m afraid.  And I think for today, I would prefer to keep the critical words unchanged.  There were some questions about “dual mandate” and “2 percent.” I think these are worth discussing in a more considered way.  The particular issue, of course, is the following:  Our policy statement tried very hard to maintain the symmetry of employment and inflation objectives. The word “dual” emphasizes the twoness of those objectives.  Now, I don’t think, actually, that striking “dual” would make a big difference, but it’s something we ought to discuss. Putting in the “2 percent” for inflation is very attractive, and I think we should discuss it.  But the symmetry would suggest in that case, looking at what we did in our statement, that we put in the estimate of the NAIRU in the earlier sentence where we say “anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent with its dual mandate.”  Well, what are thoselevels. So one could put numbers in both sides.  I think, again, that’s a question to be discussed.  These are critical issues that we need to come back to. The other things that were raised were mostly about language, and I’m happy to talk about them.  In particular, what do we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with changing the rate guidance and discusses the need for further discussion and clarification on the issue. They also mention the need to discuss other language changes, such as removing the word "dual" and including the "2 percent" for inflation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 250.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Strike the word “significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Strike the word 'significant'" indicates that someone is suggesting the removal of the word from the text, implying a disagreement on its usage or importance.


Passage number 251.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It was two things.  One was about the “strains in global financial markets.” We tried, in the language here—“while having eased somewhat”—to capture the point that Governor Tarullo made about the sense that currently they’re not quite as bad, and maybe the probabilities are less, but the risk that they pose is still large if it occurs.  So I would make two proposals.  One would be to get rid of the “having eased somewhat” and get rid of the word “significant”; then you would just be making that adjustment to the sentence.  And the other might be the thing that Governor Tarullo suggested: “Strains in global financial markets have eased, though they continue to pose significant downside risks.” I’m really fine with any of those things, and I wonder if anyone has any particular preferences.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is suggesting revisions to the wording, but there is no disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 252.
 MR. LOCKHART. I realize I can get caught up technically in whether we’re, strictly speaking, talking about strains in global financial markets that exist today, but I just want to share the concern I was trying to convey in the economy round, and it wasn’t about Europe.  It was about the Israeli–Iranian potential for a conflict, which then would produce strains in financial markets that we could not very easily, in anticipation, predict.  And I think we’re making a mistake if we suggest that that problem isn’t part of the potential picture and if we downplay it as something that’s not going to have an effect on either financial markets or the real economy.  So I’d like to keep the word “significant” in—not, strictly speaking, because it’s about financial markets today, but because that risk looms out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a concern about the potential for conflict between Israel and Iran and the potential impact it could have on global financial markets. They are advocating for the word "significant" to be included in the discussion to highlight the potential risk.


Passage number 253.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only states the position or title of "Vice Chairman" without any additional information or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 254.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes. Another alternative would be to say, “Strains in global financial markets still pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook.”  So it would be implicit that things have improved a little bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions another alternative viewpoint or phrasing without contradicting or opposing the previous statement.


Passage number 255.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How is it changed from the previous language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot determine without the passage.


Passage number 256.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Rather than say “continue to pose,” I’d just say “still pose significant downside risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is simply suggesting a more concise and efficient way to convey the same message.


Passage number 257.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that the sense of that is very similar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their opinion about the similarity of the sense of something, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 258.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It’s similar, but it’s basically acknowledging that things have gotten a little bit better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply recognizes that things have improved, albeit to a small extent.


Passage number 259.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I see.  Well, let’s try some others.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting trying some other options.


Passage number 260.
 MS. DUKE.  I like Governor Tarullo’s suggestion, and I’m thinking about the “strains in . . . markets, while having eased somewhat” as being a little bit of a change in the probability of them happening.  But the risk if they do happen is still very significant.  So I like keeping “significant” and changing the “strains.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Duke states that she agrees with Governor Tarullo's suggestion and expresses her own thoughts on the matter.


Passage number 261.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m perfectly fine to go to Governor Tarullo’s suggestion, but I’m not sure why the existing language doesn’t do exactly what you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with Governor Tarullo's suggestion and simply seeking clarification about the existing language.


Passage number 262.
 MS. DUKE.  Either one would be fine, but I like keeping “significant,” and I like “eased somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. Duke simply states her preference for using the words "significant" and "eased somewhat."


Passage number 263.
” MR. TARULLO. It was the “somewhat,” Mr. Chairman.  In addition to an aversion to using participles unnecessarily, it was the deletion of “somewhat” that was meant to move a little bit in the direction of those who thought the probabilities had changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Tarullo is clarifying his intention behind the deletion of "somewhat" and explaining that it was meant to align with those who believed the probabilities had changed.


Passage number 264.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I see.  All right.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply consists of someone acknowledging what they see and giving a response of "All right." The mention of President Fisher does not indicate any disagreement or contention either.


Passage number 265.
   MR. FISHER.  Having advocated for removing the word “significant,” I think Governor Tarullo has given us a good answer, and I would advocate for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is expressing agreement with Governor Tarullo's answer.


Passage number 266.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Is it okay if we do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for permission or confirmation.


Passage number 267.
 MS. DUKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Based solely on the given information, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 268.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  So, “Strains in global financial markets have eased, though they continue to pose significant downside risks.”  The other issue that was raised, although I’m not sure I got specific language, was about the housing sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement mentioned about the strain in global financial markets easing does not contradict or oppose the issue raised about the housing sector.


Passage number 269.
 MR. FISHER.  I have a suggested change, Mr. Chairman.  It may be too much because it adds more verbiage.  But what I had suggested was, “Indicators of conditions in the housing sector have improved somewhat”—since we took it out elsewhere—“but amid uncertainty as to when prices will stabilize.” To say that “the housing sector remains depressed” is too harsh given what we heard at this table, in my opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. 

The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is suggesting a change to the wording of a statement but acknowledges that his suggestion may be too much and adds more verbiage. He states his opinion that saying "the housing sector remains depressed" is too harsh based on the information discussed at the table. There is no direct opposition or argument from anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 270.
  But, on the other hand, if you guys are going to— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Prices are still declining; activity is very depressed.  How could you say the housing sector is in good shape.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a contrasting viewpoint or perspective by using the phrase "but on the other hand," but there is no explicit disagreement or argument being made.


Passage number 271.
 MR. FISHER.  But conditions have improved.  Look at housing starts.  Look at all of the data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that conditions have improved and asks the reader to look at the data to support this claim.


Passage number 272.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Maybe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it is an ambiguous statement that does not express any clear opinions or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 273.
 MR. FISHER.  Not maybe.  The data indicate that for three months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 274.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Weather.  Weather, Richard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 275.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is there some way to put a preliminary thing—“Although some indicators have been better on balance . . . ”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 276.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I just think it’s pretty weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement about someone's personal opinion without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 277.
 MS. DUKE. I’m the most optimistic about the potential for it to turn around, but I still don’t think it has.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The statement expresses the speaker's personal opinion, but there is no direct contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 278.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Oh, okay" does not express any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 279.
 MR. FISHER.  No, you’re not as optimistic as I am.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker acknowledges a difference in optimism levels between themselves and another person, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 280.
 MS. DUKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context to suggest that there is contention or disagreement. It simply states "MS. DUKE," which appears to be a standalone statement or reference without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 281.
  I think when it turns around, it could turn around sharply, but I don’t— MR. FISHER.  I won’t fight this, Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 282.
 Chairman, but I think maybe at the next meeting, we might indicate if— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Noted.  But I think the staff view, at least, is that we haven’t yet seen real changes in the data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The chairman is suggesting discussing something at the next meeting, and the staff member acknowledges it. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 283.
 MR. WASCHER.  I think that’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 284.
  We think that the December and January starts are elevated by the weather, and we expect that to— MR. FISHER.  Well, let’s wait and see if the weather weathers out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that the elevated starts in December and January are due to the weather, while Mr. Fisher is expressing doubt and suggesting waiting to see if the weather improves.


Passage number 285.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. My point, Mr. Chairman, is a very simple one.  Even if it improved a bit, it would still be depressed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing a straightforward point of view without challenging or contradicting any opposing ideas.


Passage number 286.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Well, I know, but we’re looking at differential changes in labor markets, for example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Well, I know" does not introduce any conflicting opinion or disagreement. It is simply a transitional phrase indicating that the speaker is aware of something before providing further information.


Passage number 287.
 MR. FISHER.  Never mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as Mr. Fisher tells someone to not worry about something, implying a lack of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 288.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or cues about contention or disagreement related to President Lacker.


Passage number 289.
 MR. LACKER.  This is on a separate point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Mr. Lacker is speaking about a separate point.


Passage number 290.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  What’s your separate point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 291.
 MR. LACKER.  It’s back to this “2 percent.”  We put “2 percent” in the consensus statement; we didn’t put NAIRU in the consensus statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about what was included in the consensus statement.


Passage number 292.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, we did—5.2 to 6 percent is in the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Yes, we did—5. 2 to 6 percent is in the statement" does not indicate any conflicting views or opposing arguments. It simply confirms that the mentioned percentage range is present in the statement.


Passage number 293.
  MR. LACKER.  We did not equate that with maximum employment.  And that’s a number that—convergence takes years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply stating a fact without expressing any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 294.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It’s maximum employment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage does not mention any specific argument or disagreement regarding the topic of maximum employment. It simply states the phrase "It's maximum employment" without any additional information or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 295.
 MR. LACKER.  And that’s different from our mandate.  We don’t equate it to our mandate in the statement.  We’re very careful to distinguish between maximum employment and the reports we have in the SEP of what unemployment converges to in the long run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is clarifying the distinction between the Federal Reserve's mandate of maximum employment and the reports on unemployment convergence in the long run.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 296.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m not sure that everyone agrees with you on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the statement. This is indicated by the use of the phrase "I'm not sure" which suggests that the speaker is uncertain or skeptical about the agreement with the other person's statement.


Passage number 297.
 MR. LACKER.  I guess it should be for a separate discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is suggesting that the topic should be discussed separately, which does not imply disagreement or contention.


Passage number 298.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply introduces someone named Mr. Kocherlakota.


Passage number 299.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Kocherlakota; there is no information provided about any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 300.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I have sympathy for what President Lacker is saying.  But I would also say that I think he’s raising very deep issues that probably are best deferred.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is stating that the speaker (Mr. Kocherlakota) agrees with President Lacker and acknowledges that the issues he raised are important but may be better discussed at a later time.


Passage number 301.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That would be my response, as usual.  [Laughter]  President Lacker, the subject of your concern could not be addressed in finite time.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The laughter that follows the response indicates a lighthearted or humorous tone, but there is no explicit indication of disagreement between the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 302.
 MR. FISHER.  I think we dispensed with this, but I would have started the sentence by saying, “Consistent with its dual statutory mandate.”  We talked about “foster maximum employment and price stability.” The sentence we’re talking about here is only about inflation.  Jeff is right.  We have circumlocution at the end, only dealing with inflation.  So, “subsequently inflation will run at or below”—because we’re talking about inflation—“the stated long-term target of 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher is clarifying the content of the sentence and agrees with Jeff's observation about it only addressing inflation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 303.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Look at the second sentence of paragraph 2: “Anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline gradually towards” circumlocution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the phrase "circumlocution" suggests that there is an intentional avoidance of direct or straightforward language in the second sentence of paragraph 2. This implies a lack of clarity or transparency in conveying the expected decline in the unemployment rate.


Passage number 304.
  [Laughter]   MR. FISHER.  Remember me talking about Charles Dickens’s office of circumlocution in Little Dorrit. But I think Jeff has made a sensible recommendation in the sentence about inflation, and I just wanted to support it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows agreement and support for Jeff's recommendation about inflation.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I take his point.  I take this as part of our broad communication challenge.  Are there other comments.  [No response] Okay. Let’s go ahead and get this done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges and agrees with someone's point ("I take his point"), expresses their understanding of a situation ("I take this as part of our broad communication challenge"), asks for additional comments ("Are there other comments"), and when there is no response, they proceed with a task ("Okay. Let's go ahead and get this done").


Passage number 306.
 MS. DANKER.  Okay.  Let me make sure I’ve got this sentence correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply refers to the speaker wanting to confirm the accuracy of a certain sentence.


Passage number 307.
 The way it’s been edited, it reads, “Strains in global financial markets have eased”— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Comma.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The comma is used to separate the introductory phrase "The way it's been edited" from the rest of the sentence, and it does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 308.
 MS. DANKER. —comma, “though they continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "though they continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook" simply provides additional information about the topic being discussed, without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 309.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it simply states a fact.


Passage number 310.
 MS. DANKER.  Okay.  With that sentence inserted in alternative B, instead of what’s there now, as well as the directive, let me call the roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing instructions or explaining a process.


Passage number 311.
 Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke Yes President Lacker No President Lockhart Yes President Pianalto Yes Governor Raskin Yes Governor Tarullo Yes President Williams Yes Governor Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  We’re going to continue with another item, which will be the discussion of our communication strategy more generally.  It’s 1:30.  Why don’t we take 30 minutes to get our lunches, and we’ll reconvene at 2:00.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement about the next topic of discussion and a suggestion for a lunch break.


Passage number 312.
[Lunch recess] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Now let’s recommence our meeting formally at this point. Our last principal item is item 4, “Discussion of Issues Related to Policy Communications.” 4 As you know, at the zero lower bound, we basically have two sets of tools.  The first are tools related to our balance sheet, and I’d like you to know that the staff is working on both reviewing and analyzing our previous LSAPs and the potential for future use, if the Committee should decide to go in that direction.  The staff is also looking at the maturity extension program—how it worked and, again, whether there would be any potential for further use of such a tool, if the Committee decided it were appropriate. I think I will mention that, as far as I know, nobody in the System is working on sterilized QE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the staff's work on reviewing and analyzing previous tools related to the balance sheet, as well as looking at the potential for future use of these tools. The mention of nobody in the System working on sterilized QE is stated as a matter of fact.


Passage number 313.
  Therefore, reports to that effect— MR. FISHER.  Are sterile.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that reports to a certain effect are sterile without any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 314.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. —are greatly exaggerated and may reflect badly on whoever leaked it, if somebody did.  Anyway, so that is under way, and we’ll want to make sure that we’re well prepared for whatever eventuality may arise. The second major tool, of course, is communication strategy, which is something we’ve been working on for some time.  And I commend the Committee for very thoughtful work on this area.  We want further discussion of that today. I want to say, first of all, that—fortunately, I think—we have no intention to come to any final decisions today.  The purpose of today’s discussion is to get guidance from the Committee on future directions and how we might address some of the concerns that were raised in the previous go-rounds.  In particular, I will say that when we put in the contingent date—back in August, I guess it was—it was my belief and expectation that at some point, we would move to a more state-contingent type of description.  That has a very substantial advantage, which is that as long as the state contingency is 4 The materials used in the discussion are appended to this transcript (appendix 4).  unchanged, even if the outlook changes, you don’t have to make adjustments to the statement.  But we didn’t succeed in a few attempts, looking narrowly at some particular language, to come to that improvement.  So today, I want to open the floor more widely to talk about a variety of different ways in which we might improve the state contingency of our communication.  First of all, there are some alternative-language paragraphs given in this memo that was circulated.  Those are only there for discussion purposes.  We shouldn’t spend a lot of time editing them in detail.  Rather, they’re just some different alternative approaches that we might use if we decide to go with using the statement to clarify the nature of our forward guidance.  That’s one possibility.  But in addition, there are other possibilities, including modifications to the SEP, and yet even other things, like potentially, for example, a common forecast or a variety of things one can imagine. If we make progress on something related to the statement or to the SEP, potentially we could even come to you in April or June with a specific proposal.  If it’s something that takes a longer lead time, obviously, we won’t be able to do that that quickly.  But again, the purpose of this item is just to get the Committee’s input. One comment on commitment and those kinds of questions.  First, I want to commend the authors of the memorandums that were circulated.  They were very useful, as a number of people have already noted today.  And one of the things that those memorandums noted is that you can have a state-contingent rule or a state-contingent commitment, which differs according to a variety of things, including whether or not you think that we have credibility to make forward commitments—for example, for time-consistent policies in the future—or whether you think that we should adjust for the zero lower bound or whether we should just be following a simpler, perhaps more robust rule.  When you think about what we’re doing in the SEP when we give our own interest rate projections, we haven’t really specified what we mean by “optimalpolicy.” And in particular, if you are somebody who strongly believes that we do have credibility and the ability to commit at least a few years in advance, presumably that’s reflected in your optimal policy path.  What I’m saying here is that, while the communication issue is the preeminent one, the discussion has raised some questions about exactly what we mean by “optimal,” and I think any discussion that bears on that would probably also be useful.  So with that, I will stop and begin a go-round.  And I’ll start with Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage is focused on discussing future directions and potential improvements, and the speaker commends the committee for their thoughtful work. There is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 315.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude to President Plosser.


Passage number 316.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 317.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 318.
  MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me begin by apologizing for my impolitic comments to President Evans in the previous round.  I’d like to request, Mr. Chairman, that I not follow President Evans in the future.  Let me also say, I’d request that President Evans not follow me.  [Laughter] No, I do apologize. That was wrong of me, and I don’t want to have the camaraderie around here break down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is apologizing for their previous comments and requesting a change in the order of speaking, but there is no argument or disagreement stated.


Passage number 319.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is simply expressing gratitude towards Jim.


Passage number 320.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a polite expression of gratitude from President Rosengren.


Passage number 321.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As we think about additional steps in our communication strategy, we need to keep in mind what we’re trying to achieve.  The goal is to improve the transparency of decisionmaking so that the public understands the likely path of monetary policy, and why that path has been chosen, without reducing the quality of the deliberative process.  One way of doing this would be to provide a consensus forecast and a consensus path for monetary policy based on that forecast.  However, reaching such a consensus does not seem practical given the size of the Committee and the diversity in our views of how best to forecast the economy and of the appropriate monetary policy given that forecast.  In fact, given the uncertainties in understanding the economy and the effect of monetary policy, I think the diversity of views expressed around the table is a strength of our system.  Trying to force consensus around a forecast might hurt, rather than help, the deliberative process. While a consensus forecast may not be practical or desirable, explicitly linking individual policy paths and economic outlooks would allow the public to better interpret individual forecasts.  In addition, if the identity of the participant is provided, the public will know which projections correspond to voters and which to nonvoters, a distinction that is important for forecasting the likely policy actions of the Committee.  Thus, I am in favor of releasing the full matrix of projections to the public and identifying the individual associated with each of the projections.   With such information, the likely path of policy and the degree of consensus concerning the forecast and policy will be revealed to the public.  Views on the forecast or appropriate policy that differ from the central tendency would be more transparently revealed, helping the public to assess the degree of uncertainty and disagreement around the monetary policy path.  Another benefit of identifying the participant’s forecast and monetary policy path would be to hold each of us accountable for our projections.  Over time, I would expect economists to evaluate the quality of our individual forecasts and our implicit reaction functions. In terms of paragraph 3, we should move away from calendar dates but be specific about economic outcomes that we expect would result in a significant change in policy.  My preference would be a statement like 3.4, where we provide specific triggers for exiting the zero bound but also make clear that additional accommodation would be appropriate if we do not make sufficient progress toward both elements of our mandate.  Complemented by such guidance, the SEP will provide sufficient information on when people expect to hit the trigger such that we would no longer need a specific date in the statement.  My second choice would be paragraph 3.2, but I would again omit the date.  I would not be supportive of paragraph 3.3, which does not provide specific guidance to the public.  If we cannot reach a consensus around economic triggers, we should continue to use forward guidance with calendar dates because it has proven to be a surprisingly useful way to provide greater clarity on our likely path that has had a meaningful impact on medium- and long-term interest rates.  While I am not opposed to disclosing alternative scenarios, that seems like an action that can be considered over time. We’ve been making a variety of changes to our communication strategy, and we may want to consider the marginal benefit of additional disclosures.  I am reminded when I refinance my mortgage that excessive disclosures may be less useful than targeted disclosures. It may be   worthwhile for the communications subcommittee to consider at what point we reach diminishing returns from additional disclosures.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is presenting their own thoughts and preferences but does not argue against any specific points or express opposition to other viewpoints.


Passage number 322.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 323.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think it’s obvious already that there are a lot of moving parts here, and the questions and the subquestions reflect that.  So to be selective today, I’d like to make four points in overview, and then I’ll elaborate further on some of them and comment on the specifics of the language that was put in the appendix.  The four points are, first, I think we have a lack of clear consensus regarding the role of the SEP; second, I believe, as has already been stated by one or more, that it’s desirable to get away from date guidance; third, there are complications introduced by elevating the role of the SEP, which I think we already have in policy communications, given that the current practice is that we publish them only four times a year and we have eight meetings a year; and, fourth, it’s desirable that the specifics of any economic conditionality be durable.  So let me make a few more points—not exhaustive— partly in elaboration of those and some other points. As I said, I think there’s a lack of consensus regarding the role of the SEP practice, and maybe it would be good for the group to step back and have a discussion on this before implementing any further changes.  My own view is that the SEP provides background color and texture that supplement the postmeeting statement and the minutes.  The SEP provides a broad sense of how the FOMC participants as a group are connecting the dots between desired economic outcomes and policy.  If we’re trying to convey in general terms how future Committees might react to economic conditions, one could argue that using the SEP is a more inclusive way of doing that. But at the same time, I would argue that the SEP should not substitute for actionable, consensus-based votes of the Committee. I am a little reluctant to godown the road of providing information in the SEP at an individual level.  I don’t think it’s healthy to encourage the public or Fed watchers to indulge in what I call FOMC Kremlinology. I do think an idea worth considering, if we want to add a bit more information to get closer to the constitution of the current Committee, would be to show who are permanent members and who are revolving members, but not necessarily just focus on the current Committee.  After all, in any given calendar year, the value of distinguishing between voters and nonvoters degrades as you get closer to year-end. Now, on the specific question related to the statement, as I expressed in the policy round, I see forward guidance in terms of a calendar date as likely to be a problem going forward, and at a minimum, I would suggest downplaying the date of liftoff by stating the economic conditionality first and putting focus on the conditionality language if we hold to that language.  I do accept that using the statement to provide more information on the Committee’s reaction function and policy conditionality could be helpful and could deliver some incremental stimulus, and I would strongly prefer that any language that is added to accomplish this observe the principle of policy decisions being outlook based or forecast based. I’d also favor words that add some flexibility to deal with the notional reliance on a single indicator for mandate consistency—for example, the unemployment rate. So, following from those points, I actually prefer alternative 3.1 in the appendix.  I think it qualifies the quantitative thresholds with the word “nearing” that suggests a forecast-based discipline.  The phrase “medium-term inflation outlook” does this as well.  A focus on the unemployment rate could be problematic, as I’ve already suggested, in that changing labor force participation could keep the unemployment rate elevated even while there is robust employment growth.  So the phrase “including the pace of improvement in labor market conditions” helps with this problem.  I like 3.1 because it’s simple and concise.  To me, 3.2 adds complexity, although I would say the use of a reference to inflation expectations is helpful.  It is, in my mind, covered by the expression “medium-term inflation outlook” in 3.1.  Alternative 3.3 strikes me as a restatement of the balanced-approach policy principle, and 3.4 lengthens the statement and adds more complexity than I think is advisable. Regarding the quantitative thresholds themselves, the levels should be chosen with the intent that they be durable and therefore constrain to some degree next year’s and the following year’s voting Committee.  So I think the numerical thresholds have to be decided with the full deliberation involving all participants using techniques like straw votes to determine whether a consensus actually exists, and then that can be voted on by the Committee.  Today, we’re not really deliberating on the specifics, but I do want to mention that, as regards the unemployment threshold in alternative 3.1, I would err on the side of something higher than 7 percent, given all of the imprecision around questions like the level at which the unemployment rate would begin to generate inflation pressures and the speed at which pressures might develop.  Also, perhaps alternatively, I would change “close to or somewhat below” to simply “close to.” Finally, on the question of a consensus forecast, I think President Rosengren suggested the same thing.  It strikes me as a painful process and not, in the end, all that productive.  I think the SEP can and should be used to provide the public with a sense of all the views at the table that inform the deliberations of the formal voting Committee, and the forecast information in the SEP, if fully fleshed out, can suffice to give this sense of what the consensus is. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lockhart expresses his own views and preferences on the role of the SEP, the use of forward guidance, and the specific language in the statement. He also disagrees with the idea of consensus forecasts.


Passage number 324.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Williams without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 325.
  MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided. Please provide the specific passage or context for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 326.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The discussion so far reminds me quite a bit of our family discussions at home over what to have for dinner.  Typically, it revolves around two issues.  One is, no one is happy with the food choices we have in the house.  Second is, everybody is very hungry.  So we debate:  Should it be Italian, Thai food, seafood, whatever. And in the end, we go to the food court and everybody gets their own.  [Laughter] Over the past few years, this Committee has steadily improved our communication with economic and monetary policy outlooks.  We’ve made a lot of progress.  We’ve identified the food court.  I think we can do more to illuminate the connection between the two, between the economic and monetary policy outlooks—that is, to communicate our reaction function.  And here, I’m following up on what President Plosser said.  I think that really is our main goal, and the FOMC statement can certainly do better in this regard. Actually, I view paragraphs 3.1 or 3.2 or 3.4—any of them—as being improvements over what we’re currently doing.  Now, in keeping with past statements, any discussion should be concise and convey only the most important points.  If we try to convey too many nuances, the key points will get lost. Among the alternatives of paragraph 3, I have a slight preference for version 3.1, which provides, to me, the right amount and kind of information.  Notably, I do think the statement should still provide a policy liftoff date, and that date should evolve as the outlook changes.  In contrast, the economic conditions projected to hold at the time of liftoff will likely remain relatively stable.  Also, given the relative stability of the economic conditions at liftoff versus the liftoff date, I would move the calendar date to the end of paragraph 3 after laying out the economic conditions that underlie the policy, which I think President Lockhart mentioned.  I don’t see the advantage to providing additional forecast detail over the medium run in the statement as illustrated in the alternative language for paragraph 3.2, shown on page 5 of the  handout.  Again, I think the focus of our statement is not on the forecast per se, but on the relationship between the outlook and the policy decision. The SEP can also help align the public’s expectations with our own expectations and reduce uncertainty about the future path of policy, and I do believe that over time, as our forecasts for economic activity, inflation, and the funds rate evolve, the public will get a better picture of the state-contingent nature of our policy reaction function.  Further enhancements could be made to the SEP to speed that process along.  Now, we are doing a very good job of portraying the dispersion in the views of the participants, so I don’t think we need to go further in that direction.  And I am, because of that, somewhat nervous about the idea of publishing the full matrix of the participants, because, again, it would highlight more of the dispersion.  I think what we need to do, and this follows on a number of comments that people have made, is now provide clearer views on what the consensus of the Committee is, and we could do a better job of describing the central view of the participants. In a perfect world, we would all agree on a Committee forecast and publish that, as the Bank of England does.  That is best practice in many ways.  But until we reach this forecast nirvana, a useful intermediate step would be to highlight something closer to the central view of the participants already.  And I believe that President Plosser already mentioned this idea, but we’ve been thinking about this quite a bit, and that is, we could take a page from surveys of private-sector forecasts, such as the SPF or the Blue Chip.  Their press releases focus on the median forecast for a few key aggregates.  Now, the median has some desirable statistical properties.  It’s a very good summary statistic of the distribution, a good summary statistic of the center of the Committee, and it’s relatively insensitive to outliers. In particular, it would be useful for the SEP table 1 to include the medians of all the projections, including the economic variables and the funds rate.  As it stands, until the minutes are released,market participants summarize the Committee’s forecast by computing the midpoint of the central tendency.  Publishing the medians of the economic and interest rate projections just before the Chairman’s press conference would help focus attention on the central view of the participants, which could help, I think, clarify our message. Finally, again, a point that’s already been made—it would be useful for the SEP to include more information about uncertainty.  In particular, I think it would be useful for the SEP to start including uncertainty intervals for the funds rate, just as it does for other economic variables.  Table 2 in the SEP summarizes the historical accuracy of forecasts for GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation, but it doesn’t do so for the funds rate, even though short-term interest rate forecasts are subject to considerable uncertainty, as we’ve already discussed. Adding these confidence ranges would reinforce the notion that our outlook for the future path of the funds rate is not an exogenous commitment but depends on how economic conditions evolve.  In other words, it’s state contingent.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although the speaker is making suggestions for improvements and enhancements, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the progress made by the Committee and offers their own perspective on how the communication can be further improved.


Passage number 327.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude from President Evans.


Passage number 328.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 329.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the idea of communicating more about how the Committee’s outlook affects its policy decisions, and I’d like to think that we can find a way before too long to provide more conditions-based guidance than date-based guidance. In principle, including inflation and unemployment thresholds would have an advantage over using a date.  Our discussions this morning illustrated the many pitfalls of using a date. Also, we may have more agreement on the conditions for a move, even though we may disagree on the timing.  This is especially true if the main source of our disagreement is about the pace of the recovery in our outlooks.  In practice, however, we appear to disagree on what we regard as the appropriate reaction function to the outlook, and it is this difference that poses the strongest  challenge for reaching agreement on thresholds.  When my staff examined the recent SEP projections for appropriate policy and our projections for the economy, their analysis indicated that a large part of the difference in the takeoff date could be attributed to differences in what we submitted for our long-run unemployment rate.  With considerable dispersion in our views of such a fundamental variable, which is a key input tool of the Taylor rule, it could be hard to come up with a statement regarding an unemployment threshold that accurately summarizes the range of the Committee’s views and provides simple and clear guidance to the public.  I worry, however, that if we find it hard to come up with compromise wording that accounts for differences in our longer-run unemployment rates and other differences in our views on appropriate policy, it would likely be too complicated to still be informative. I totally agree with Governor Yellen’s comments earlier about clarity versus transparency. So I have a preference for a straightforward statement, and quantitative thresholds would be the most straightforward.  But again, if we could legitimately form a consensus around a straightforward statement, such as paragraph 3.1 in part B, I could support it.  I do worry, as we’ve been talking this afternoon, that consensus around this simple phrasing would be hard to achieve. For example, I estimate my long-run unemployment rate at 6 percent, and so I would be more comfortable with an unemployment threshold of 7½ percent.  However, I could accept close to 7 percent, with the phrase that was included in the language of B.3.1 that talked about the pace of improvement in labor markets.  So I would be more comfortable with a straightforward, clearer statement, but given the difficulty that we’re hearing about reaching a consensus, I would be willing to support some qualitative language as long as we have more assurance that the qualitative language would provide clarity.  Again, after listening to this afternoon’s discussions, I know that is a huge challenge, but I’m confident that the subcommittee  on communications is up to this challenge. I want us to avoid making still more changes to our communications that could be hard for the public to interpret.  In my view, there is a lot to be said for waiting and letting the public digest our recent changes and for us to better understand the strengths and weaknesses of further communications changes in our policies before we enact further enhancements. So with that said, I do like the idea of incorporating some medium-term language in paragraph 2.  The current language that we use is too short-term focused.  Paragraph 2 of alternative C is about right in length, and it leaves further details to the SEP or the Chairman’s press conferences.  Regarding other enhancements that are listed or suggested by question 3, I think they are all good ideas worth considering.  I’d like to have more analysis about what we think the strengths and weaknesses of each of these ideas would be.  What would we be hoping to accomplish with each of these ideas.  So I’d be open to more discussion about these various ideas, but I’m not ready today to select any specific proposal.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention and disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, expresses support for the idea of communicating more about the Committee's outlook and providing conditions-based guidance instead of date-based guidance. However, she also acknowledges that there is disagreement among the Committee members on the appropriate reaction function and the long-run unemployment rate, which makes it difficult to reach agreement on specific thresholds. She expresses concerns about the complexity of reaching a consensus and the potential for confusion in communicating the Committee's views. Overall, she is open to discussion and considering different ideas, but she is not ready to select a specific proposal at this time.


Passage number 330.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President George.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 331.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the comments that have been made to this point, I’m going to set aside my formal comments and just react to a couple of things.  One is, given the changes that we’ve made so far in our communication strategy, I have been leaning toward the comments that President Pianalto made about letting things sit a while in terms of what we’ve already put out there and being very cautious in making further changes given the short amount of time in which we’ve made what I think are important changes here.  Regarding the connection between the outlook and the policy, as I looked at the questions, I really was drawn to the comment that Governor Yellen made about trying to be careful between transparency and clarity.  And so as I looked more at what would be clearer, then you get drawn  to things like thresholds or things that seem more specific.  I could not satisfy myself, as I looked at the “more specifics,” that they really took into account the full range of things that we think about, which is what makes this difficult to come to terms with—balancing the flexibility that President Bullard talked about with trying to be clearer to the public about what we’re doing.  And in that sense, I go back to the document on the longer-run goals and strategy, which laid out—albeit not in very specific terms, but clearer than I think we had been—what it is we are looking at in terms of our objectives.  So I’m satisfied with that piece, at least for the time being. As it relates to the SEP, I also have mixed feelings there.  I don’t know if I’d go as far as Vice Chairman Dudley in saying it’s a mess, but it might be close.  That said, I think we should not put too much on those projections, too.  Now that we’ve put them out there, it’s fair for the public to look at that as being background to a range of views.  I think we should be careful that they not get in the way of the responsibility of the Committee to come to a decision.  And so looking at those in the context of focusing on their central tendency might be the best we can do in the near term. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Ms. George, expresses mixed feelings and disagreement with certain aspects of the communication strategy, the use of thresholds, and the projections in the SEP. She acknowledges the difficulty in balancing flexibility and clarity and disagrees with Vice Chairman Dudley's characterization of the SEP as a mess. However, she does express satisfaction with the document on longer-run goals and strategy.


Passage number 332.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude towards President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 333.
 MR. EVANS.  I’m expecting something good here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses his anticipation for something positive.


Passage number 334.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  If we think that having a consensus forecast, as opposed to the heterogeneous mess that is the SEP, might save 2,000 jobs—you can imagine that providing more clarity about policy would be able to do that. If you look at recent estimates of the stimulus, the optimistic view is that jobs cost about $100,000 per job.  So saving 2,000 jobs is $200 million.  I think we should be able to spend the time to get that right, and 2,000 jobs across the country is not that much. Now, with that said, I also think it’s pretty feasible, so let me talk about why I say that. If you were to say to me, let’s write a consensus statement about monetary policy with 17 people in the room, and let’s start from scratch, you wouldn’t get anywhere, right. How do we get around that problem. We achieve that consensus on our written statement by focusing our discussion on a rather limited array of choices, and I think the same would work with devising a consensus outlook.  So what do we focus on.  There have been suggestions about using a median from the SEP.  I think there is some validity to that.  We could have some kind of survey process that would start with that as some information gathering, but my basic idea is more to link forecasts to the statements.  At each FOMC meeting, the staff prepares three alternative statements. For each statement, you could simply append a near-term forecast for the relevant variables that’s reasonably associated with those statements—basically a mathematical version of paragraph 1 of alternatives A, B and C.  Alternative A would typically be a weak outlook, B a middle outlook, and C a strong one.  When you voted for a statement, you’d be voting for the associated forecast, just as voting for an alternative is the same as voting for the associated monetary policy directive.  There are some logistical issues here about how to do this, how to get the information to the staff to allow them to do a good job on this—and Vice Chairman Dudley talked about this as well—but I think there are ways around this.  Basically, if you do an SEP maybe 10 days before the meeting, you can start to get the right kind of information to the staff.  You can combine that with the Tealbook A kinds of forecasts out of FRB/US.  I do not think this is an impossibility by any means. Essentially, a forecast for the relevant variables has a relatively small number of dimensions compared with the words we have to issue at each meeting. So I think I’ve covered all the questions.  I think we should work toward a consensus forecast, and that would greatly improve our communications.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion on the idea of having a consensus forecast and outlining their proposed approach to achieving it. They also mention some potential logistical issues that would need to be addressed, but they still believe that a consensus forecast is feasible and would improve communication.


Passage number 335.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher, is that a two-handed intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 336.
 MR. FISHER.  No, sir.  I apologize.  I have to leave at 4:00 p.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Mr. Fisher has to leave at 4:00 p.m.


Passage number 337.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Vice Chairman" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 338.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I just have a clarifying question. We have these three choices, which I think are interesting, but the question I have is, are you agreeing with the forecast associated with the three choices or the reaction function associated with those three choices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply seeking clarification about whether the person they are speaking to agrees with the forecast or the reaction function associated with the three choices.


Passage number 339.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I’m only proposing the forecast.  That was the only thing I was going to describe—not a reaction function.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their proposal and clarifying what they were going to describe. There is no indication of any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 340.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "Okay" is a neutral and non-contentious response that indicates agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 341.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply contains a polite expression of gratitude from President Fisher.


Passage number 342.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was thinking of your comment about, you were asked if you were in charge of foreign policy; my old thing—monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It only includes a statement made by Mr. Fisher, without any opposing viewpoint or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 343.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Foreign policy is even scarier, actually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's opinion about foreign policy.


Passage number 344.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Lacker.


Passage number 345.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I said a bit about communication this morning, so I’ll try to be brief. First, there’s a good reason this is hard.  At Committee meetings where you’re just deciding on the funds rate, you just decide.  When you’re looking forward and you’re talking about the future, you’re talking about a bunch of states of the world, and waiting until you just have one to deal with is always going to be easier—waiting until you know what next June is going to look like.  So it’s just bound to be hard. We should understand collectively what we mean before we publish it.  That’s pretty simple, but it’s easy to lose sight of, and I think we did that in January and, to some extent, last August.  I think we left the room with different interpretations of whether we were making a commitment or not, and we need to sort that out.  A lesson I’ve learned just from today’s discussion is that it would be useful to think through contingencies—have the staff help us think through, all right, what if this happens. What if the data come in this way over the next couple of quarters.  How does this language evolve then. Is it going to be graceful to turn it in this direction or that direction.  We’ve been focused on trying to make the language easier.  Your point was a good one, Mr. Chairman.  Yes, for us to adopt President Williams’s suggestion is a turn in the other direction; we haven’t really thought through what a turn is going to look like.  I don’t think it’s reasonable or practical—this is a corollary—to do more than we can agree on, to say more than we can agree on.  And we did this with the exit strategy—we got a workable consensus—and then with the consensus statement.  We worked really hard, we left out stuff we couldn’t agree on, and we included everything we could agree on—a lowest-common-denominator approach.  I think a lot of the alternatives I see here, in specificity, go beyond, theoretically, what would be part of a reasonable consensus here. I want to say a word about commitment. I’ve heard President Kocherlakota make some seemingly nihilistic statements about the inability of the Committee to commit future Committees.  And I don’t think a black-and-white view of that is correct. I think we are committed.  We have been committed.  We have renewed the commitment made by Chairman Volcker to keep inflation low and stable.  We’ve renewed that every time we’ve responded to mini inflation scares, and thankfully, we don’t get many anymore. It was our experience in the 1980s and 1990s to respond to those in ways that were detrimental to our objectives in the very short run, to the extent that they required tightening rates in order to fulfill that commitment.  So I think President Kocherlakota is right—you have to ask the question; if we’re going to commit ourselves, don’t there have to be incentives.  And I think the incentives are well in line there for us to live up to that implicit commitment, but complicated, contingent, reaction-function kinds of commitments are going to be harder for us to live up to.  It’s going to take longer to falsify or verify whether we’re complying with it, so I think that’s going to be hard. About the FOMC versus the SEP—this is related to commitment. It’s one thing for the Committee to vote on a rate change today.  But to vote on policy three years from now—for this Committee—it’s in rotation, the membership is going to change in three years.  That suggests something more like the approach you used, Mr. Chairman, for the exit strategy and the consensus statement, which were meant to bind future voting members of the Committee to some extent.  You developed a broad consensus among all participants.  They were meant to last long enough to live through various rotations of memberships—maybe not bind in a legal sense, but to be a lasting agreement in the Committee. So when I think about communication, I’m not sure there’s much more we can do.  When I think about what we can agree on, and then think about what value is going to be added, I’m skeptical that we can save—I don’t know, did President Kocherlakota say 200,000 jobs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is mainly discussing the challenges and considerations surrounding communication and commitment within the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).


Passage number 346.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  No, 2,000 jobs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states the number of jobs as 2,000.


Passage number 347.
 MR. LACKER.  Two thousand jobs. Is that, like, Fed watchers put out of work— [laughter]—or how does that work. We can talk about this offline.  But think about the third chart in exhibit 1 that our Manager showed us this morning.  And it showed this little slope that primary dealers have in mind that the unemployment rate that’s going to trigger an exit differs depending on the inflation rate.  I think if you asked them the questions about our reaction function, qualitatively market participants would get it generally right—that if growth picks up, we’re going to exit earlier, and if growth is slow, we’re going to exit later. The understanding of the public and financial markets is pretty good, is pretty close to what we can agree with.  I think the distance between what we can manage to agree on here and what the public understands is minimal.  So, look at an example.  A lot of these have the unemployment rate as a threshold or trigger, but there are a lot of policy rules and models where the right thing to do is to respond to economic growth.  As you know, the core of all the models we use is this growth model where the real rate depends on the growth rate, not the level of some resource utilization.  So there’s an argument that you could put GDP growth at 4 percent or something in there equally as plausibly.  And I agree with President Bullard—there’s enough uncertainty about the model we ought to be using, or the policy reaction function that best corresponds to optimal policy, that we’re going to have a hard time getting very much further. A simple qualitative characterization, like 3.3, is, I think, all we ought to aspire to.  But even then, the use of the words “resource slack” is going to divide us.  There are going to be differences of views about whether that’s a reasonable thing.  I   understand that everything is estimated with imprecision, but something about which people can think it’s between 0 and 6 percent might be of limited usefulness for us in this setting. Let me just close by pointing out what we’ve accomplished in the last year—press conferences, the exit strategy statement, the consensus statement.  The exit strategy statement was designed to achieve something.  It was designed to move public understanding in a certain way.  It was designed to say, “Hey, we’ve got a plan,” and I think that was very effective.  The “2013” language—maybe things are worse than we think, or we’re more dovish than you’re going to think.  It was designed to convey one of those two.  It was designed to push down the yield curve, and I think it’s done that.  The Vice Chairman is right about that. If this is a journey, I think we should be looking for a rest area.  [Laughter] I hope it has a nice food court for President Williams and his family—maybe South of the Border or something.  But I think we’ve achieved a lot, and a great legacy has been left from what we’ve done now.  We need to wrestle with what we’ve got.  I don’t think we fully understand what we have.  That’s the lesson from this morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different aspects of the Federal Reserve's policies and the public's understanding of them. There is no disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 348.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any statements or propositions that can be argued or disputed. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude from the speaker to President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 349.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I have to defend myself against the charge of being a nihilist.  [Laughter] I used the word “commitment” overly broadly, President Lacker.  I was only referring to the specific issue of commitment—a lot of the policies that would be beneficial in the current environment involve having a relatively higher-than-target rate of inflation along with a low rate of unemployment in the later part of the decade.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of clarification and explanation from Mr. Kocherlakota.


Passage number 350.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a single statement and does not involve any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 351.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  And that’s the kind of commitment I was questioning as being difficult to carry out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is stating that carrying out a certain commitment is challenging.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 352.
  MR. LACKER. If I could respond, Mr. Chairman—the way I’d put it is, that’s a commitment that you’d question the credibility of.  You’d question the credibility of that commitment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "you'd question the credibility of that commitment" implies doubt or skepticism towards the commitment being discussed.


Passage number 353.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 354.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would insert that credibility is not a 0/1 variable.  The facts show that we’ve had effects on rates out for a couple of years—now, maybe not 10 years, but maybe 2 years. Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that credibility is not a binary variable and mentioning some facts regarding the effects on rates over a specific time period. The mention of "maybe not 10 years, but maybe 2 years" does not indicate disagreement but rather a clarification or distinction.


Passage number 355.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think I’m going to largely agree with President Lacker. For the life of me, I’m having a hard time figuring out what problem it is we’re actually trying to solve. The first thing—is there some agreement we’ve reached that we think we need to communicate to the public that we haven’t.  I just don’t sense that there’s that level of agreement out there that we need, in the interest of transparency, to communicate.  And then the second thing is, I don’t see that there’s a level of confusion in the marketplace that necessitates us communicating something.  And I would go to the same panel 3 that President Lacker referenced in Brian’s presentation.  It looks to me as though the market understands there’s a tradeoff between unemployment and inflation rates.  And when we published what we published, they moved down their expectations, but it seems to me that they heard us.  The new line, the March 2012 line, doesn’t look terribly different than what’s attempted to be described in a lot of these attachments. Furthermore, if you go to panel 2, which is the distribution of the first increase in the target fed funds rate, it gives me some information. It tells me when a group of dealers think that liftoff would be.  And it gives me an idea of what the move has been over the last intermeeting period.  That’s the same information we’re going to give about the participants on this Committee.  So I think that’s doing something.  I think the way market participants come to that is that they formed opinions about what the Committee is likely to do based on two things—one, what we say; and, two, what the Committee has actually done over time.  And then, finally, most of the public doesn’t care how we’re making these decisions.  Savers want to know, how much interest am I going to get and when.  Borrowers want to know, how much interest am I going to pay and when.  And investors want to know, what are my assets going to be worth and when. And as unsatisfactory as the date is to many of you, it works for them.  They can understand it.  So I have a tough time. To go to the specific questions, I think anything that includes two new data points, two new numbers, just gives us additional points of disagreement, additional reasons for someone to dissent from the statement and not find a way to support it.  It also gives an opportunity for those two new numbers to be different from the consensus statement that we did all agree to and publish.  It doesn’t weight the variations, and it is different from history, because every time I compare this with the fed funds paths in the alternative simulations, which are based on the historical actions of the Committee and a lot of information, if I assume that previous Committees made reasonable decisions, then it’s hard for me to assume that something that’s different from that is a reasonable thing for me to agree to. In terms of clarifying who projected what in the SEP—again, I think the only thing anybody really cares about is, what does the Chairman project. Once they know what the Chairman projects, their interest in what the rest of us project goes way down.  And it is a three-year horizon, and everybody will vote within that three-year horizon.  So to me, there’s a difference between committing some theoretical future Committee and committing the person who will actually vote on the decision in two years when they’re sitting right next to me and they’ve said that they don’t like it.  So I think that is a difference. Lastly, these discussions have all been about, again, when and how we exit.  There’s been no discussion about how we communicate thresholds for any future easing—for QE3—which is what I think there’s a lot of misunderstanding about, a lot of desire for information about, and that’s something that it would be fruitful to talk about.  And then the second question we discussed in the policy round—which is, what is the threshold and the increment for us moving the date that we have in our statement today.—we need to think about that carefully.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. Duke, is largely agreeing with President Lacker and stating her understanding of the situation. She expresses doubts about the need to communicate certain information to the public and shares her perspective on the market's understanding and reaction. While she raises some concerns and offers her own viewpoint, there is no direct conflict or disagreement with any specific argument or statement.


Passage number 356.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher, whenever you have to leave, please feel free.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a polite expression of gratitude and a request for the addressee to leave whenever necessary. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 357.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 358.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot support this proposal, as it would undermine the financial stability of our state.


Passage number 359.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think my reaction to the discussion this afternoon, as opposed to the item on the agenda, is that we’re now engaged in a heavy dose of over-theorizing.  And there are some risks associated with that, which have been highlighted by several people already. With respect to the first set of questions, it feels to me as though a specific problem, which I think we all acknowledge in the static nature of a date once chosen in a particular FOMC statement at a particular moment, has now been generalized into the question of whether there ought to be more quantitative indicators showing the relationship between policy and economic conditions or forecasting. Like Betsy, I think the supposed generalizations are highly asymmetrical. The triggers are in there only for tightening, not for easing, so presumably this is  not a model that would actually be used in normal times, but instead is specific to the circumstances that we face right now. Narayana makes excellent points about the degree to which the use of quantitative triggers can be, and probably would be, misunderstood outside the confines of this room.  I would add to that my own uneasiness with the specific indicators that are reflected in the draft paragraphs.  So I think on this one, my current preference would be to treat the date issue for what it is, which is a somewhat discrete, though significant, issue that is a byproduct of a zero interest rate period during which we are trying to use communication to substitute to some degree for more-conventional movements in the federal funds rate and, on that ad hoc basis, to primarily use the Chairman’s press conferences to adjust, as necessary, expectations around what that date actually means.  And there may come a point at which we’d want to change the date. On the SEP itself—and I think this is really 2 and 3—the point that Janet made at the outset, and a number of you have echoed, is critical.  Sometimes it doesn’t seem this way to me when I walk in here—that this is a collective decisionmaking process, as opposed to people coming in already knowing exactly what they’re going to do.  But this is a collective process in the sense that it’s a Committee and it requires a vote.  And I do think that the way in which the SEP has been put in place meant we didn’t have a chance adequately to take into account the idiosyncrasies of our particular monetary policy committee, both its size and the peculiarity of nonregular voting members.  I would be in favor of thinking about how to give more focus to the projections so as to make it a little bit more clear how they relate to the collective decision.  But I would really counsel against trying to do that in April or June.  It’s a bit of a muddle out there, but I don’t think it’s a horrible muddle, and I don’t think it’s creating big problems.  So it seems to me that this is a case in which we might actually want to wait a while, see how people’s   perceptions of the projections—with some guidance by the Chairman in his press conferences— evolve over time, and then maybe next year have the subcommittee—whatever Janet’s group is—think about what kinds of changes we may want to make in light of a year’s worth of experience rather than of one or two releases’ worth of experience with it. Boy, Narayana is heroic in thinking consensus is possible.  And if that were right, I think that would be optimal.  If it’s not—and I fear that it would be tough—I hope we would at least think about the alternative scenarios approach to focus people on particular specific circumstances and then maybe give a little bit of focus, in turn, to the projections.  On the voter– nonvoter issue, it seems to me there’s an argument for the proposition that the person who is going to be voting a year and a half from now is actually more important than the person voting now with respect to the language that’s in there.  So I think it’s actually important for the public to understand who is in what camp, but that’s not always the case. I actually find myself favoring the full matrix with identification of individuals, but that’s really only a first, and probably not fully considered, thought.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his opinions and preferences on different topics, but he does not directly disagree with anyone else.


Passage number 360.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


Passage number 361.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll first provide a general perspective. It seems to me worthwhile to strive to give the public a clearer understanding of the links between the economic outlook and the Committee’s monetary policy decisions.  And on this front, I think we’ve made great strides. In particular, the expansion of the postmeeting statement, along with the careful attention that we pay to the words in it, now provides the public with much more information than before.  This “build-out” of the postmeeting statement has been enhanced with press conferences, minutes, and the SEP.  And I say this not because I believe in quantity over quality, or transparency over clarity.  It strikes me that while the longer postmeeting statementcertainly provides more information, we have been thoughtful and methodical about the quality of what’s being communicated.  Phrases and changes are discussed extensively, and this is appropriate because our words matter. I also imagine that at some point in time, we would contemplate language as being unnecessary and we would delete it. At the same time, we’ve provided the public with a lot of new information regarding participants’ projections.  And this, too, strikes me as the right step, although I have to say that I’ve always viewed this as one step in a multistep process. To assist the public in understanding the linkages between the economic outlook and monetary policy decisions, we started with a formulation of projections at the individual participant level.  And this was the first step; this was the transparency. However, once the individual components are understood, the public still doesn’t know how the components became reshaped at the Committee level and result in policy decisions.  In other words, do they not have perfect clarity.  They don’t see, for example, how the individual economic outlooks, particularly in the choice to contract or expand or stay put, depend on the Committee’s view of how the decisions to contract, expand, or stay put relate to particular economic conditions and assumptions.  Without clear guidance, the public is left with speculation and uncertainty.  And I’ll say that the speculation and uncertainty don’t derive from not knowing which of the individual dots on the chart drive the Committee’s actions. That should not be the objective.  I don’t think we’re trying to individualize members on the Committee. I’m not sure the public is served by knowing who dot A is and who dot B is.  Rather, the speculation arises from the public not knowing what our reaction function is.  So in my view, we should be striving to enhance understanding of what the public should look for in the economy come late 2014.  This, to me, would encourage a reasonable degree of certainty about the economic factors that we believe, as  a Committee, are relevant to the choice in a date of contraction or expansion or staying put.  Now, my current sense is that there’s no consensus on what this reaction function looks like, and these comments really are meant to convey that this vacuum adds to uncertainties, which— theoretically, at least—could otherwise be minimized. I’ll comment briefly on questions 2 and 3.  First of all, about further adjustments to the SEP—yes, I think further adjustments would be helpful.  There is much room for improvement in the SEP, and I would prefer, though, to continuously evaluate options for clarification of the SEP, if possible, in one fell swoop rather than as a kind of drip, drip, incremental process that could give the public the argument that we have been withholding that which we decided not to provide in the prior SEP.  The third question, about other potential approaches for clarifying, really brings back, again, this distinction between transparency and clarity.  And it reminds me that there is an elephant in the room here, and that’s the call by many in the public to disclose, with a shorter lag, the transcripts of these meetings. I think that for many in the public, this is the ultimate transparency option.  The true definition of a reaction function consists of the dynamics that exist here.  Many people in the public would argue that anything we do short of that falls short of true transparency.  Now, I don’t agree with this view, because of this distinction between transparency and clarity.  And my sense is that we are proceeding in a responsible, deliberate, thoughtful manner, and throwing the transcripts out earlier may provide transparency but, certainly, will not provide clarity. I do, though, want to mention this because these efforts that we’re undergoing still represent, I think, a big disconnect from what some in the public understand to be complete transparency.  So one recommendation that I have for managing the public debate and communication to keep control of the pace and structure of disclosure is to consider a shift in the rhetoric that we use from one about transparency to one about clarity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is giving their perspective on the topic and making recommendations for improvement.


Passage number 362.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Thank you, all, for bearing with a long day and for a very good conversation.  I particularly want to commend the Committee on the interactive nature of this discussion.  There was an awful lot of back-and-forth that I thought was very helpful.  As I said, we weren’t going to come to any decisions today—[laughter]—and I don’t really think that I can accurately summarize the whole discussion, but let me make a couple of comments.  First, there were a number of people who expressed a desire to let things sit and percolate for a while to give the public time to digest all of the steps we’ve taken, et cetera. That’s fine in principle, but as today’s discussion suggested, we do have the issue of what to do about the current form of the statement.  And we’ll have the same issue next meeting. So, if nothing else, we should at least—and I say “we” in this case now, but I think the staff, with some further outreach—think about some kind of improvement in our broader communication strategy, whether it’s the press conference or whether it’s a longer statement or whether it’s something that just gives a more fulsome description of what it is the date means and what we might be thinking about as we look at it.  That’s one observation.  There were other interesting suggestions about looking at, say, the Bank of England’s monetary policy report—or Inflation Report, I guess it’s called—to see what we might learn from that.  Of course, we already do two Monetary Policy Reports to the Congress each year.  There’s a lot of staff effort invested there.  It seems to me that we might conceivably end up reallocating that effort to four shorter reports, for example, that would be more useful to the public than what we have now. So I think that those are some directions, and again, we’ll look through the transcripts of this discussion to see what else we can pull out.  For example, there were a number of people who had comments on the scenarios option, maybe using the minutes.  There was a good discussion of whether more disclosure in the SEP would be useful.  So there are various things that we can look at, and again, I very much appreciate the discussion. Before closing, I want to mention one other thing, which is that one question that has been raised about our SEP is the fact that between June and November, there’s a very long gap between what should be, in some sense, quarterly projections.  And I’ve asked Governor Yellen and her subcommittee to look at this.  We need to look at it.  We need to make some decisions soon about this because, of course, we have to prepare our FOMC meeting schedule for next year.  But possible options might be adding a fifth SEP or moving around the meetings—perhaps even having seven meetings that are two days.  There are various options that we could look at.  And we’re going to have some discussion of that, but clearly we have to come to some resolution soon because we do need to set the meeting schedule for next year.  If anyone has thoughts or views on this general subject, perhaps you can be in touch with Governor Yellen.  [Laughter] Any further questions or comments.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 363.
 MR. LACKER.  Earlier in the meeting about today’s statement, about “2014,” the issue of commitment came up. I interpreted the view that having made the statement raises the bar for action as that it represents some commitment.  That contradicts what you’ve said in public about it being a forecast. I take the status quo to be that it’s a forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Lacker believes that making a statement in 2014 raises the bar for action and represents a commitment, while the other person (not specified in the passage) disagrees and believes it is only a forecast. This difference in perspective creates disagreement or contention.


Passage number 364.
  Can I assume that it remains that way until we formally adopt— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I asked for discussion of that point today. I think one thing that I was trying to convey—and maybe I misunderstood your question originally—was, was this an unconditional commitment.  There may be some people in the public who say, “Well, the Fed says they’re not changing rates until late 2014—unconditionally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 365.
” MR. LACKER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes one short statement, so there is no room for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 366.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And I was very clear that that is certainly not what we’re doing, that this is conditional on the factors that we discuss in the statement.  However, I don’t think this Committee has really thoroughly hashed out whether or not the reaction function that is embedded in that conditional commitment is a Taylor rule or an attempt at an optimal policy under commitment or what.  And I think that question is not yet fully resolved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While the speaker acknowledges that the Committee has not fully resolved the question of the reaction function, there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 367.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a neutral statement or question.


