Passage number 1.
 Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on  December 15–16, 2009  December 15, 2009—Afternoon Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon, everybody. PARTICIPANTS. Good afternoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are simply greeting each other.


Passage number 2.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We need a motion to close our meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply requesting someone to make a motion to end the meeting.


Passage number 3.
 MR. KOHN. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states "So moved," indicating agreement or acceptance of a proposal.


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Our meeting today and tomorrow follows the basic sequence we’ve been having recently, but with an important addition, which is that we have a staff presentation on inflation dynamics.  We need about two hours for that presentation, I understand, and we’ve thought about it and decided to put it at the end of the meeting so we would have plenty of time to complete our policy decision.  But I hope that people will pay attention to the time and make sure we have enough time tomorrow to give appropriate attention to the presentation. In that spirit, why don’t we start directly.  Mr. Sack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Brian, you’re right that we need to be thinking as a Committee about the sequencing of how we will remove the policy accommodation.  My thought on this had been that we needed to wait until we had a somewhat clearer idea of what the timing of the availability of the tools was going to be.  I’m asking Brian Sack and Brian   Madigan, whom I have not warned about this question—do you think that January might be a time when we could at least begin a discussion on this at the Committee level.  Will we have enough information about our tools.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that Brian is right and suggests discussing the sequencing of removing the policy accommodation. They also mention considering the timing of the availability of tools. The question posed to Brian Sack and Brian Madigan is about whether January would be a suitable time for starting the discussion, indicating a collaborative approach rather than disagreement.


Passage number 6.
 MR. SACK. Yes, I think we’ll have enough information.  There will certainly be details about the tools that we’re still working out, but I think we’ll have some information on their scope. For reverse repos, in particular, we essentially already have the capacity to do the amount of reserve draining that was indicated in the survey.  So I wouldn’t argue for putting off that more strategic debate in order to hammer out every last detail of the tools.  I think it’s probably time to move forward with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sack, is expressing his opinion and suggesting that they have enough information to move forward with a strategic debate.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. So no later than January we will put this on the agenda for discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement indicates a planned action to discuss a topic and there is no indication of disagreement among the parties involved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
 MR. PLOSSER. Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the following passage. This can be inferred from the use of the speaker's last name, "Plosser," instead of a more respectful title like "Chairman" or "Sir." The use of "Mr. Chairman" instead of the speaker's name suggests a level of formality and respect, which may indicate a difference of opinion or tension between the individuals involved.


Passage number 9.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the passage being provided, it is not possible to accurately determine whether there is contention or disagreement in it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 10.
 MR. PLOSSER. I think it is important to do that in January.  But I would just like to emphasize that, in the context of that and thinking about sequencing, I think it would also be very helpful to think about what we believe the steady-state policy tools are going to be; that is, how are we going to conduct policy in normal times going forward with interest on reserves.  And, I think it is important to have that discussion, but in the context of thinking about how we use the tools, and the way we use these tools, interacts with where we ultimately want to end up in how we conduct policy—whether it is a floor system or a corridor system—and what we think is going to happen to the funds market.  I think these things are tied together, and I’d like to see that discussion carried on in tandem if we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. This can be seen in the phrase "I think it is important to do that in January," where Mr. Plosser expresses his belief that an action should be taken in January. However, he contrasts this by saying, "I think it would also be very helpful to think about what we believe the steady-state policy tools are going to be." This suggests that there may be a difference of opinion or disagreement on how to approach the issue.


Passage number 11.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The point is well taken.  I guess I would say that, given all of these important decisions, maybe we should all try to minimize excessive speculation in public about this subject until we as a Committee have come to more clarity on sequencing.  But these are issues we need to address very soon. So thank you for that. On the issue of reinvestment, let me just add this one other option I can think of, which is to reinvest in bills. This gives you maximum flexibility if you want to drain quickly. Are you looking for some kind of Committee guidance at this point, or are you going to come back to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging a point made, suggesting a course of action, and asking for clarification or guidance from the committee.


Passage number 12.
 MR. SACK. I would just like to make sure that everyone is on board with running down the agency and MBS holdings, or at least doing that as an interim strategy.  In terms of a strategy for the entire portfolio or a strategy to be used beyond the near term, I think that, yes, we should come back and have a full discussion and one that probably to some degree folds in the issue of asset sales, because obviously redemptions accomplish many of the things that asset sales accomplish. One way to think about the redemption strategy is that it is in some sense a commitment strategy to convince the markets that you are not going to shed your portfolio too quickly.  So one question I think we should consider is:  If there are other ways to make that commitment, then do asset sales give us more flexibility. Obviously what is somewhat odd about redemptions is the flip side of that, which is that this decision about how quickly to shrink the portfolio is governed by other factors that are uncertain and that could change and so on.  So I would like to give it full consideration, along with the discussion of whether there is any strategy through which we could sell assets safely in some regard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and suggesting that a full discussion should be had to consider different strategies regarding running down the agency and MBS holdings. They mention the possibility of asset sales and redemptions as strategies to accomplish certain goals. They also suggest considering other ways to make a commitment to the market without necessarily relying on redemptions. Overall, there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 13.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, again, use of bills could smooth out the path if you thought the redemptions were too quick, for example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that the use of bills could be useful in certain situations, such as when redemptions are perceived as too quick. It does not present conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 14.
 MR. SACK. Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "absolutely" indicates a strong agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 15.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. If anyone has concerns about letting things mature as an interim strategy, you should mention that in our discussion. Before I open the floor for questions for Brian, the Vice Chairman had an introduction he would like to make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that if anyone has concerns about a certain strategy, they should bring it up in the discussion. Additionally, it mentions that the Vice Chairman has an introduction to make before taking questions.


Passage number 16.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I wanted to introduce Steve Friedman from the Markets Group in New York. Steve runs the forex area.  So he’s partners in crime with Mr. Sheets on swaps and other things. Welcome, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 17.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Welcome.  Okay. Questions or comments for Brian. Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply welcoming someone and asking if there are any questions or comments for Brian, possibly indicating a meeting or gathering.


Passage number 18.
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, on panel 29, the orange line for asset sales—that is understood by dealers to be sales and not just the runoff through maturation of these securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply referring to a panel and explaining the understanding of dealers regarding the orange line for asset sales.


Passage number 19.
 MR. SACK. That’s correct, though I think one shortcoming of the survey as we designed it is that we didn’t actually ask about redemptions, so I think we will do that in the future.  But this question was phrased to be explicitly about sales.  A few dealers volunteered views on redemptions under the category of “other,” but I think in the future we’ll be more careful about trying to get their views on their expectations about the redemption strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Sack reflecting on a survey and suggesting improvements for future surveys.


Passage number 20.
 MR. TARULLO. All right. I think you just answered my next question, which is:  At this juncture you’re not certain as to what the dealer views are on what our redemption default position is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the previous response answered their question.


Passage number 21.
  MR. SACK. I would strongly guess that the consensus expectation is that the agency and MBS will be run off and the Treasuries will be reinvested, but I’ll have more confidence in that if we measure it in the next survey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion followed by a statement about measuring the expectation in an upcoming survey.


Passage number 22.
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a straightforward statement of thanks.


Passage number 23.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the statement "President Rosengren." This is because the statement itself does not provide any context or information to determine if there is a disagreement or contention. It simply mentions the position of President Rosengren without any additional details or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 24.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Just a question on panel 28. Is the policy rate that they’re talking about there the fed funds rate or the interest rate on reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question seeking clarification.


Passage number 25.
 MR. SACK. It’s the federal funds rate.  I think it’s likely that market participants see those two, the federal funds rate target and the IOER rate, moving in tandem.  But again, we didn’t explicitly get that from the survey—the survey asks about timing of policy tightening in terms of an increase in the federal funds rate target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Sack's belief about market participants' views on the federal funds rate and the IOER rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 26.
 MR. ROSENGREN. So no dealer raised the question of whether you would just move the interest rate on reserves but not do anything else, for example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, implies that dealers did raise the question of whether the interest rate on reserves would be moved without any other actions, but the statement being questioned suggests otherwise.


Passage number 27.
 MR. SACK. They did not. But again, I think we could incorporate that in future surveys.  I also think that, if we’re very interested in gauging the market’s views on all of these issues— obviously there may be a few survey issues to clean up—we also might want to consider doing a broader survey. This is a survey of the 18 primary dealers.  It’s answered mainly by the economists at those primary dealers.  We’re not convinced that they have the same views as the traders or as a broader set of financial firms.  So if there is a lot of interest in gauging these expectations, I think we could make a more extensive effort for the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is discussing potential improvements to future surveys and the inclusion of different perspectives, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 29.
 MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wondered, Brian, if you could talk a little bit about the CMBS market and the TALF, and particularly new CMBS.  I guess the issuance has been limited under the TALF.  Why is that, and what are the prospects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for information about the CMBS market and the TALF (Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility). There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 30.
 MR. SACK. As you know, the November TALF subscription included the first new-issue CMBS deal, the DDR deal.  That seemed to have some positive effect on the market, even though we ended up taking only a small amount of risk, I think, on the portfolio—the amount of the loan was only $72 million.  The deal was very well received and seemed to initiate some activity in the market.  Since then we’ve seen two other new single-borrower issues come to market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker provides information and recounts events without expressing any opposing views or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 31.
 MR. KOHN. Through TALF.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only presents a statement by Mr. Kohn, with no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 32.
 MR. SACK. No, not through TALF, outside of TALF.  And we hear reports of a handful of other issues also being prepared to come to market.  Of course, this is still a trickle of issuance compared with where we were several years ago, so I think the market is still extremely impaired, but showing some signs of life.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the issuance of certain issues in the market.


Passage number 33.
 MR. KOHN. Are there signs that more are going to bring it to TALF.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply asking if there are signs that more people are going to bring something to TALF.


Passage number 34.
 MR. SACK. I think TALF has been a very important factor in bringing this activity back and will continue to be for as long as it’s in place.  But, at the same time, I think there has been a surprise at how strong the demand has been for the issues.  So maybe that’s the most encouraging sign—not only did TALF get a deal done, but it brought some activity back to the market even independent of TALF.  We see that as a very positive sign.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing that TALF has been successful in bringing activity back to the market and highlighting the positive sign of strong demand for the issues.


Passage number 35.
 MR. NELSON. I’d add just a few things. The two deals that were priced had been in the TALF pipeline, so they were thinking of making them TALF-eligible, and they decided, having observed the reaction to the first deal, it was possible to go ahead without that.  The other thing is  that half of the loans that were taken out for DDR have actually been repaid already, that is, half of the $72 million. Finally, yesterday was the December CMBS subscription, and there were no new-issue CMBS brought to that subscription.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents additional information and updates about certain deals and loans.


Passage number 36.
 MR. SACK. Let me add a few more things.  We have begun to ask market participants about their expectations for the market, to try to assess how dependent it is on TALF.  We’ve asked a very small set of market participants, so take all of these responses with a grain of salt.  The general view was that CMBS spreads would widen once the TALF expired, and, indeed, in secondary market trading we do see some difference between similar deals that are TALF-eligible and not TALF-eligible. So it does appear, based on that evidence, that the TALF is having an effect on keeping spreads narrower than otherwise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting information and observations about the market and its dependence on TALF.


Passage number 37.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. There is no conflicting viewpoint or opposing argument presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you. Brian, actually you began to answer my question on the primary dealers.  I realize, after listening to and seeing presentations like this, I didn’t really know who the survey respondents were.  Is it really bank economists.  I thought this was more financial market participants.  I guess the question is:  If it is bank economists, is it really that different from, say, the Blue Chip or NABE or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses his uncertainty and disagreement about the identity of the survey respondents. He questions whether they are bank economists or financial market participants and suggests that if they are bank economists, their opinions may not differ much from other well-known economic organizations like the Blue Chip or NABE.


Passage number 39.
 MR. SACK. It’s very hard to gauge.  We know the survey is filled out by a lot of economists, but they sit on trading desks and talk to traders.  So it’s somewhat mixed, I would say, in terms of what you are actually getting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that it is difficult to gauge the situation because the survey is filled out by economists who have different perspectives based on their interactions with traders.


Passage number 40.
 MR. EVANS. Do you have any idea if it’s consistent from time to time, or do they mix it up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for information about a certain topic.


Passage number 41.
 MR. SACK. My impression is that it’s consistent.  At the New York Fed, we also interact with a separate group of advisers, who are from the buy side, and we’ve beenexperimenting with running a similar survey out to that group where we clearly would be reaching investment managers.  As we move into 2010, we hope to bring that product on line as a MarketSOURCE piece for exactly this purpose, that is, to broaden our reach in these surveys.  I think the surveys are proving very valuable in being able to address key policy issues, so I think we want to maximize their effectiveness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their impression and plans for the future without any conflicting opinions or views present.


Passage number 42.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The phrase "Vice Chairman" does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement that simply identifies a position or role.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 43.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. As one of those people who used to receive those surveys, I know that they usually go to the economists who sit on the desk.  If they’re uncertain about how to answer the question, they’ll talk to the traders.  So I think there’s probably a little gap between the economists’ views and the traders’ views, but generally the traders are consulted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "So I think there’s probably a little gap between the economists’ views and the traders’ views" suggests that there is some difference or disagreement between the economists and the traders.


Passage number 44.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot provide answer as there is no passage provided.


Passage number 45.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, a couple of questions that are triggered by the slides, but you may want to wait until next month to answer them.  Looking at slide 23, if we wanted to shift this maturity schedule, could we trade within the portfolio to adjust the way that maturity schedule looks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that the questions triggered by the slides could be addressed at a later date.


Passage number 46.
 MR. SACK. Yes, you certainly could. Even, say, within a certain asset class, like Treasuries, you have options such as those that came up earlier, like redeeming longer-term securities and reinvesting shorter-term ones, or even reinvesting longer-term ones into shorter-term securities.  There are some limits on doing that at auction, but you could always do that in the secondary market as well.  The same is true for MBS.  There’s nothing in theory that prevents us from selling MBS and purchasing Treasuries or trying to reallocate across asset classes. I think there would be obvious challenges to doing any of that in terms of   communicating to the markets what you’re doing, and we’d have to be very careful in that communication, but it could be done. I’ll also say that there’s a lot of concern in the markets about sales of MBS.  We’ve bought a lot, and we’ve been the dominant player in the market.  The market is concerned about adjusting to our not being there as a steady purchaser, and I think the idea of our being there as a net seller of MBS is a concern to some.  So while all of these strategies are possible, I think we’d have to be very careful about what we were trying to achieve and make sure the market understood it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different options and strategies related to asset allocation and market communication.


Passage number 47.
 MR. LOCKHART. A second question, if I may. According to slide 30, if I understand it correctly, a great majority of respondents believe that we would start tightening the fed funds rate target while we have relatively high levels of excess reserves.  How are they thinking and how are you thinking about how the fed funds rate market works in the condition of high reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and seeking information about how the fed funds rate market works in the condition of high reserves.


Passage number 48.
 MR. SACK. Again, we didn’t get into that level of detail.  I think the presumption would be that they understand that interest on excess reserves is a tool that can raise all short-term interest rates even with a large amount of reserves in the system.  In this response, they’re implicitly saying that that mechanism will work, or at least that policymakers think it will work with a relatively high degree of reserves, or at least that policymakers will begin to tighten and see if it works.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the understanding and assumptions of policymakers regarding the use of interest on excess reserves as a tool to raise short-term interest rates.


Passage number 49.
 MR. LOCKHART. So if we raise the interest rate on excess reserves, the fed funds rate will follow to an extent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any specific claims or statements that could indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states a possible cause-and-effect relationship between raising the interest rate on excess reserves and the corresponding movement of the fed funds rate.


Passage number 50.
 MR. SACK. Right. I think that’s the general perception, although as I noted in the text, there’s a lot of uncertainty. If you look at panel 27, we know that with all of these excess reserves, the funds rate has been soft to the IOER rate.  I think a real key policy question is:  Is that spread steady.  If that spread is steady—10 to 15 basis points—then it seems that policymakers have very effective control of short-term interest rates even with the amount of reserves indicated in the lower right panel.  There’s just no way to measure empirically whether that spread will be steady because we’ve only had this period of high reserves when we’ve been pinned up against the zero bound. So that is, I think, a key policy question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any significant contention or disagreement. It discusses the general perception and uncertainty surrounding the spread between the funds rate and IOER rate, and poses a key policy question.


Passage number 51.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only states a person's title without providing any information or context that would suggest disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 52.
 MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just a quick question on slide No. 29.  What do you guess that slide would have looked like before we began testing reverse repos as an exit strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 53.
 MR. SACK. I think your question raises a general issue about the fact that we’re doing a survey with the firms we have been interacting with the most in terms of setting up the reverse repo program. There was some concern on our end about whether that was biasing the results in this direction.  So, I think that argues for the wider survey. Having said all of that, when we speak to market participants outside of the primary dealers, there’s just an incredible amount of focus on reverse repos, and I am not sure why that is, relative to term deposits.  So I think, broadly speaking, market participants really do expect reverse repurchase agreements to be a key part of the policy tools.  Of course, in this response both reverse repos and term deposits are being used very actively.  Reverse repos are a little bit higher, but they’re both very active draining tools.  It may be that asking the dealers puts a little bit more focus on reverse repos, but I’m not sure.  I wouldn’t want to say that this probably does not represent the broader review. I think that, if we could make an effort to find that out through a broader set of participants, then I wouldn’t be surprised if it comes out similarly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. It discusses potential concerns about bias in a survey and acknowledges the focus on reverse repos among market participants. The speaker is open to conducting a broader survey to gather more perspectives but does not express any disagreement or contention with the current situation.


Passage number 54.
  MR. FISHER. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply includes a speaker thanking someone.


Passage number 55.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions President Plosser without providing any information or context to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 56.
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, just a follow-up on that last point.  I think the dealers are focusing on reverse repos because that’s what they hear us talk about most of the time.  We haven’t talked as much publicly about the term deposits or asset sales.  So I think we sort of get back from them what we say at times, and we have to be a little bit careful interpreting that, just as an observation. On redemptions and so forth, I tend to think we are going to have to shrink our balance sheet, and I think your memo very effectively focuses our thinking about the optimal size of our balance sheet and how we want to think about that.  We have walked up to this question over and over again over the last year and a half and really haven’t come to grips with what the answer is, but this sort of raises that question foursquare, and I think it’s important that we think about that.  I think the direction going forward is that the balance sheet is going to get smaller rather than larger, so I’m in favor of letting them all run off.  In terms of Treasuries, I do think at some point, as the Chairman’s comment suggested, if we get back to a SOMA portfolio that looks more like it used to look, we’re going to have to start substituting short-term for long-term.  I don’t know that we need to do that initially, but certainly that would be a possibility. Back to the sequencing—again, I think these things interact with one another.  We have two other things affecting the overall balance sheet.  One is the runoff in the liquidity programs.  Another issue, which we haven’t returned to, is the SFP.  What’s going to happen to it.  Is it going to come back.  How is that going to effect our balance sheet. And how would that interact with all of this.  So I think there’s a whole complex set of interactions that we need to be thinking about. That’s why I commented earlier about the need to discuss our views on how we implement policy going forward, sort of a new steady state.  How we get to that steady state is combination of these things.  I don’t think we can think about them in isolation. So, if you have got some observations about the SFP, I’d love to hear them, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply sharing their observations and thoughts on various aspects of the balance sheet and potential policy actions.


Passage number 57.
 MR. SACK. First, let me respond to your point on communications about reverse repos versus other tools, such as asset sales or the term deposit facility.  I think in part that has been a result of the timing.  The reverse repo tool for the Treasury and agency collateral, at least, has progressed more quickly, and we wanted to go ahead and test it.  So you do have a situation where we’ve had more communications about that.  I think we’ll see—and Jim Clouse will talk about this—more communication on the term deposit facility going forward, and so some catch­up in that regard. On the SFP, I thought the survey results were interesting.  Roughly speaking, half of the respondents thought it would just stay at $15 billion, and the other half thought it would be ramped back up to $200 billion.  Our thinking was that, with an adequate increase in the debt limit, which as of yesterday we thought we were probably going to get, SFP would run back up to $200 billion over a relatively quick time frame—four to six weeks—and to a point where we had a nice, evenly spaced maturity distribution that would then just roll over and keep that size.  More recently, it looks like the debt limit may be raised by a much more limited amount, only enough to provide room for several months, in which case it would be very hard to run up the SFP because it would immediately have to be run back down.  But I think that, absent that constraint, our inclination is to have Treasury run the SFP back up, and that obviously would keep it as a policy tool that could be used if needed at some point in the future.  There’s no reason $200 billion is the right number, but I think that decision would have to be made inconjunction with our assessment of the effectiveness of the other tools in terms of getting reserves out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of the speaker's thoughts and opinions on various topics.


Passage number 58.
 MR. PLOSSER. But I think that’s why this is important.  The SFP got run down on us, which was implicitly an increase in our balance sheet, and in excess reserves that we did not necessarily elect to have happen. The discussion earlier on this was that it was going to come back up again. What I hear is that it may not go back up, which, in my view, would strengthen the case for letting some of these other things mature and run off, as opposed to reinvesting them, because excess reserves are already higher than we thought they would be in the initial go-around of asset purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is primarily an explanation of the current situation and the speaker's view on the matter.


Passage number 59.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A lot depends on where you think our policy is working.  If it’s working on the asset side and the amount of MBS we buy is what really matters, then the amount of excess reserves is just kind of a residual, and it’s not doing much independently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is presenting two different perspectives on the impact of policy. It acknowledges that there are different views on where the policy is effective and how it affects different aspects. However, there is no clear contention or disagreement between these perspectives.


Passage number 60.
 MR. PLOSSER. Fair enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple agreement or acknowledgement of a statement.


Passage number 61.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But there are a number of different ways to think about it. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there are different ways to think about something, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 62.
 MR. HOENIG. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, this question is more for you.  Your comment at the outset and then President Plosser’s reaction to it was describing a discussion that would take place in January.  I’m not clear on how you are outlining the policy discussion that might take place in January versus perhaps now, and if you could clarify that for me, that would be helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 63.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Sure. I was just responding to the comment myself, but there are two separate questions.  One question is how accommodative policy should be, and that has to do with the outlook for the economy and inflation and so on.  But there are also what you   might call the technical questions, and, in particular, given that we want to unwind accommodation, what would be the appropriate sequencing in terms of the tools that we use.  Should we, for example, drain reserves first and then raise the interest rate on reserves.  If we drain reserves first, which particular tools should we use and in what combination.  President Plosser pointed out that that’s also linked to the question of what our official target is.  We may simply want to announce that we are raising the interest rate on excess reserves and make no comment whatsoever about the federal funds rate, because the control of the federal funds rate may be loose and may not be that meaningful an interest rate, given the nature of that market now. So again, I want to separate the question of when and how quickly we should be removing accommodation from a more technical set of questions about whether there is a preferred sequencing or combination that is in some sense independent of the policy decision itself. There may not be.  It could be that those two things are so intertwined that we just have to decide on them jointly, but it is certainly worth the discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing two separate questions related to accommodative policy and the technical aspects of unwinding accommodation. The speaker acknowledges that there may not be a preferred sequencing or combination and suggests that both questions are worth discussing.


Passage number 64.
 MR. HOENIG. I agree. I would assume that we could at this meeting hint about our preferences as we look forward to January, because of the very developments that are taking place now in the economy, and not just wait until January for their discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there is a mention of different opinions ("our preferences"), there is no explicit disagreement or contention present in the passage. The speaker states that they agree with the idea of discussing their preferences earlier, rather than waiting until January.


Passage number 65.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No. I’m sorry. I didn’t mean to prohibit discussion, but what I was saying is that, to the extent that there is a technical question, it would be useful to have some staff input and a chance to think about it in advance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing an apology and clarifying their intention to not prohibit discussion. They are requesting staff input and time to think about a technical question.


Passage number 66.
 MR. HOENIG. Absolutely. I agree with that. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "I agree with that" indicates agreement between the speaker and the previous statement.


Passage number 67.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage because there is no accompanying information or context provided. Please provide the relevant passage for a more accurate assessment.


Passage number 68.
 MR. LACKER. I’ll pass. Honest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply opting to not engage in a conversation or answer a question.


Passage number 69.
 [Laughter]CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions laughter and President Pianalto without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 70.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you. I think this follows up on the point about the meeting that we’ll have in January to discuss tools and sequencing.  Brian, on your chart 27, my staff had conducted a similar analysis.  They used the dates from December 2008 through current period and found that there is a closer correlation between the effective fed funds rate and interest on reserves when excess reserves are under $800 billion.  It is not as clear on your chart as it was on the chart that my staff prepared.  Is this a useful analysis as we start to think about the tools and sequencing.  When excess reserves are closer to $800 billion, will the interest on reserves then be a more effective tool.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Pianalto is simply providing her analysis and asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 71.
 MR. SACK. That sounds right.  I actually took this chart from some work being done by Jamie McAndrews and other staff at the New York Fed.  And I know there is similar work going on at the Board and probably a number of other places.  That work tried to fit a demand schedule through here, and it’s a nonlinear demand schedule.  As you suggest, it has more elasticity at lower levels of reserves and then flattens out. That work has a lot of other interesting results, including looking at whether GSE balances have a special effect relative to the overall level of reserves.  So I would expect, hopefully, that some of that work will be presented in whatever material is prepared for the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply confirming the information and discussing additional related work that has been done.


Passage number 72.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given statement, "President Kocherlakota," does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states the title or position of someone named Kocherlakota.


Passage number 73.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, what is the Desk’s position, if any, on the effect of the term deposit facility and reverse repos on short-term interest rates. Suppose we start running a term deposit facility.  What kind of effect do you foresee that having on the level of short-term interest rates.  Or is it just going to be totally disconnected, or do you think there is going to be some pass-through or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not expressing contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked to gain information about the Desk's position on the effect of the term deposit facility and reverse repos on short-term interest rates.


Passage number 74.
 MR. SACK. I think one thing it clearly does is pull reserves out of the market—less reserves available for overnight lending means you’ll bring short-term interest rates up.  That’s exactly what’s shown in exhibit 27, that is, the idea that those tools could be used to get to a lower level of reserve balances and bring these other short-term interest rates up closer to and maybe more connected to the IOER rate.  I think that’s the main effect. One question we wrestled with, especially with reverses, is whether there’s an independent effect, a direct effect, on RP rates.  If we drain $300 billion of reserves by dumping a bunch of collateral into the RP market, do we not only get the effect in exhibit 27, but do we also get further upward pressure on the RP rate from that collateral.  I think we see that as a possibility—that is, you could actually get some further upward pressure on RP rates relative to overnight rates. I think that would tend to be transitory, but certainly if that collateral were dumped quickly that could happen.  But generally speaking, and over longer periods of time, we think the main effect comes via affecting the amount of liquidity available in the overnight lending market, in which case draining enough liquidity tends to pull rates up towards the IOER rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting different effects and possibilities related to the use of tools to adjust reserve balances and interest rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 75.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. So you’re not worried about these programs basically being an influence on short-term interest rates beyond the IOER rate.  That’s what I would be concerned about. You’re just saying we are moving the fed funds rate closer to the IOER rate.  That’s fine with me.  I’m more worried that they’re going to be a separate influence on short-term interest rates beyond the IOER rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: Mr. Kocherlakota expresses his concern about the programs being a separate influence on short-term interest rates beyond the IOER rate, indicating a disagreement with the speaker.


Passage number 76.
 MR. SACK. Well, I think at some point, if the size is large enough, then, yes, you could pull short-term interest rates above the IOER rate.  I’m making an assumption that the size of these programs will be calibrated to some objective, whether that objective is getting the otherrates around the IOER rate or not.  So the size will be endogenous to the framework that the FOMC lays out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's thoughts and assumptions about the relationship between the size of certain programs and short-term interest rates.


Passage number 77.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Well, the description of the TDF involved an auction, so sometimes it can be hard to know exactly what price you’ll get out of that, I would guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about the outcome of an auction.


Passage number 78.
 MR. SACK. That’s right. There’s going to be analysis and judgment, but, of course, in the old days when we did temporary operations every day, there was always assessment and judgment about how much operations were needed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about assessment and judgment in the past.


Passage number 79.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We will be hearing about the TDF in just a moment.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the reader will be hearing about the TDF (presumably a topic of interest), and then mentions President Bullard.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 80.
 MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, I just wanted to make sure I understand exhibits 19 and 20 and the effects of tapering.  We’re tapering now, and we’ve gotten some distance along that path. I guess these charts right below are meant to say that the effects have been minor, or there haven’t been any effects, even though people in the market said, “Oh, you’re going to back up these rates.”  Is that a fair assessment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement or contention in the passage. 

The speaker, Mr. Bullard, seems to be questioning the claim made by "Brian" about the effects of tapering. He mentions that they are currently tapering and suggests that the charts provided contradict the notion that there have been no effects or only minor effects. This implies a disagreement or contention regarding the perceived impacts of tapering.


Passage number 81.
 MR. SACK. Yes, exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 82.
 MR. BULLARD. Okay. But, nevertheless, they think if we keep going, then you’re going to get a big effect at some point in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that although others may believe there will be a significant effect in the future, he acknowledges their viewpoint and expresses his understanding by saying "Okay."


Passage number 83.
 MR. SACK. That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply affirms the statement made by Mr. Sack.


Passage number 84.
 MR. BULLARD. Okay. So they’re sticking to their story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that someone is sticking to their story. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 85.
  [Laughter] MR. SACK. They’re sticking to their story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone is sticking to their story, which does not necessarily imply a disagreement.


Passage number 86.
 MR. BULLARD. And we’re going to watch it, because we’re going to be tapering for another 90 days or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage indicates agreement. Mr. Bullard states that they will be tapering for another 90 days, suggesting that there is no disagreement or contention mentioned.


Passage number 87.
  MR. SACK. That’s right. Our purchases have declined, but conditions in the market have been very tight. It’s not just that the assets didn’t cheapen, but they have actually richened in terms of the spread narrowing further.  So we haven’t seen any signs of what we and the markets worried about as we backed away from this. Now, there are a lot of things going on in markets.  There’s not a lot of supply coming into the market.  We are approaching year-end, and so on.  So we’ll wait and see. But so far, there are no signs that there is any increase in rates from our pulling back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 88.
 MR. BULLARD. Okay. So I have just one question on the survey.  You say, “selling assets.” Well, what do you mean “selling assets.”  If you say you’re going to dump $1 trillion worth of MBS onto the market, yes, that’s going to have a big effect.  But if you sell it in some measured way that makes sense, then it seems like these are the right pictures to be thinking about—a first pass at how that would happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 89.
 MR. SACK. Yes. In my view, a big chunk of the question about asset sales is:  Can we do them in a way that doesn’t cause a sharp backup in rates, whether that’s a pre-commitment to a gradual sales pace, or whether it’s building in some kind of state responsiveness to interest rates, or whether it’s other approaches.  The staff is trying to think about these issues—that is, what mechanisms could we use to sell assets safely.  It may be that there is no way to do it convincingly, and the only way to shed assets is to do it through redemptions, and that would be fine. But I think we at least want to think through all of the options and assess whether there is some approach where we could basically get the effects—the same kind of gradual winding down in the portfolio you would get under redemptions—but that would give us more flexibility along the way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage indicates contention or disagreement because it presents different possible approaches to asset sales and acknowledges that there may be no convincing way to do it safely. The speaker is suggesting exploring multiple options and assessing their feasibility, which implies that there is disagreement or uncertainty about the best approach.


Passage number 90.
 MR. BULLARD. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker is expressing gratitude, which does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 91.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there are other questions without providing any conflicting opinions or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 92.
 MR. LACKER. I changed my mind.  [Laughter]  The day we announce that we’re going to sell assets, there’s no doubt that prices are going to change.  So I don’t think “no price change” should be the standard of safety, right.  We want to minimize the volatility of the path that prices take to where they’re going after the shift of our policy, represented by the announcement of a path of asset sales.  Is that right.  I mean, you’re using the word “safely.”  I’m sort of inquiring about your meaning of the word “safely” here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the meaning of the word "safely" in the context of their discussion.


Passage number 93.
 MR. SACK. Okay. What I meant, but you can correct me, was not producing a large backup in rates. I guess I was working under the assumption that an abrupt and sizable increase in long-term interest rates would be viewed as counterproductive at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and acknowledging that they may have made a mistake in their previous statement.


Passage number 94.
 MR. LACKER. But is it obvious that any backup in rates on MBS would be counterproductive. There’s some threshold we might want to achieve—right.—because the data all suggest that we’re pushing them artificially low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification by asking a question.


Passage number 95.
 MR. SACK. The data suggest we’ve pushed them low.  We do think the LSAPs have worked, and it is just an optimal policy decision about how quickly you want to unwind any of those effects. We can put this differently:  A challenge with asset sales perhaps is that there will be a tendency for the markets to front-load all of the effects.  When we did LSAPs, you saw an immediate and sizable market reaction; then a lot of the program was carrying through the commitment to justify that reaction.  I think policymakers need to be concerned about those same patterns taking place in reverse. So that’s the issue:  Is there a way to unwind the portfolio slowly to limit that immediate reaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is presenting an argument or perspective without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 96.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. One would think that clarity about what you’re going to do—speed or price or whatever—would help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that clarity about what one is going to do, such as choosing between speed or price, would be helpful.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 97.
  MR. LACKER. Yes. Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, agrees with the statement or question that was made before his response.


Passage number 98.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the title of President Rosengren without providing any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 99.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Just to follow up on that point, it seems like you have a huge inventory, and the market doesn’t know how you are going to dispose of it.  Asking the street about what the interest rate reaction would be—if at every meeting we might potentially dump a whole lot of it, I would want a huge risk premium before I bought that asset.  So, as we think about asset sales, and different rules for handling them, it seems that if there’s a clear rule, it may have a different effect on the risk premium than the possibility that every six weeks you may or may not have a huge inventory dumped onto the market.  We haven’t had an experience like this, so I don’t know how you can measure it empirically. But to the extent that the dealer community has any feel for this, it may be worth getting some sense about interest rates as well as quantities when you do your survey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Rosengren, asking for clarification and expressing uncertainty about the potential effects of asset sales on the risk premium and interest rates.


Passage number 100.
 MR. SACK. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 101.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions "President Plosser," but does not provide any context or information that would indicate any kind of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 102.
 MR. PLOSSER. One quick question, Mr. Chairman.  You may have alluded to this, but are we going to take an action on whether or not we want to do the redemptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Plosser seeking clarification on whether a decision will be made regarding redemptions.


Passage number 103.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. My understanding was that tentatively, for the moment, we were just going to let things run off. But we were just introducing this as an issue we need to be aware of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the author's understanding is that they will let things run off for the moment, but they are introducing a new issue for awareness.


Passage number 104.
 MR. SACK. Correct. I think that strategy is consistent with the current directive, so I don’t believe any action is necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the strategy and believes no further action is needed.


Passage number 105.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provided does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Okay. Vice Chairman." without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 106.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I just want to add that the issue on redemptions, though, is also colored by what you want the portfolio to look like in the longer run.  Let’s say we start with a portfolio that was bills, notes, and bonds, and was roughly in proportion to the market; but it’s not clear that that’s necessarily the portfolio that we want in the new world as we transition to a new monetary policy setting.  That decision on redemptions is partly about balance sheet size, and it’s also partly about where we want to take the portfolio over the medium to longer run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

The passage discusses the issue of redemptions and suggests that there may be disagreement or contention over what the portfolio should look like in the longer run and how it should be adjusted as a new monetary policy is implemented. This implies that there may be differing opinions on the optimal composition and direction of the portfolio.


Passage number 107.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Great. Okay.  If there are no other questions, let me turn to Jim Clouse and Bill Nelson for a brief report on some facilities.  Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrases "Great. Okay." indicate agreement and approval.


Passage number 108.
  MR. CLOUSE. Following up on the plans discussed at the last meeting, the Desk carried out a series of small-scale, real-value reverse RP operations over the intermeeting period to identify any operational difficulties in moving cash and collateral between the Federal Reserve, the clearing banks, and the primary dealers.  Before conducting the operations, the New York Fed released a statement announcing that a series of such operations would be conducted and emphasizing that they had no implications for the stance of monetary policy.  Five such operations have been conducted with both Treasury and agency debt securities serving as collateral.  The maturities for these operations ranged from overnight to eight days, including some with overlapping terms.  The operations were quite small—the maximum outstanding over the last two weeks was only about $400 million—and, as anticipated, had little or no market impact.  All of the operations were conducted, settled, and matured successfully.  A few minor technical issues surfaced and are being addressed.  In short, the tests confirmed that the System now has the capacity to conduct triparty reverse RP operations effectively with primary dealers using Treasury and agency debt as collateral. The staff continues to work on extending the reverse RP program to include agency MBS as collateral and to include a broader set of counterparties. Regarding the extension of collateral to include agency MBS, the staff has been working with the two triparty clearing banks and the agency MBS custodian to determine the most efficient, cost-effective means of reversing out agency MBS collateral.  Significant complications must be addressed in this effort, but the team expects to reach agreement on an overall approach in the near future and to give the clearing banks the go-ahead to make the necessary system changes within the next month.  We expect that those changes will be implemented by the end of the first quarter of next year and that small-scale, real-value test reverse RP operations with agency MBS can begin shortly thereafter.   In terms of expanding the range of counterparties for reverse RP operations beyond the primary dealers, the Desk has identified a set of large cash providers and has begun discussions with some of these firms on a number of operational issues.  In addition, the staff is working to develop a set of public criteria that will allow a small number of large firms, perhaps two dozen, to present themselves as potential counterparties. Both of these efforts are proving quite challenging given the wide range of institutions involved. The staff is pursuing this agenda aggressively, but our best guess at this point is that the expansion of the range of counterparties will require several months for completion. Turning to other work on reserve management tools, the staff has developed a proposal for a term deposit facility, the basic elements of which were summarized in a memo distributed last week.  As envisioned in the proposal, term deposits would be a new type of account offered by the Federal Reserve to any institution that is eligible to earn interest on balances at a Reserve Bank.  Balances placed in term deposits would not be eligible to satisfy reserve or clearing balance requirements or to cover daylight or overnight overdrafts. As a result, balances placed in term deposits would drain reserves. The proposal suggests that term deposits would be fixed-rate obligations and could have maturities ranging between one and six months with no early withdrawal option. As required by statute, the rate paid on term deposits could not exceed the general level of short-term interest rates.  Consistent with the Federal Reserve’s general policy of accepting as collateral any sound asset that a bank may hold, the proposal suggests that term deposits could be pledged as collateral to secure borrowing at the discount window or daylight credit. The staff proposal notes that term deposits could be offered to the public in several ways but focuses largely on the possibility of auctioning term deposits.  Auctions of term deposits would employ a single-price format so that all winning bidders receive the highest rate among all winning bids at the auction.  Auctions would be conducted at regular intervals, perhaps every two weeks, and the settlement dates and maturities of the deposits could be aligned with the beginning of reserve maintenance periods.  The proposal suggests that the Board would select one Reserve Bank to act as the term deposit offering administrator for the System.  The offering administrator would be responsible for tasks such as announcing term deposit auctions and posting auction results to a public website. The staff proposal would seek public comment on three basic questions:  the need for limitations on the amount of term deposits that any individual institution may hold or win at auction; the appropriate range of maturities for term deposits; and whether there are any alternative structures for term deposits that should be considered.  After review by the Board, the staff proposal would be published in the Federal Register with a 30-day public comment period. Based on the comments received, a final proposal would be published early next year.  As noted previously, the automated systems necessary to implement a term deposit program have been developed and tested, but a number of operational steps must be completed before the program can be implemented.  The staff will be working aggressively to complete these steps over the next few months.  Bill will now continue the staff presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is informational and does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is providing an update on the progress and plans of the staff.


Passage number 109.
 MR. NELSON. Thank you, Jim.  I will briefly update the Committee on the modifications to the terms on the Term Auction Facility and primary credit programs that the staff anticipates it will propose over the next several months. The TAF auction that was conducted yesterday was again substantially undersubscribed. When it settles on Thursday, TAF credit will equal $76 billion, 45 percent lower than at the time of the November FOMC meeting.  All currently outstanding TAF loans will come due coincident with the January TAF auction.  At that point, only 28-day TAF credit will be provided.  Although only $75 billion will be auctioned in January, it seems likely that it will again be undersubscribed because of the steep downward trend in TAF credit and because the year-end will have passed. In light of the continued improvement in interbank funding markets, as discussed at the November FOMC meeting, the staff expects that it will soon recommend the Board announce a schedule of TAF auction amounts that decline to zero.  The staff will propose a specific schedule after observing the results of the January 11 auction.  If the auction is again substantially undersubscribed, the staff could propose amounts that decline to zero in just a few months, but evidence of stronger demand could lead us to recommend an auction schedule that declines a bit more slowly, say, to zero by midyear. Turning to primary credit, primary credit declined 14 percent over the intermeeting period to $19 billion.  Of that amount, $14 billion is outstanding to Depfa, and $4 billion to Dexia, which are both branches of European banks. On November 17, the Board announced that the maximum maturity on primary credit loans would be reduced to 28 days on January 14, a first step in normalizing the terms on primary credit.  That change will align the maximum term on primary credit loans with the terms of TAF loans.  A next step in normalization could be a 25 basis point increase in the primary credit rate.  The discount rate adjustment could be discussed by Board members and Reserve Bank Presidents at the January FOMC meeting, with any increase announced a few days later, presumably accompanied by language that made it clear that the move was not a signal about the outlook for the stance of monetary policy.  The staff envisions that Presidents might initiate discussions with their boards of directors about a potential increase a week or so before the January FOMC meeting. A further step in normalization of primary credit terms could be a reduction in the maximum maturity to overnight, except for the smallest institutions.  The Board and Reserve Banks could evaluate early next year the advisability and potential timing of such a move.   Consideration about further increases in the primary credit–federal funds rate  spread could be deferred until perhaps midyear to evaluate such further adjustments  in light of accumulated experience with a 50 basis point spread and shorter terms.   That concludes our prepared remarks.  We would be happy to answer your questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 110.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there questions for Jim or Bill.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement asking if there are any questions for Jim or Bill. President Lacker does not create any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 111.
 MR. LACKER. Yes. Could you elaborate on what discussions with our directors you envision in January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a straightforward question and does not showcase any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 112.
 MR. NELSON. Discussions about the increase in the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions discussions about the increase in the discount rate without providing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 113.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’ll need a recommendation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that a recommendation is required without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 114.
 MR. LACKER. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not express any disagreement or contention. The speaker simply states "I see," indicating an understanding or acknowledgment of something.


Passage number 115.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It’s been a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that a certain amount of time has passed without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints being expressed.


Passage number 116.
 MR. MADIGAN. But our view is that this is obviously a sensitive topic, so it might be better to hold off on that for several weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Madigan suggests holding off on discussing a sensitive topic for several weeks, indicating that he agrees with the notion of delaying the discussion.


Passage number 117.
 MR. HOENIG. Rather than in this meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This statement does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Hoenig prefers something other than in a meeting for a particular circumstance.


Passage number 118.
 MR. MADIGAN. Right. No, I’m sorry, I’m talking about discussions with the boards of directors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 119.
 MR. HOENIG. With the boards of directors—I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only states a fact about the speaker's understanding regarding the boards of directors. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 120.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions the name "President Bullard" without providing any context or additional information. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement based solely on this information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 121.
 MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question on the term deposit facility. One of the provisions is “no early withdrawal,” but another provision is “you can be pledged as collateral at the window.” Those seem to be in conflict.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The two provisions mentioned, "no early withdrawal" and "you can be pledged as collateral at the window," appear to be conflicting with each other. "No early withdrawal" implies that the funds cannot be withdrawn before a certain period, whereas "you can be pledged as collateral at the window" suggests that the funds can be used as collateral. This creates inconsistency and disagreement within the provisions.


Passage number 122.
 MR. CLOUSE. Both of them would give some potential for accessing liquidity.  I personally wouldn’t characterize it as being in conflict.  It was a fine judgment on whether we should allow these to be pledged as collateral at the discount window, but the Federal Reserve has a long-standing policy of taking basically any asset that a bank can hold as collateral.  As   long as the pricing for the primary credit program is correct, as was pointed out at the last meeting, actually, there wouldn’t be strong incentives for an institution to pledge collateral at the primary credit facility in order to invest it in a term deposit.  We would ensure that that sort of arbitrage was ruled out. And, of course, there’s lots of stigma around borrowing at the discount window, too, so the option value of that is probably not that high. I view it, anyway, as sort of a technical thing.  Banks already have over $1 trillion worth of collateral pledged at the discount window.  They could do anything they need to at the primary credit window with any other form of collateral.  So there’s nothing really special about the term deposit facility allowing them to pledge those particular deposits as collateral.  It’s just to be consistent with our existing policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining their personal opinion and viewpoint on the topic.


Passage number 123.
 MR. BULLARD. Well, you might turn that around and say, “Then, why have a ‘no early withdrawal’ provision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or question without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 124.
” MR. CLOUSE. Well, an early withdrawal option is, first of all, tremendously complicated to develop in the automated system.  The automated system has been developed, and, to put in that feature, would really greatly complicate things.  In addition, you have to worry a lot about where you set the penalty to guard against very frequent usage of that option.  So if you wanted to provide some capability for these institutions to access liquidity, it just seemed a lot more natural to keep access to liquidity in a facility where we understand exactly how things work. And, as you know, we don’t anticipate, especially as we move to normalize the program, that institutions will be regularly using the primary credit facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the reasons for not including an early withdrawal option in the automated system and suggesting an alternative approach to providing access to liquidity.


Passage number 125.
  But I would say, too, that it will be interesting to review comments on this from the public  MR. BULLARD. Is this the comment period for the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their curiosity about the comments from the public.


Passage number 126.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Go ahead.  We don’t have this unstructured period, so consider this to be your time to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention in the passage. The phrase "Go ahead" is encouraging the listener to speak, and the following statement is simply providing an explanation or invitation for them to provide their comment.


Passage number 127.
  MR. BULLARD. Okay. One of the aspects of the TDF is, “well, now we’re going to drain reserves.” How meaningful is it to say that I’ve got an overnight deposit at the central bank versus I’ve got a 30-day deposit at the central bank, one of which I’m going to count as reserves and in the monetary base, and the other of which I’m not going to count in that.  It seems to me the macroeconomic difference is very slight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their perspective and stating that they perceive the difference in macroeconomic impact to be minimal. However, there is no explicit disagreement with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 128.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, you can’t lend the 30-day money in the overnight federal funds market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact, indicating that it is not possible to lend the 30-day money in the overnight federal funds market. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 129.
 MR. BULLARD. There’s a question about how liquid it really is, but it seems that it’s very substitutable. I can wait 30 days and take it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is simply expressing a question or doubt about the liquidity of something, but providing a statement regarding its substitutability.


Passage number 130.
 MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 132.
 MR. LACKER. Is it useful to consider alongside that question, President Bullard, the question of how a term deposit compares in liquidity with an equal term Treasury holding, which is equally collateralizable, and, thus, equally liquid, but we consider a nonmonetary asset.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is simply posing a question and highlighting the comparison between a term deposit and a Treasury holding.


Passage number 133.
 MR. MADIGAN. Indeed, the TDFs would be less liquid, because they can’t be sold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 134.
 MR. LACKER. Right. They’re nontransferable.  There you go. It’s even less liquid than T-bills.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply provides additional information about the liquidity of the mentioned items.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 135.
 MR. BULLARD. There’s variable liquidity among various assets, and you should have metrics about the degree of liquidity, and then get your measure of how much liquidity is out there, instead of arbitrarily saying certain assets are liquid and others are not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is suggesting a disagreement with the approach of arbitrarily categorizing assets as either liquid or illiquid. He proposes using metrics to determine the degree of liquidity and suggests that there may be variable liquidity among different assets.


Passage number 136.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. For the reasons that you just described, I think it will be helpful in managing overnight interest rates.  Of course, there’s always the question about the linkages between that and broad financial conditions, but our typical target is the overnight rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The statement presents a belief that the described reasons will be helpful in managing overnight interest rates. It acknowledges the existence of a question about the linkages between that and broad financial conditions but does not imply any disagreement with the statement.


Passage number 137.
 MR. BULLARD. Do we expect the interest rates in this facility to be anything other than the expected interest rate on reserves over the six months.  Plus a term premium.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 138.
 MR. CLOUSE. The staff proposal envisions largely an auction facility to offer these deposits, and you might expect, then, that the auction rate would stop out somewhat below a comparable term money market instrument, for example, maybe a little bit below LIBOR, reflecting the fact that we’re a risk-free counterparty rather than a risky counterparty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply explaining the staff proposal and the expected outcome of the auction rate.


Passage number 139.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Other questions" does not provide enough context to determine any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 140.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Just a question on the primary credit rate.  We all have directors meetings at different times.  So if it’s purely a technical adjustment, it might be better to have a day that we all called our boards of directors at the same time.  I’m just a little worried that somebody might have a directors meeting in the first week of January, and though I know this is supposed to stay confidential, it might start leaking out.  So it just strikes me that it would be better if we could just say on a certain day you will call your board and everybody talks about it as being a technical adjustment, if that’s truly what we think it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply a suggestion or concern being raised by Mr. Rosengren about the timing and communication of the primary credit rate adjustment.


Passage number 141.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no passage provided to analyze.


Passage number 142.
 MR. LACKER. Yes, I was just going to suggest that.  I think the record is that rate change requests from Reserve Banks have not leaked—I don’t know of any example of rate requests that have leaked. I do think a little more formal coordination might be useful, in that, going into our January meetings, we’d know that we’re getting the wink that the Board is likely to approve this technical adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Rather, it shows agreement and suggests a need for more coordination.


Passage number 143.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’ll coordinate.  And we don’t need recommendations from all the Banks, of course, but just one.  We understand the need to coordinate this in a way that is not going to create problems.  Thank you. President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a desire for coordination and acknowledges that they don't need recommendations from all banks but just one. They also express an understanding of the need to coordinate in a way that avoids problems. The tone is cooperative and appreciative.


Passage number 144.
 MS. PIANALTO. It might also be a good time to remind directors.  There was one occasion when it was leaked, and it was a federal crime.  So it might be an appropriate time to remind directors, as we do all the time, that any discussion of the discount rate is confidential, and if there is a leak, it’s a federal offense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply reminding directors to keep discussions of the discount rate confidential and emphasizing the consequences of a leak.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well put.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not convey any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating agreement or approval of President Plosser.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 146.
 MR. PLOSSER. I’d like to follow up a little bit on the TDF, because I’m still uncomfortable with the potential for arbitrage between it and primary credit.  Jim, do you envision that the TAF will shut down before TDF becomes active.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage as Mr. Plosser expresses his discomfort with the potential for arbitrage between the TDF and primary credit.


Passage number 147.
 MR. CLOUSE. That seems likely, given the market’s expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states that something is likely based on the market's expectations. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 148.
 MR. PLOSSER. Otherwise, I can imagine a bank lending to us at one rate and getting the TAF credit at 25 basis points, which is borrowing backed by posting TDF collateral.  It looks as if you’re going to cap the auction rate at the primary credit rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Plosser suggesting that if a bank lends money to "us" (presumably the Federal Reserve) at a certain rate, they should only be able to access TAF credit at the same rate.


Passage number 149.
 MR. CLOUSE. Well, we’d want to be sure that it couldn’t go higher than the primary credit rate, for sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a desire to ensure that something does not exceed a certain limit.


Passage number 150.
 MR. PLOSSER. Because otherwise you are inviting them to game the system.  But if the term premium is not high enough, then that sort of enters into what maturities you’re going to offer, whether the term premium for six months or a year would be so large that you couldn’t cap the TDF rate at the primary credit rate—that is, the spread wasn’t big enough.  So I’m just really puzzled about how all of this is going to sort itself out, and whether or not this is really going to be effective at draining any reserves at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and uncertainty about how certain factors will affect the effectiveness of a particular policy.


Passage number 151.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. There’s always some primary credit rate spread that’s big enough that you can slip anything you want to underneath it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a general statement without any hint of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 152.
 MR. PLOSSER. Right. But that spread will partly depend on what the range of maturities are that we offer at the TDF.  The longer the maturity, presumably the higher the premium, and whether we’ve got the spread high enough to cover that would be something that we would have to sort of work on, I would think, in order to make it work. Will that end up raising interest rates.  President Kocherlakota was talking about this. Do these tools affect interest rates in some sense.  Is this just a backhanded way of raising rates, which we might as well raise anyway.  I’m still a little uncomfortable with how this is actually going to work and whether it’s going to do what we think it’s going to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage mainly consists of the speaker expressing their own uncertainty and questioning how certain tools might affect interest rates. There is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 153.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is great monetary economics.  [Laughter] You can have such a great graduate class.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not expressing any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the economics being discussed is great and elicits laughter, indicating a positive response.


Passage number 154.
 MR. PLOSSER. Yes, right. If I live that long.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple response indicating agreement or acknowledgement.


Passage number 155.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 156.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Yes. I’m going to follow up on some of the things President Plosser was saying. What we could do is raise the interest rate on excess reserves; we could offer this term deposit, which strikes me as like offering a certificate of deposit, a CD, to a bank, and they can lock in their funds—that’s offering a high interest rate on a particular kind of illiquid asset; or we could sell off MBS, but we’re worried about raising the rates there.  So I guess we’re going to defer all of this until January, and we’ll sort it all out at that point.  But there is this question about which interest rate we’re going to be manipulating at a given point in time.  I’m not seeing clearly why this is the right interest rate to manipulate as opposed to the   IOER rate or just selling agency MBS.  That’s the part I’m not following.  But, again, maybe this will be cleared up in January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is unsure about which interest rate to manipulate but acknowledges that the decision will be made in January.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 157.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I don’t want to interject, but I think there are two ways to look at it. One is just to say the IOER rate, which is an overnight rate, is the basic tool, and we just have all of these fine-tuning instruments to make sure we don’t have too much slippage between the market rate—the federal funds rate—and the IOER rate.  That’s one approach, and I think that’s the simplest approach.  The other way, though, is to say, well, we really have tools that can affect things at different parts of the term structure or different types of instruments, and we can play with that if we want. That gets more complicated and it makes policymaking more complicated.  So I don’t know how far we want to go in that direction, but I think there are at least two ways to look at that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents two different approaches or perspectives on the use of tools and instruments in monetary policymaking, indicating that there is potential disagreement or debate about which approach is preferable.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 158.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Just to follow up—if I’m a bank, why would I put my reserves into this account unless it paid a higher interest rate than the IOER rate.  Because it’s less liquid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is questioning the reason for banks to put their reserves into a certain account unless it provided a higher interest rate than the IOER (Interest on Excess Reserves) rate. This implies that there might be a disagreement or contention about the interest rate being offered for reserves and their liquidity.


Passage number 159.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It will.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided.


Passage number 160.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Okay. So, at least as far as I can see, it’s not just fine-tuning that gap between the fed funds rate and the IOER rate.  It’s actually playing with the various aspects of the term structure in some fashion.  And maybe that’s the right way for us to proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their perspective and suggesting a possible approach, without contradicting any previous statements or opinions.


Passage number 161.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Market operations are swaps of assets for assets.  We’re swapping reserves for deposits. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply describes market operations as swaps of assets for assets and gives an example of swapping reserves for deposits. The mention of President Evans does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 162.
 MR. EVANS. Something about President Plosser’s question made me think about stigma.  Jim, you mentioned this, too.  If you were a bank, and you had these term deposits, and then something happened and you went to the window—which is just a normal type of thing—would you be worried. In the old days, if we were worried about arbitrage, then the supervisor would make a phone call.  It seems that we would have to be very clear in mentioning that it would still be okay to access the window under the right conditions, and that you wouldn’t get a call from the supervisor.  Or, if they’re worried about that, then they might just not bid on the term deposits, and it doesn’t amount to anything.  It might be a little tricky.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their thoughts on the topic of stigma and the potential concerns banks may have regarding accessing the window under certain conditions. They are exploring different possibilities and considerations, but there is no clear disagreement or conflicting opinions presented.


Passage number 163.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. We left that old regime, of course, when we moved the discount rate above the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 164.
 MR. EVANS. Right. That’s why it’s okay. Of course, they still don’t borrow.  At some point, Jim mentioned that stigma is our friend—I wrote that down—or at least that it could help us with something. But we think that stigma will make this arbitrage go away.  It’s just something to think about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states different perspectives or thoughts on the topic of stigma and how it may impact an arbitrage situation.


Passage number 165.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions.  [No response.]  I could press on just a bit more.  Our friend Dave Stockton is a victim of H1N1 flu virus.  David Wilcox has stepped into the breach, so let me turn it over to David.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply provides information about Dave Stockton's illness and the replacement of David Wilcox.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks. Are there questions for our colleagues.  [No response.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions asking for questions from colleagues.


Passage number 167.
] Seeing no questions— MR. PLOSSER. It’s hard to know how to take that restrained enthusiasm in this report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the meaning behind the report's restrained enthusiasm, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflict present.


Passage number 168.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Coffee awaits. [Laughter]  One small item:  We need to approve the domestic operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that coffee is available and there is laughter following this statement. It then introduces a small item that requires approval.


Passage number 169.
 MR. KOHN. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage simply states that "So moved." which indicates agreement or approval, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 170.
 MR. WARSH.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states that someone named Mr. Warsh is speaking, without adding any information about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 171.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  All right. Why don’t we take a coffee break and come back in about 20 minutes.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statements are polite and aim to reach a consensus for taking a coffee break and reconvening later. The "thank you" at the end indicates a level of agreement and appreciation.


Passage number 172.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Why don’t we recommence and begin our go-round.   President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply suggests resuming the meeting and starting the go-round.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 173.
   MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We have had some heartening news since the last meeting.  In particular, the employment report was stronger than most analysts expected, with the economy losing only 11,000 jobs.  However, it is obvious, but still important, to emphasize that this is still moving in the wrong direction.  As the recovery progresses, a good employment report will be one that adds jobs substantially faster than growth in the labor force, so we can make significant progress in reducing the unemployment rate and reattaining full employment. The Greenbook has the unemployment rate at 9.6 percent at the end of 2010, with an assumption of no change in the federal funds rate.  Unfortunately, my own forecast is quite similar.  Initial claims for unemployment insurance remain quite elevated.  We need to see a significant reduction in job loss and a marked increase in hiring if we are going to achieve net increases in employment that significantly exceed growth in the labor force.  Other labor market trends highlight why the progress is likely to be slow in bringing the unemployment rate down.  First, the fraction of employed persons working part-time for economic reasons is nearly at an all-time high for the series.  Second, the workweek of production and non-supervisory workers remains low relative to non-recessionary periods.  With many workers on a reduced workweek, or involuntarily on part-time work, many businesses will defer hiring new employees until their existing workforce is more fully utilized.  Thus, even if GDP growth exceeds potential, as I expect it will over the coming quarters, this will likely reduce the unemployment rate only gradually. Headwinds from the banking sector are also likely to continue to blow strongly.  The percent of bank assets in institutions with low supervisory ratings continues to grow, and bank failures are artificially being held down by resource constraints at the FDIC.  Given the volumeof problem loans and problem banks, it is probably time to have a Resolution Trust Corporation to deal with failed bank assets. Recovery in commercial real estate will be delayed if the public and private sectors hold large inventories of problem commercial real estate loans in the hope that losses will be avoided through forbearance. On the inflation front, there is little evidence of inflationary pressures.  A variety of models used by the Boston Fed expect continued disinflation.  For models that depend on resource slack, the very high unemployment rate relative to any reasonable estimate of full employment suggests further disinflation.  However, recognizing the difficulties in measuring unemployment and output gaps, we have also examined models that emphasize the role of real marginal cost.  Here, too, one would expect significant disinflation, because real unit labor costs have been falling dramatically and are currently at a postwar low.  With double-digit unemployment, I don’t expect a quick reversal in real unit labor costs.  Furthermore, our model suggests that, even in the presence of extremely well-anchored inflation expectations, the downward pull from resource underutilization may well outweigh the stabilizing effect of anchored expectations. Thus, while the high-frequency data have clearly improved from earlier this year, they have not changed enough to significantly alter the outlook of an economy with very weak labor markets and a significant risk of further disinflation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges some positive news in the employment report but also emphasizes that it is still moving in the wrong direction. They also highlight their own forecast, which is similar to the Greenbook's forecast, indicating a lack of confidence in the outlook. Additionally, the speaker discusses the slow progress in reducing the unemployment rate and mentions headwinds from the banking sector, suggesting potential challenges to the economy. Overall, the passage presents a cautious and skeptical view of the current economic situation.


Passage number 174.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards someone named President Bullard.


Passage number 175.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Plosser.


Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 177.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The sentiment of directors and contacts in the Sixth District supports a modest recovery scenario.  In the most recent cycle of board meetings, surveys, and calls, I heard views that suggest an improving but still quite fragile economic reality.  We collected a number of comments that represent “color,” and not much that raised doubts about the modestly better conditions.  We heard reports of better retail spending for appliances and building materials.  This was confirmed by last Friday’s retail sales estimate.  Retail sales improvement, however, seems to be tied to deep price discounts, and we heard retailers are not building inventories in anticipation of a sustained spending pickup.  We heard that retailers are prepared to lose sales for lack of in-store inventory. We also heard reports that temporary hiring has increased, and that, too, was reflected in the most recent employment report for November.  Temp agencies told us that they are seeing growth in higher-level administrative jobs.  Anecdotal feedback also supported the story that President Bullard pointed out—that policy uncertainty about health care, taxes, regulation, and cap and trade is feeding a very cautious approach to business investment and hiring. The Atlanta Bank’s economic growth and recovery forecast continues to foresee a path to the downside of the Greenbook outlook, particularly in 2011 and 2012.  Notwithstanding some better-than-expected incoming data, I am holding to the view that there are formidable and verylikely persistent suppressing factors that will inhibit a buildup of growth momentum.  Our greatest concerns are centered on business investment and the impact of commercial real estate value contraction on bank credit to smaller businesses, which ultimately affects job growth. We looked more deeply at the inventory and the commercial real estate-related concerns during the intermeeting period and did not find reason to adjust our forecast assumptions.  We found that, while inventories are lean in a few retail categories, significant excess inventory remains in many manufacturing categories. We also found that there is a strong coincidence of banks with commercial real estate exposure in excess of three times capital and small business loan share. An implication of the Atlanta Bank’s outlook is very slow progress on unemployment and underemployment. As regards price stability, I remain of the view that upside inflation risk is not much of a concern for the near and medium term.  I find it hard to pinpoint a source of broad inflationary pressure and see some indications of disinflation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting information and their own viewpoint without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a simple thank you statement to President Fisher.


Passage number 179.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 180.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Can I make an interjection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking for permission to make an interjection. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 181.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I don’t blame you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing understanding or empathy towards someone, implying that there is no blame or disagreement involved.


Passage number 182.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Two things.  One, Mr. Hatzius, who is the chief U.S. economist at Goldman Sachs right now, did win the Blue Chip Forecasting award for accuracy this year. [Laughter].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Hatzius won an award for accuracy, which is followed by laughter.


Passage number 183.
 MR. FISHER. That’s ex post, past tense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 184.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And, two, I think I contributed something to his training.  [Laughter]. So it’s not surprising that our views are not that far apart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there was laughter, indicating that the statement was intended as a joke or lighthearted comment. The phrase "our views are not that far apart" suggests that there is agreement or similarity between the speaker and the subject's views.


Passage number 185.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Lacker without providing any information or context that hints at contention or disagreement.


Passage number 186.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am not sure I have ever seen President Dudley blush. [Laughter] Our information about the Fifth District economy has been somewhat mixed lately.  Surveys indicate the service sector is looking up.  The nonretail revenue index has moved back toward positive territory—it’s not there yet—having been quite weak for several months. The retail revenue index has edged into positive territory for the first time since the second quarter of 2007. Readings for employment in these two service sectors and expected demand six months ahead have also strengthened noticeably.  The manufacturing index has backed off its recent highs, however, and is hovering around the break-even mark.  Anecdotal comments suggest demand has stabilized in many firms after having recovered in the middle of the year, and exports are widely cited as a bright spot in the District.  Our survey measures of price trends remain stable at a low level. Nationally, at the last meeting I think most of us were expecting national data to show a moderately paced recovery.  The intermeeting data have generally been consistent with that or in some cases a bit better than expected, as many have remarked.  Payroll employment losses have slowed substantially, and, as is typical in recoveries, there were strong upward revisions for prior months. Initial jobless claims have fallen more than 20 percent in the last six months, and the   improvement in aggregate hours worked after so many months of stagnation was particularly useful. This stabilization in the labor market bolsters the outlook for consumer spending, I think.  Revisions that have added 1¼ percentage points to the level of personal income cumulatively also bode well for consumption, and these developments make the recent growth in retail sales look more sustainable.  The recent firming in net exports and residential investment are also supporting domestic production.  The strong ISM manufacturing readings for production and new orders are consistent with recovery in the manufacturing sector.  Because the Fifth District manufacturing survey led the ISM on the way up, however, it led the much smaller Empire State survey and Philadelphia surveys as well; its recent decline might be a reason for caution about the robustness of manufacturing at the national level.  Commercial construction is obviously a drag on economic growth, but those figures have not come in noticeably worse than expected, because expectations were so low to begin with.  So overall, I’m expecting moderate growth to continue along the lines of what’s in the Greenbook, but without as much disinflation. Having said that, I find it hard to get a bead on just how this recovery is going to shape up over the next year or so. I sense a degree of caution among businesses attributable to concerns about the shifting regulatory environment and potential health care and climate change legislation. Some of my colleagues around the table have remarked on that.  In addition, uncertainty about the future path of federal deficits, I think, looms over the outlook as well.  So economic growth might not accelerate much from here. In financial markets, rates on an array of short-term instruments have fallen since the September meeting—T-bills, commercial paper, and short-term euro-dollar deposits, for example.  Meanwhile reserve balances have risen by more than $200 billion over the same period. This looks a lot like the quantitative easing we were expecting, and it may be partly  responsible for the decline in other medium-term rates as well.  It’s not obvious that further easing was really needed over this time frame, as the outlook has generally been improving.  The magnitude of the effect seems to have been relatively small, however, and inflation expectations seem to have remained stable. The case for expecting further disinflation continues to weaken, in my view.  The Greenbook’s forecast for 2010 core PCE inflation was marked up yet again this time and has doubled since March.  The 2009 core forecast has been revised up since then as well, as core inflation has failed to fall as expected. It looks to me as if the stabilizing effect of inflation expectations has dominated any depressing effect coming from gaps between output and statistical trends in output, but I’m sure we will discuss this at greater length in our special topic tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a summary of various economic indicators and the speaker's personal observations and opinions.


Passage number 187.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude to President Evans without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 188.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Once again, my outlook and business reports have not changed very much over the intermeeting period.  Most of my contacts currently are seeing continued modest improvement in their businesses, but firms continue to be nervous about prospects for the first half of 2010, and they’re not making major new commitments right now.  That said, some are in the process of making marginal adjustments.  The temp firms said that they have now had three months of decent gains in orders, mostly for low-wage, light-industrial workers. Typically this is the first segment of their business to come back after a recession, and there were scattered reports from other contacts about some modest rehiring, though it is too early to see how meaningful these might be.  Largely, it is the biggest cutters of employment that are rehiring right now. On balance, most reports indicate that businesses have largely completed the employment and capacity reductions associated with right-sizing their operations for what   they expect, and when signals point more clearly to a sustainable upturn in the economy, they appear ready to make more definite commitments to ramp up production.  By the way, no one raised the specter of uncertainty over government legislation currently being contemplated, but if I asked them later, and I did sometimes, they said yes, but it was not the first thing on their minds. Financial conditions seem to have eased further in a number of markets.  Risk aversion continues to decline, and there are increasing reports of previously sidelined capital moving in the markets in search of higher returns.  Not surprisingly, the chorus of concerns regarding frothiness in financial exuberance seems to be growing, and I think you heard about this in Berlin, according to news reports, Mr. Chairman.  Although these warnings seem premature, a couple of them were interesting.  For example, my private equity director has noted several times that at least a few recent deals have included some of the troublesome features that we saw during the last boom:  interest rate toggles, light covenant provisions, and funding for dividend recaps. In exuberant times, these lax provisions came bundled together.  In recent deals only single provisions have been included. Still, he says he didn’t expect to see any of these so soon.  In banking, however, there has been no change in the ongoing complaints and debates.  Small businesses say credit is overly tight, while bankers worry about creditworthiness, managerial ability, and examiners’ reactions to new lending. This divergence between conditions in capital markets and bank credit serves as a reminder that monetary policy is a blunt tool.  Monetary accommodation will flow to where it can obtain the best return, and it is difficult to predict when it will reach particular sectors.  Currently the liquidity is going to capital markets, and while it is helping banks shore up their balance sheets, it is not clearly finding its way into new bank lending. Turning to the outlook, business and household caution and restrictive bank credit will continue to be headwinds, but I expect these to abate more as we move through next year.  Overall, my forecast for real economic activity is about unchanged from last round, and we are looking for GDP growth rates over the next year and a half similar to those in the Greenbook.  With regard to prices, resource slack remains large, and inflation trends are still well below my guideline of 2 percent. At the same time, inflation expectations have remained within their recent ranges.  So my forecast for inflation is about the same as last round, with core PCE inflation flattened down a bit in 2010 to 2011 but then moving up to about 1¾ percent in 2012.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a report from Mr. Evans discussing his outlook and business reports.


Passage number 189.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply expressing gratitude towards President Yellen.


Passage number 190.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude towards President Hoenig.


Passage number 191.
 MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the structural challenges that our economy is experiencing and has ahead of it, I’m relatively optimistic about the economy.  Rather than discussing the national picture, because our District mirrors some of the national events, I’ll focus on some of that information.   First of all, we’re experiencing some improvement in our manufacturing sector.  It’s small but systematic, and we get fairly good reports back on our surveys.  Our retail sales reports are up across the District. This holiday season has been better than most people expected.  We are seeing some slowing down in job losses, as others have reported, certainly, across the region.  And even in our housing sector we are seeing modest improvements there as well.  Our ag sector is actually improving very nicely, with improvements in the international sales area, with goods sales to China, for example, and so our ag sector is really quite good right now across the region.  Even technology seems positive.  As one of our contacts described it, compared with the tech bubble bust, this has been a very mild event for them, so they’re much more optimistic as they go forward and think that they will have further strengthening moving from here. It’s interesting in talking with some of these individuals—it’s like listening to the FOMC.  They’re optimistic, they’re doing pretty well, but they’re not quite sure, so they’re holding back, waiting for more certainty before they invest. And they have a good pocket of money to invest once they gain that confidence to “pull the trigger,” if you will.  That was striking in a number of conversations I had with some of the tech people and some of the others who were thinking about investing going forward. I think that’s worth noting. As others have said, commercial real estate is really quite difficult for banks that are caught up in the commercial real estate cycle.  But, for our region, I think it’s also important to make some distinctions.  In the urban areas, where some banks have plunged into commercial real estate, they’re in deep trouble, and they’re not going to be able to make loans.  They’re just hanging on. But there’s another group of banks that did not plunge as deeply, and it’s a fair percentage of our banks. They have kind of the same issue that I talked about earlier—they have the money, but they want to be very careful, they don’t want to get caught up in any false  recovery, and so they are being very thoughtful before they extend it.  Even though they have funds, their standards are fairly tight, and they’re also claiming they’re not seeing the demand from the small business, so they have both sides going.  But as the economy improves, I think a good number of them will be in a position to lend, even though there will continue to be a drag from the commercial real estate side. So overall I think we are on the right track.  Things are improving in our region, and I think I see that in the models on the national economy.  I have no major disagreements with the Greenbook, as we think about things going forward. I do want to note and make a comment on the issue that Jim Bullard mentioned.  I think that the approach of not reinvesting proceeds in the maturing MBS is a very good approach.  And I would tell you that, the way I look at it, even if you were to do that, in 2016 you’d still have half your portfolio left. But it’s like phase 1 of this extraction process.  We talked earlier about raising the spread, letting these roll off, and then, depending on how the economy recovers, we might be more actively engaged in managing that portfolio down, if we’re permitted to do so, by circumstances, and we should be considering that.  Part of that, hopefully, will be discussed tomorrow, and certainly a big part of that will be discussed in January. And I look forward to both of those conversations. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing optimism about the economy and discussing various positive developments in different sectors. They also express support for a particular approach regarding the management of MBS portfolio.


Passage number 192.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude toward President Pianalto.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 193.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am pleased to see the signs of improvement in the economic data we received during the intermeeting period, especially in the November employment report.  Nonetheless, I see the economy in 2010 as having little momentum and as challenged by a lack of business confidence.  My business contacts report that sales are up from earlier this year, but they don’t see the momentum that is needed for a  sustained recovery.  Several of my contacts noted that recent growth is unlikely to be sustained, because it was driven by one-time gains.  For example, business has been picking up in several manufacturing industries, because they are replacing inventories at the wholesale level.  They indicated that wholesalers had not been restocking earlier in the year.  Inventory restocking is obviously welcomed, but if it is without a sustained improvement in final demand, it implies only a temporary strengthening in economic activity. My business contacts also expressed a general lack of confidence in the outlook. They view the current environment as so alien that most of them were uncomfortable providing an outlook for 2010. They tell me that their conventional methods for assessing their own business prospects are irrelevant in this environment.  On top of the uncertainties about the economic outlook, as others have noted, proposals for health care reform, financial reform, and the new environmental regulations, have the potential to affect business conditions significantly in the near future. I am concerned that this lack of confidence in the economy’s prospects for even the next few quarters is going to be a significant barrier to a more robust recovery.  Businesses continue to stress cash preservation and cost containment as their top priorities.  They report little incentive or motivation to invest in capital projects.  To quote one CEO, “We’re not going to invest or prepare for growth without orders in hand.”  This issue of confidence was also raised in a recent discussion at our joint board of directors meeting, among the businesspeople and the bankers, on credit availability and bank lending standards. For large firms, which have access to the public debt markets, credit is now available on more attractive terms than earlier this year.  But, as others have commented, smaller firms, which rely primarily on banks, are complaining about the availability of credit.  Bankers expressed a lack of confidence in the values of their borrowers’ collateral as one of the main reasons that they have had to raise their lending standards. Many of the businesspeople criticized the higher pricing and tighter terms for lending as being based on unreasonable assessments of their businesses.  So they are losing confidence in banks as a reliable source for funds in the face of elevated terms and additional covenants.  These reports suggest that credit availability continues to be an impediment to growth, particularly if we are counting on small businesses to contribute to economic growth. My business contacts did have some good news, and that is that more firms are expecting to return to profitability.  With this improvement, several businesses reported that they would at least partially restore hours, wages, and benefits that had been cut when the outlook was more dire. These actions should aid GDP growth, even if they have little effect on the unemployment rate for a while. More broadly, the speed and scale of the cutbacks many businesses implemented earlier this year give firms substantial room to expand activities before they would have to hire any new employees. Weighing all of these reports and the recent data, I made only minor changes to my outlook. I continue to see weaker GDP growth in the current quarter and for 2010 than the Greenbook projection. I expect the unemployment rate to remain roughly unchanged in December, with only modest improvements through all of next year.  My projection for core PCE inflation remains low throughout 2010 before it gradually converges towards 2 percent beginning in 2011. My inflation outlook is based on the significant amount of excess capacity that we currently have and inflation expectations that remain close to 2 percent from one to ten years out, according to my staff’s model for inflation expectations.  I continue to see the risks as balanced around my outlook for economic growth and inflation. The potential for the recent momentum in labor markets to continue is roughly offset by the potential for further restraints on credit availability.  For inflation, uncertainty remains elevated on either side of my projection.  This uncertainty is linked closely to whether or not inflation expectations remain anchored.  Overall, the economy is certainly in better shape than earlier this year, but it is still not clear to me that the economy has truly turned the corner.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Ms. Pianalto expresses concern about the lack of business confidence and the potential barriers to a more robust economic recovery. She also highlights the disagreement between businesses and banks regarding credit availability and lending standards. Additionally, she mentions differing assessments of business values and elevated terms and additional covenants, which further contribute to the disagreement between businesspeople and bankers.


Passage number 194.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude from someone (President Kocherlakota) to the reader.


Passage number 195.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the Ninth District, real economic activity has begun to recover, but slowly.  The basic sense among our directors and our Small Business Council is that the deterioration in conditions has ended.  Figures confirm this sense. Regional unemployment has stabilized, although at elevated levels.  However, our directors also expressed some skepticism about the degree to which this turnaround can be sustained without ongoing government interventions, such as the first-time homebuyer credit.  Our Small Business Council expressed strong concerns about policy uncertainty related to taxes, health care, and cap and trade. Nationally, the revised estimate of third quarter GDP growth was 2.8 percent.  This increase is better than the preceding four quarters of negative growth.  Nonetheless, output is well below its trend level if we assume that that trend grows at 3 percent per year, beginning in the fourth quarter of 2007.  The Greenbook predicts that GDP will rise by over 4 percent per year over the next two years.  Based on our Minneapolis model’s forecast, I believe that this prediction is somewhat optimistic.  But even if the Greenbook were right, GDP will be well below this 3 percent trend line through the end of 2011.   In terms of labor market conditions, the November employment report was heartening.  National unemployment has started to decline, and employment seemed to stabilize in November.  However, unemployment remains extremely high by historical standards, and I agree with the Greenbook that it will remain elevated through 2011.  The employment-to­population ratio remains at a 25-year low. The inflation front is more promising.  Inflation remains low.  Inflationary expectations, as measured by Blue Chip forecasts or TIPS spreads, also remain low.  My own expectations are similar.  Nonetheless, I am concerned about a tail risk of a low-probability but high-inflation outcome.  The size of the government debt held in the private sector has increased by more than 30 percent in the past two years.  This rise in the debt can only be funded by future tax increases, spending cuts, or higher inflation.  Any uncertainty about the Congress’s will to exercise the required fiscal restraint translates directly into uncertainty about current or future inflation. There is also good news in financial markets.  Thanks in large part to interventions by the Fed, key liquidity measures like TED spreads have returned to normal.  Indeed, the option-adjusted spread between agency MBS and Treasuries has fallen to near historical lows.  This improvement in financial markets has significant consequences for policy.  Liquidity disruptions last fall served to segment financial markets in unprecedented ways.  In that environment, the LSAP played a valuable role by lowering risk premiums in the agency debt and MBS markets.  However, the return to normalcy in spreads across financial markets indicates the degree of market segmentation is, at a minimum, greatly reduced.  Without such segmentation, the impact of reducing our holdings of agency MBS or Treasury debt on their yields is likely to be muted.  I would, at a minimum, be supportive of not reinvesting the proceeds from the LSAP either from the agency securities or from the Treasury debt. Overall, the real side of the economy is recovering somewhat.  However, detrended GDP is well below historical norms, and unemployment is well above the historical norms.  And this characterization seems likely to continue well into 2011.  Inflation is under control and is expected to remain so, although the size of the government debt represents a possible large risk.  Financial markets continue to improve and are much stronger than a year ago.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting information and expressing their own opinions and concerns, but there is no disagreement with other viewpoints.


Passage number 196.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is a polite expression of appreciation rather than an indication of disagreement.


Passage number 197.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic outlook has clearly improved since the previous meeting, and we all seem to agree on that.  On the real activity side, here’s what strikes me as most meaningful:  First is a more solid foundation for consumer spending, as David Wilcox pointed out—a higher underlying compensation trend, as well as slower job losses and rising hours worked last month.  Second is consumer spending gains—core retail sales in November were quite solid, for example, and real consumer spending looks likely to grow at a moderate rate this quarter.  Third, as Nathan pointed out, is trade improvement fueled by export growth, not just export growth on its own, but also supported by pretty strong economic expansion outside the U.S.  And, fourth is something that hasn’t been mentioned yet—it looks as if some of the TARP monies are going to be used to fund a modest jobs program, so the trajectory of fiscal stimulus may not be as steeply downward as we go through 2010 as we anticipated earlier. But I don’t want to put too much weight on any of this.  First, I think much of this improvement was anticipated.  I think it’s more that we’re moving along the path that we expected, rather than we are moving to a distinctly better path.  Second, there are significant constraints in terms of credit availability, and I don’t see any sign that those have changed very much since the last meeting.  Third, we still have a tremendous amount of political uncertainty about health care reform, financial reform, and tax policy.  In talking to our directors, they make it very clear that this is a factor influencing their hiring behavior.  Although job losses have slowed, this seems to be almost exclusively due to much slower layoffs than due to a pickup in hiring. So for the New York Fed, Richard, the bottom line is more confidence about the sustainability of the recovery, but still an expectation that the economy will slow a bit from the current pace in 2010. That said, I think the risks to our forecast are shifting towards the upside from the downside. We should also recognize that we face a very disappointing path for unemployment going forward. So even if the economy is on a somewhat stronger growth path, that would be very welcome right now, and I would argue we should not offset that with changes in our policy. On the inflation side, I think the outlook has not changed much.  We have TIPS five-year, five-year forward inflation measures—it may in fact be slightly higher than that, but it’s hard to know because the inflation risk premiums are hard to extract.  And some other indicators certainly show less anxiety about the inflation outlook.  For example, the fears about commodity prices and the dollar seem to have calmed down quite a bit since the last meeting.  Interestingly, the mid-month University of Michigan reading had an almost bizarre drop in the median one-year and five-year inflation forecast—maybe it was just a fluke, but it was interesting nevertheless. Given the large amount of federal borrowing and the imminent wind-up of our large-scale asset-purchase program, I am, frankly, quite surprised that long-term rates have not climbed more sharply.  And I take that as another sign that investors are either not that worried  about the long-term fiscal outlook or particularly worried about the risk of higher inflation.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker acknowledges areas of improvement in the economy but also raises concerns and uncertainties. They mention constraints in credit availability, political uncertainty, and disappointing unemployment rates. They also mention that inflation outlook has not changed much but there are indicators showing less anxiety about inflation. Overall, there is acknowledgement of positive developments but also concerns and uncertainties.


Passage number 198.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Thank you. Governor Kohn" is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Kohn.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only contains a polite expression of gratitude toward Governor Warsh.


Passage number 200.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply consists of a polite expression of gratitude directed towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 201.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 202.
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me first say I know how pleased everyone must be that we are getting through the go-round this afternoon so that we will have plenty of time tomorrow for our special, though regrettably untelevised, version of “Who Wants to Be an Inflation Fighter.” [Laughter]  I have read the transcript. Developments since our previous meeting have obviously been positive, on balance, though not uniformly so.  The late-year improvement probably reduces somewhat further the likelihood of what I have previously characterized as a relapse scenario.  But even if this modest trend continues through December, I don’t think a stronger than expected fourth quarter fundamentally changes the outlook for 2010.  In this regard, there remains the important question whether or, more precisely, how much self-sustaining demand will fill in behind the withdrawal of stimulus over the course of next year.  For the reasons many of us have rehearsed at previous meetings, and that some of you have repeated this afternoon, the answer to this question is quite uncertain. One area that unfortunately looks all too certain is unemployment.  Even the most optimistic of private forecasters believe that unemployment will remain at very elevated levels throughout next year. Quite apart from the social and longer-term economic damage that may be effected by prolonged high unemployment, my intuition continues to be that a level of 9 or 10 percent places a significant limit on the growth of personal consumption expenditures unless one expects that compensation levels will themselves rise steadily. Obviously then the contribution of wealth effects would be important for a sustained acceleration in consumption, as, in fact, we see reflected in the forecasts of those who do anticipate stronger PCE growth. Here again, though, there is considerable uncertainty.  Indeed, I have noted that even those who sit together on the more optimistic end of the spectrum of forecasts for 2010 disagree on whether housing or equities will be the key driver of rising wealth. As to housing, at least, while I can tell the story of reduced inventories, lower prices, and less new home construction moving residential real estate eventually in a positive direction, I can equally conceive of such factors as more foreclosures associated with unemployment and a possible jump in mortgage rates associated with the end of our MBS purchases leading to stagnant or even slightly declining home prices. To be fair, I should also note that some on the more pessimistic end of the 2010 spectrum have been a bit undone by the revisions to 2009 data that revealed a higher saving rate than had  previously been assumed, thereby undermining the argument that saving will inevitably jump a good deal next year with consequent negative effects on PCE. But this example makes my point as readily as the cloudiness around the more upbeat commentaries. We are still learning exactly how the different characteristics of a deep, financially induced recession might confound expectations developed through experience with each of the recessions in the last 60 years, whether mild, moderate, or severe.  We will not have the luxury of waiting to see all these differences unfold as we make our policy decisions.  We will necessarily be navigating in somewhat uncharted waters, but to this point, I believe we have yet to see a credibly strong current flowing by us. My basic outlook is thus essentially unchanged from November, despite the noteworthy developments since that time.  Near-term prospects remain moderately positive, with the important major qualification of employment.  As to the second half of 2010 and beyond, a forecast of incrementally to moderately above trend growth remains the best bet, but I continue to see significant, though reduced, downside risks and growing, though still modest, upside risks as well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Tarullo outlining his views and outlook on the economy.


Passage number 203.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I know you’re all expecting a crisp, linear summary of the go-round, but I see that it’s past 5:30 [laughter], so why don’t we adjourn for a reception and dinner, and we’ll see you the first thing in the morning at 9:00 a.m..  Thank you. [Meeting recessed]2 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). December 16, 2009—Morning Session Meeting attendees greeted Chairman Bernanke with a standing ovation when he entered the meeting room in recognition of his being named Time Magazine’s Person of the Year 2009.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of events.


Passage number 204.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The power of the media. [Laughter] Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges the power of the media and expresses gratitude.


Passage number 205.
 MR. WARSH.  A little extra pressure for your pithy summary of yesterday’s discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply requesting a concise summary of the previous day's discussion, without any indication of disagreement or debate.


Passage number 206.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We want to start today with Bill Wascher, who will give us some updates on data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions that Bill Wascher will provide updates on data. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 207.
 MR. WASCHER.2  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We received two data releases this morning—housing starts and the CPI—and you should have in front of you a three-page handout that summarizes the data.  The first page summarizes the housing starts data, and you can see from the top line that total starts moved up to an annual rate of 574,000 units in November, with increases in starts of both single-family and multifamily units.  The jump in multifamily starts, which is about halfway down the table, basically reverses a sharp dip in October, and that was in line with our expectations.  While single-family starts also increased, that increase was smaller than we were expecting. Permits, which are a better underlying measure of starts, increased more than starts in November. But the combination of the permits and starts figures in November was weaker than we were expecting, and it suggests to us that our near-term forecast for single-family starts is probably too optimistic.  While I would still think that a gradual improvement in new home sales will lead to a more noticeable pickup in the pace of starts next year, these data suggest that the upturn is lagging a little bit more than we were projecting.  The implications of these data for GDP are mainly for the first quarter, given the lag between starts and construction; these data, and our reaction to them, would probably take off a tenth or two of a percentage point from our forecast for GDP growth in the first quarter. The next page summarizes the data for the CPI.  The total CPI rose 0.4 percent in November, which is what we were expecting for the headline number.  However, energy prices rose a larger-than-expected 4.1 percent last month, while core prices were about unchanged in November; to two decimal places, they rose three basis points.  We had been expecting an increase in the core index of about 0.1 percent.  The softness was concentrated in prices of services, especially in rents.  In contrast, core goods prices rose 0.2 of a percent in November, with noticeable increases in tobacco prices and in motor vehicle prices. It looks as if yesterday’s PPI release and today’s CPI release, taken together, will imply a lower estimate of core PCE inflation in both the fourth quarter and the first quarter than we had  in the Greenbook. In particular, it looks as if we’ll be down from 1.6 percent in the fourth quarter in the Greenbook to 1.2 percent for core PCE price inflation, and in the first quarter down from 1.3 percent to 1.1 percent.  For the total PCE price index, we would revise our estimate for the fourth quarter from 2.8 percent to 2.6 percent; for the first quarter, because of the higher energy prices, we would still be at 1.1 percent. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply summarizing data and sharing their observations and analysis.


Passage number 208.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there questions for Brian.  [No response.] Okay. If there are no questions, let’s begin our go-round with President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply indicates that there are no questions for Brian, and then suggests starting with President Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 209.
 MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B, but I would like to emphasize something that I’ve said in the past.  I continue to see a persuasive case for further policy easing. We are far below maximum sustainable employment, inflation is undesirably low, and almost any version of the Taylor Rule, as well as the Bluebook’s optimal policy simulation, recommends a negative setting for the federal funds rate at the present time.  We need to remind ourselves of this fact to counteract the very natural instinct to tighten policy as the economy recovers. It’s true that, if we had been free to lower the federal funds rate into negative territory, it would probably be appropriate to start tightening in the not-too-distant future.  But we were constrained on the way down by the zero bound, and, in the face of that bound, systematic policy calls for us to hold the federal funds rate near zero for a long time to come. Alternative B includes a paragraph addressing our special liquidity facilities.  I do not consider the proposed language very controversial, with one exception.  I’m concerned about phasing out TALF support for newly issued CMBS.  I think it’s too soon to announce the termination of that support.  Outside of CRE lending, financial conditions have improved considerably, and it’s appropriate to allow the other facilities to expire as scheduled.  The reaction should be minimal because few observers expect them to continue. In contrast, our decisions relating to the LSAP programs are important from a policy perspective. The question of whether or not to reinvest SOMA holdings as they mature is an aspect of a broader policy decision concerning these programs.  I do see some advantage to allowing our agency-related holdings to run off.  This is a mechanistic strategy, but it creates a self-liquidating feature for our MBS portfolio—an exit strategy that shrinks our holdings over time in a manner that will be predictable to markets, minimizing the possibility of abrupt movements in yields that could result from further discretionary asset purchases or sales and ongoing market speculation about our plans. I’m encouraged by the staff assessment that allowing our MBS holdings to run off is likely to raise mortgage rates by only a few basis points.  If so, I think the benefits of increased predictability and a well-defined exit strategy will likely outweigh the small, albeit undesirable, contractionary effects of permitting our MBS holdings to contract before we would ideally withdraw stimulus. My bigger concern is that we just don’t know what will happen to MBS spreads and mortgage rates as we wind down our purchases over the next several months.  Many market participants expect rates to spike up considerably.  And if that happens when the economy is still very weak, and the housing markets remain fragile, I think we may need to resume purchases.  I agree with President Bullard that it’s important to preserve the flexibility to tailor LSAP purchases and sales to emerging economic and financial conditions. The final line in paragraph 3 states that our purchases are conditional on evolving conditions, and I consider that line to be more than mere boilerplate.  We will need to take that proviso seriously during the next few meetings as we gain a better idea of how winding down our programs is affecting spreads and yields. In the meantime, it’s worth strategizing about whether there is any way for us to gear the pace of purchases or sales to evolving conditions without targeting a specific mortgage rate and without creating undue uncertainty and excess volatility in the markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, favors alternative B but expresses concern about phasing out TALF support for newly issued CMBS. She believes it is too soon to terminate that support. Additionally, she expresses uncertainty about what will happen to MBS spreads and mortgage rates as they wind down their purchases, and suggests the possibility of resuming purchases if rates spike up considerably and the economy remains weak. She agrees with President Bullard that it is important to preserve flexibility in LSAP purchases and sales.


Passage number 210.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you. President Rosengren" shows appreciation and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 211.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B. The Greenbook assumes no change in interest rates through 2010.  That is consistent with my own view of appropriate monetary policy and is consistent with communicating that we expect to maintain very low rates for an extended period of time.  If outcomes are similar to the Greenbook forecast, removing the “extended period” language is a topic best left for the second half of 2010.   Removal of that language is likely to set off a significant change in market interest rates.  It will not be appropriate until private sector growth is on a sustainable path and labor markets have improved significantly. In terms of exit strategy, selling a portion of our holdings of mortgage-backed securities should not be done in 2010 if the economy unfolds as envisioned in the Greenbook forecast.  Uncertainty about the amount and speed of sales of our very large holdings of mortgage-backed securities would almost surely drive up the risk premium required by private purchasers of mortgage-backed securities. Conversations with a variety of market participants in Boston indicate that such sales are not anticipated and would be viewed as a signal that we wanted mortgage rates much higher, with the potential to dramatically slow a housing sector just beginning to recover. Should the economy unfold as in the Greenbook forecast, with only gradual improvement in unemployment and the inflation rate well below 2 percent, I do not believe that we will need   to raise rates either through increasing the interest rate on reserves or removing reserves from the system until at least the end of next year.  The risks to real side recovery remain significant, and the costs of the downside risks outweigh the costs associated with any upside risks. I’d like to follow up on the discussion yesterday on the primary credit rate.  If we were to keep the “extended period” language and raise the primary credit rate in January, it may send a confusing signal to the market.  While we would likely want to raise the primary credit rate as we implement the term deposit facility, I would prefer to raise the primary credit rate closer to the time we are implementing the facility and possibly in conjunction with removing the extended period language, which I would hope would not be at the January meeting. I also concur with President Yellen’s comment on the TALF.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, expresses support for alternative B and shares their view on appropriate monetary policy. They also discuss their views on the timing of removing the "extended period" language and the potential consequences of selling mortgage-backed securities. Overall, their statements are aligned with the Greenbook forecast and do not indicate any disagreement or contention with the other participants mentioned.


Passage number 212.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The given passage only consists of a polite expression of gratitude from someone named President Plosser, with no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 213.
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Given the increasing signs that the economy is gaining momentum, I think it’s important for this Committee to consider language that begins to prepare the market for the possibility that we will need to begin reducing the degree of policy accommodation and our interventions in private markets sooner rather than later. The time to change policy is not now, but I do believe the time is getting closer.  I think the language in alternative C does a better job of this than the language in B, with the change in the forward guidance regarding the path of the funds rate substituting “some time” for “an extended period of time.”  I also note that paragraph 3 in alternative C begins with the phrase “at this meeting.”  I wasn’t quite sure about the intent of that, but my interpretation is—and I have some sympathy with the view—that this language does emphasize that things may change at some future meeting, and it sort of keeps our options open that changes can come to pass.My own view is that, as economic growth picks up and becomes more sustainable, real interest rates will rise.  Appetite for risk will increase, and that will lead to a rise in the opportunity cost of the vast amount of excess reserves that sits in the system.  The money multiplier will go up, and those excess reserves will flow rapidly out into the economy, as the opportunity cost gets higher and higher for banks to hold onto them.  The combination of more sustained growth and a flow of excess reserves into the economy would mean that if we want to retain control over those excess reserves, we will have to raise the policy rate.  So as real growth picks up and becomes more sustainable, our policy rates should rise with that.  Put another way, we may lose control of all those excess reserves. As I’ve discussed at earlier meetings, I favor the inflation paragraph in alternative C primarily because it emphasizes the dependence of inflation on the stability of longer-term expectations and on policy adjustments that we will take to keep inflation levels consistent with price stability, both on the positive and negative side of our target. I like conveying this idea that it is monetary policy actions rather than structural features of the economy that influence inflation over the longer term.  Moreover, I think that the language of paragraph 2 in alternative C will help stabilize and anchor expectations, as it more strongly signals our commitment to maintain price stability.  I think this can only help us in a period when the dispersion in inflation forecasts has widened and uncertainty has increased.  As I said at our last meeting, the dispersion of the forecasts for long-term inflation, both in our SPF survey and our Livingston survey, has widened noticeably, and this should concern us. I favor including the last paragraph of alternative B, which is repeated in alternative C, regarding the expiration of some of our facilities on February 1 for three reasons.  First, and most importantly, I believe it is the right policy.  The improvement of financial conditions over the   past year has been swifter than some of us might have expected, and financial conditions appear to be returning to normalcy.  I see no compelling reason at this point to keep the facilities open beyond February. Second, the market expects that these facilities are going to be wound down early next year, so I don’t think the paragraph would cause much of a market reaction, and it should help reduce uncertainty around that expectation.  Third, it’s becoming progressively harder to justify the existence of some of these liquidity programs as financial market conditions improve.  I assume that the Governors are going to have to take a decision soon about whether exigent and unusual circumstances continue to exist to justify the programs.  In my view, it’s becoming harder and harder to do that.  My only comment is that it’s not clear why we shouldn’t further reduce the size of TAF auctions at this point.  They’re still significantly undersubscribed, and we haven’t been able to increase the rate. There will likely be interactions with the term deposit facility, as we mentioned yesterday.  I suggest we reduce these auctions again to see if we can’t get supply more in line with demand. As to our discussion yesterday about increasing the penalty rate, the discount rate, I’ll repeat my plea on this.  I’m sympathetic with President Rosengren and repeat my plea that we not treat our exit tools in isolation.  We need to treat them collectively and have a discussion in January about how all the pieces of our exit tools fit together, with an eye toward what form of monetary policy framework we’ll want to use after this exit strategy is over.  That is, we need to know not only where we’re going, but also how all of these different tools fit together to get us there, because there are a lot of interactions.  It’s difficult to determine the appropriate exit strategy and optimal size of our balance sheet without knowing which alternative monetary policy implementation framework we’re headed towards and what our policy rate strategies will be. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any specific disagreement or contention. It primarily presents the opinion and views of the speaker (Mr. Plosser) on various aspects of monetary policy.


Passage number 214.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. "Thank you" and "President Kocherlakota" are expressions of gratitude and acknowledgement, and do not indicate any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 215.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In our November statement, we committed to maintaining a target range of zero to 25 basis points for the fed funds rate as long as the economy continued to exhibit low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations. I believe that those conditions are still in place, and so I am happy to maintain the fed funds rate in that target range. Also, for the reasons ably described by President Plosser, I support committing ourselves to plans for ending the liquidity facilities as is done in both alternatives B and C.  I do not see the utility of our buying the extra $150 billion of agency MBS and $15 billion of agency debt in alternative B, but I am willing to support the thrust of the alternative, because our language in the November statement about the LSAP signaled a strong commitment to those extra asset purchases. With that said, I am concerned that alternative B is so silent about our plans for the balance sheet beyond March. I would recommend changing the last sentence of alternative B to read, “The Committee will continue to evaluate the size and composition of its holdings of securities in light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets,” so that’s basically changing from “purchases” to “holdings.”  This change would communicate to the public that we may choose to reduce the balance sheet by failing to reinvest or by selling assets. My own view is that we should begin such a reduction in the second quarter of 2010, at least by failing to reinvest and, more desirably, through additional sales. Why do I favor reducing the balance sheet.  Well, first, the benefits of our interventions in these markets have fallen greatly.  I am convinced from evidence offered by the New York Fed that the LSAP had big benefits in late 2008 and early 2009, but during that period financial  markets were functioning poorly.  Risk premia in particular markets became largely disconnected from one another.  But as pages 12 and 13 of the Bluebook emphasize, these conditions have greatly ameliorated, and investors can more readily substitute across various financial assets.  In these circumstances, reducing our positions will have a muted effect on yields. The benefits, therefore, of our big balance sheet have been greatly reduced, and our big balance sheet is not without cost.  It confronts us with the low probability possibility of high inflation. Banks have $1 trillion of excess reserves.  These reserves represent an inflation risk generated from potential changes in household expectations. The logic here is simple.  If households believe that the price level is about to rise, they will demand more liquid deposits in order to make their transactions.  One of the five memos for the inflation dynamics session we’re going to get is by Simon Potter and other coauthors, and it indicates how increases in government debt can lead to exactly those kinds of changes in household beliefs. Given those changes, banks can readily accommodate the extra demand for deposits because they’re holding so many excess reserves.  The extra deposits in the hands of households become extra money chasing the same amount of goods, which has the possibility of generating inflation. In this way excess reserves are a vehicle for households’ expectations about inflation to become reality. One way this chain of events could take place is for banks to make additional loans.  However, their doing so would mean that they would be significantly changing the risk composition of their portfolios.  My own belief is that deposit creation would be fueled instead by households and firms selling banks relatively illiquid but relatively riskless securities like corporate bonds, municipal bonds, and Treasuries.  Households and firms now own about $4 trillion in such securities, which is enough to expand demand deposits by 600 percent.  This   expansion, obviously an extreme case, would put enormous pressure on the price level.  I’d be the first to say that this inflationary chain is only a possibility, and I agree with market assessments that it currently has a low probability of occurring.  But one lesson I have taken away from the past five years is that our conduct of policy should take account of exactly these kinds of low-probability adverse tail events. The staff is currently exploring the use of reverse repos and term deposits.  These facilities have potentially useful ways to accommodate transient reductions of excess reserves.  In contrast, asset sales are a more effective commitment to a permanent reduction in our balance sheet. This difference means that, at a minimum, asset sales are a useful complement to term deposits or reverse repos. As I say, I would like to see shrinkage in our balance sheet beginning in the second quarter of 2010, but now I think it’s worthwhile for us to start to foreshadow that possibility by changing the language of alternative B as I have recommended to refer to holdings of securities as opposed to simply talking about purchases.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, disagrees with alternative B and expresses concern about the lack of plans for the balance sheet beyond March. He recommends changing the language of alternative B to indicate a possible reduction in the balance sheet and argues for starting shrinkage in the second quarter of 2010.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 217.
 MR. FISHER. Well, Mr. Chairman, on page 156 of the 177 pages of the last transcript, I said, “My one suggestion, which I don’t think will carry the table, is that we change the term ‘extended period’ to ‘for some time.’”  Mr. Chairman, my one suggestion, which I don’t think will carry the table, is that if we do change the term “extended period,” we change it to “for some time.”  I’m going to be a broken record on that, but I know it will not carry the table. Here’s the point.  I’m against expanding the balance sheet.  I take the comments just made by my predecessor commentator quite seriously.  But I do believe that the language in alternative B is acceptable even without changing “for an extended period.”  I would note President Rosengren’s excellent point that we consider the treatment of the spread on primary credit and its juxtaposition against the “extended period” language.  I actually was caught quite flat-footed by that discussion yesterday—unprepared for it.  I’d like some time to think about commenting on it.  I’d like to see where it is sequenced into our exit strategy.  I understand the theoretical desire to re-widen that spread.  I do worry about the signal it’s going to send, by the way, to small and community bankers.  I don’t quite understand the full composition of who accesses primary credit, and I could see some interpreting it as:  “You’re still biased towards the big guys who are more active in the fed funds market and penalizing smaller borrowers who may want to access the primary credit window.”  So I’d like more time, and I’m a little bit concerned that we’re rushing that discussion, particularly in the context of these broader things we have been talking about.  So I would ask very much that we not rush this into the first week of January. To sum up:  against expansion of the balance sheet, remain concerned about the phrase “extended period,” because I think we’ve boxed ourselves in there—we didn’t get much for it, but it’s there. The third paragraph is very good. We did what we said we were going to do when it was necessary to do it, and we’re done.  We aim to complete these liquidity facilities and, indeed, we signaled that we’re on that road for asset purchases unless, as President Yellen points out, it becomes necessary, which I think we cover in the very last sentence, to modify our plans in order to preserve financial stability and economic growth. I have one other editorial suggestion in the first paragraph whether we use alternative B or C. We talk about the housing sector.  We talk about household spending.  We talk about business still cutting back on fixed investment.  And yet, in your excellent summary of what we  said, we have one point that is not included in there, which is the reluctance of businesses to expand overhead, including payrolls. My editorial suggestion would be at the end of the sentence that begins with “businesses are still cutting back on fixed investment, though at a slower pace; they continue to make progress in bringing inventory stocks into better alignment with sales, but remain reluctant to expand overhead, including payrolls.”  I would insert that in either B or C. It is nowhere else referenced in this statement, and I think it’s a very important point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their suggestions, concerns, and editorial suggestions, but there is no direct disagreement or argument with anyone else.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Say it again, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This phrase is a polite and neutral request for someone to repeat something they have said. There is no contention or disagreement implied.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 219.
 MR. FISHER. Yes, sir. With the sentence that reads, “Businesses are still cutting back on fixed investment, though at a slower pace; they continue to make progress in bringing inventory stocks into better alignment with sales.”  I would add, “but remain reluctant to expand overhead, including payrolls.” This is what we heard at the table.  You summarized it eloquently. It is not in the statement, and I think it should be.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is a disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher believes that the statement should include the fact that businesses are reluctant to expand overhead and payrolls, while the speaker who made the statement did not include this information. Mr. Fisher is expressing his disagreement and arguing that this information should be included.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. “Remain reluctant to expand overhead, including payrolls.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "remain reluctant" indicates that there is disagreement or hesitation towards expanding overhead, including payrolls.


Passage number 221.
” MR. FISHER. “But remain reluctant to expand overhead,” comma, “including payrolls.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is expressing the idea of being cautious about increasing overhead, including payrolls. However, without further context, it is not possible to determine if there is any opposing viewpoint or disagreement.


Passage number 222.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a polite acknowledgment and gratitude towards Governor Kohn, indicating a positive and agreeable interaction.


Passage number 223.
 MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  On the first two paragraphs, I thought they nicely captured the slightly better outlook that we heard around the table, but without changing the fundamental contours of the expansion that most of us expect.  So I thought they were in pretty good shape. On President Fisher’s suggestion, I think I would amend your suggestion in the following way.  I think this would be okay—it would be interesting to hear what other people think.  “Businesses are still cutting back on fixed   investment, though at a slower pace, and they remain reluctant to add to payrolls.”  I think this reference to overhead is a little confusing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, expresses his support for alternative B and shares his thoughts and suggestions on specific paragraphs. He also acknowledges the potential for different opinions on one particular point.


Passage number 224.
 MR. FISHER. Well, payrolls are a big part of overhead.  So that would be—but I think we need to include that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any specific disagreement or contention. It simply mentions that payrolls are a significant part of overhead and suggests including that point in the discussion.


Passage number 225.
 MR. KOHN. Then “they continue to make progress.”  I think we did hear that around the table, and it’s not inconsistent with the notion that the deterioration of labor market is abating.  So I think that would be all right. On the third paragraph, I agree with an awful lot of what President Yellen said.  I think we’re still in an unsatisfactory place, with the outlook for income, employment, and inflation still suboptimal for the next several years, even with a negative real federal funds rate in place.  If we had a positive nominal federal funds rate, I’d probably be arguing for some easing, but we don’t.  I think there’s uncertainty about the benefits of adding to our longer-term purchases and some costs to that as well, so I’m not prepared to argue for that.  So I’m fine with leaving that as we have it. But I do think it’s important, as President Kocherlakota said, that we’re looking at low rates of resource utilization for some time, subdued inflation trends—we just had some confirmation of that this morning—and stable inflation expectations. So I feel very strongly that we need to retain the “extended period” language. With every improvement in the economy and with the passage of time, we get closer to the eventual time when we’ll have to tighten policy, but I think that’s still some time away.  I worry that the natural real rate could be very low for some time.  The story we’re telling is one in which we have these headwinds, as you’ve been saying, Mr. Chairman, in bank credit, and as they go away, things kind of snap back and the policy rate can be normalized by historic standards under those circumstances. My concern is that we came into this episode with not a very high real interest rate, which seemed consistent with the economy producing at right around full employment and not much inflation pressure outside the commodity and petroleum sector.  We have to replace a bunch of consumption.  So presumably consumption as a proportion of GDP is going to be lower going forward, financial services as a proportion of GDP are going to be lower going forward, and residential construction as a proportion of GDP is going to be lower going forward.  This is a much more balanced economy.  But we need to crowd in investment and net exports to replace all that, especially because I don’t think any of us want to crowd in government to replace all of that on a permanent basis.  That’s not a sustainable situation.  So I think the issue of when to begin normalization of the real federal funds rate and what that’s going to look like is one in which I see a potential for a lot of softness for a long time to come.  And I think it’s too early, President Kocherlakota, to change the purchases to holdings.  Let’s consider that as part of the late January meeting when we discuss the exit strategy. On the last paragraph, I am in favor of including it—the funding markets have returned to normal in most areas, short-term markets and banks are able to access funds without our help, with people issuing commercial paper or accessing funding without our help.  It’s not an entirely riskless thing to suspend these. We don’t know to what extent our being there as a backstop is providing the confidence to keep these markets going, and all of this funding has occurred in the context of very reduced demands for funding.  Banks and corporations are shrinking their balance sheets. When that turns around, it’s not clear what’s going to happen.  So it’s not riskless, but it’s worth taking the risk.  I think we need to do that and wind up these facilities and see what happens.Securitization markets are a more difficult picture, I think, especially for the new issue CMBS, as President Yellen pointed out. It’s still a troubled market.  There’s very little activity. I did hear some mildly encouraging things from Brian Sack yesterday.  It’s beginning to come back. Still, I think we could stick with the current wording, but, as President Yellen noted, we should take that last sentence seriously. If we get into the spring and the new issue CMBS market is still broken, we could think about extending that, I think, and evaluate the situation then. I think it’s a good idea to include this paragraph in the announcement.  This is a collaborative effort between the Board and the FOMC.  I think as long as the “extended period” language is still here, people won’t take it as an early exit signal but rather appropriately as a signal that we see the financial markets are working better and we don’t need the unusual liquidity backups. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with statements made by President Yellen and President Kocherlakota, and also expresses their own opinions on various topics.


Passage number 226.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and "President Bullard" do not indicate any form of disagreement.


Passage number 227.
 MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also support alternative B, but with one change. I would agree with President Plosser that the inflation paragraph from alternative C is the more appropriate one.  The inflation paragraph in alternative C says the following:  “Longer­term inflation expectations have been stable, and the Committee expects that, with appropriate monetary policy adjustments, inflation will remain at levels consistent with price stability.”  I think that’s a better statement of what we’re up to here at the FOMC.  It takes ownership of the inflation outcomes, which I think is appropriate for the Committee, and I also think that statement does not preclude any factors that might influence inflation.  We look at many things.  We look at all the indicators that we can, both in the U.S. and globally, and the factors that might influence inflation.  But it does claim responsibility that at the end of the day it’s up to us to maintain low and stable inflation.   Future statements may have to reconsider what we’re saying about the federal funds rate.  I think this is an issue that we need to think about.  Is the federal funds rate really the primary interest rate instrument going forward.  I thought Brian Sack’s report highlighted issues about federal funds rate control in the environment in the next few years, maybe longer.  It seems to me that might have implications for credibility and communication for the Committee, and so I think we need to think about that issue.  In particular, is the interest rate on reserves being viewed as the primary policy rate going forward, and is that sensible, and does that work in our models. The next meeting will be an important one for thinking about how to play the asset purchase program going forward.  We can discuss it in more detail at that time, but, as I said yesterday, I would prefer that we think carefully about how to actively manage the return of the balance sheet both to normal levels, as one concern, and to an appropriate mix of assets as another concern. With the very large size, we’re going to have to do that over a period of years, so we need a strategy about how we’re going to get there so that we don’t have to make adjustments in any sudden fashion. Again, as we all agree, I think interest rates may remain near zero according to the Greenbook over the next two years. The Committee needs a clear plan for how to react to incoming data during that period.  Otherwise, what’s going to happen is that, at the end of the first quarter.  We’re going to be perceived as going on hold and perhaps staying on hold for a long time, but information is going to roll in about the performance of the economy.  We may want to adjust policy during that period, especially if the news is particularly strong or particularly weak, which can easily happen, according to the estimates of uncertainty around our forecast.  Our asset purchase program has been considered successful, according to staff analysis.  We could use that program to adjust policy going forward, as we remain at the near-zero policy rate. I would see the asset purchase program as a substitute for the policy easing we would have undertaken had we been able to do so.  It seems logical to me that we would gradually withdraw some of the policy accommodation coming from the asset-purchase program as the economy improves.  That would substitute for tightening that we would not be willing to do with the rise in rates. Also, we should stand ready to do more with the asset-purchase program should information on the economy come in weaker than expected.  Again, as many have pointed out, there’s plenty of downside risk as well as upside risk.  I think the former Chairman of this Committee said that uncertainty isn’t just a fact of life, it’s a defining feature of how we have to deal with policy. I agree with President Kocherlakota’s suggestion on holdings in the third paragraph.  I thought that was a good suggestion. I support that. I also support President Fisher’s suggestion in paragraph 1, perhaps as modified by Governor Kohn, but I thought that was a good point, too.  And I agree with the comments that have been made about the final paragraph.  I support the final paragraph as written. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and agrees with President Plosser on the inflation paragraph from alternative C. The speaker also raises some questions and suggestions for consideration, but does not directly disagree with any statements made.


Passage number 228.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any assertion or statement that can be subject to contention or disagreement. It simply expresses thanks to President Hoenig.


Passage number 229.
 MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It’s an interesting meeting.  The way I’m trying to think of the context is that economic circumstances obviously have changed.  You and others have described them.  You might think of this meeting as an inflection point, where we’re beginning to think a little bit differently about how we’re doing monetary policy and how we might do it in the future.  There are a couple of aspects to it.  In this meeting, we’re beginning to describe, I guess, more definitely our exit from the extraordinary facilities that we’ve engaged in.Paragraph 4 walks us through that, and I think that’s a good thing.  And I also would probably be in agreement as we move to January for the increase in the spread.  With that, I do agree with President Plosser that we should also increase the minimum acceptable bid rate on the TAF as we go forward to keep that in line.  So that is, kind of, phase 1 of this.   Phase 2 is the more difficult, and that’s the process of removing the highly accommodative policy and perhaps firming policy as we go forward.  That, of course, will depend, as many have said, on a variety of economic circumstances.  But that’s always the case. I’m very sensitive to the fact that unemployment will be very slow to come down over the next several quarters, but I also would remind the Committee that if we started today, it would be a long time before monetary policy is brought back up to what most would consider a normal policy under normal circumstances as well.  We’re going to have an accommodative policy for many quarters ahead, even if we were to start removing some of it today, and we shouldn’t lose sight that.  We need to be thinking about removing this accommodative policy and restoring our balance sheet, as others have said, to pre-crisis levels. We need to do that in gingerly way, of course, but we also need to begin to prepare the markets for that. I’m very concerned.  I know how we need to be walking on eggshells, I really do.  But I’m very concerned about this “extended period” language when we’re near zero, because it also provides a safe harbor for those who are going to engage, and are, in fact, engaged, in speculative activities around that, and we encourage that, and I think there is a price to pay at the other end of this. So as I balance this out, I’m not inclined to wordsmith things, but I do have a slight preference for C for a couple of reasons.  I think it does more forcefully respond to the fact that conditions have improved.  It does allow us to scale back some of the purchases that, in my opinion, should be scaled back, and it does change the language from “extended period” to  “some time.”  I think, yes, there would be some jitteriness in the market, perhaps, but, at the same time, it would set the stage for giving people some confidence that things are improving and that we are, in fact, anticipating and avoiding some of the mistakes of the past that we are duly being reminded of.  So that’s how I view it at this time.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual's opinion and viewpoint about the current economic circumstances and their thoughts on monetary policy.


Passage number 230.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 231.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. I think it’s premature to reduce stimulus, and I support retaining the “extended period” language.  My soundings of participants in the financial markets suggest that, whether we like it or not, this “extended period” language has become a fixation, and it gives us little flexibility until we really are genuinely ready to signal that we are going to tighten the policy rate.  So I don’t see the benefits at this stage of coming off that language. I also support the inclusion of the language in the final paragraph.  I think this language is a useful reaffirmation of our intent, and I see the inclusion of paragraph 4 as furthering a communications practice of clarifying various exit questions related to management of the balance sheet. Having said that, if I understood President Yellen’s suggestion, I am sympathetic to the removal of the TALF sentence, if that was her suggestion, because I see the commercial real estate problem going forward as possibly requiring continuing use of TALF in support of the CMBS market. Perhaps it does not require comment, but I will say I am comfortable with the Desk’s recommendation of an interim policy pending further deliberation starting next month of not reinvesting proceeds of maturing MBS and agency securities.  I also agree with the recommendation to wait on the decision regarding the Treasury’s portfolio.  I’m comfortable with that because, given the small amount of maturities in the near term, I think these interim arrangements will have little effect on the market’s interpretation of our policy direction. I think it’s worth commenting on that because we’re planning next month to discuss the overall exit policy. I see in January and possibly in subsequent meetings that the Committee is going to have to take up a number of questions that are quite complex regarding exit implementation—when to begin active shrinking of the balance sheet, what tools to use, and what proportion and what sequence or what combination, and how much tactical adjustment is required in response to developments in the financial markets and the economy.  These are going to be very challenging questions, because there are so many policy variables at play and possible economic states that we will be dealing with.  So I would have been proposing something like the Chairman’s suggestion. Let me just say that I welcome the January session, and I hope we devote a significant period of time to it. Like President Fisher, I was a bit taken by surprise or flatfooted by the recommendation on the primary credit rate, and I too would like to hear more discussion on that, and I think President Rosengren also commented that he had doubts regarding the timing of this, and I share those doubts as well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, expresses support for alternative B and provides reasons for his support. He also agrees with the inclusion of certain language and policies. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 232.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply consists of a statement of gratitude addressed to President Lacker without any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 233.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have some attraction for alternative C.  I don’t think we need to provide further stimulus over the next couple of months by buying more MBS. If we had committed a couple of months ago to buying the amount listed in alternative C, I don’t think we would decide to increase that amount to match up with alternative B. I think that President Kocherlakota was very eloquent about the concerns about our balance sheet, especially our strategy past March.  I think Mr. Sack’s graphs showing the option-adjusted spread on MBS is stunning. It shows that we have driven MBS spreads well below historic norms.  And I think it’s worth keeping in mind that those historic norms already reflected an implicit subsidy due to the perceived status of the government sponsored enterprises as benefiting from a government guarantee.  President Kocherlakota pointed to the value of our asset purchases last fall and earlier this year in improving market function, and the natural metric for that is spreads. These spreads have not only restored market functioning, if you take them as a serious indicator, but we have gone beyond that, and we’re subsidizing the housing market now. I think we should look at our MBS strategy in terms of the composition of aggregate demand that we want to foster.  Do we want to tilt aggregate demand towards housing and away from other components.  I understand the need to stabilize the housing market, and we did that earlier this year. The market was in freefall.  Prices were falling.  That was cutting household net worth. People were cutting back on consumption.  They did not know where things were going. But the market is broadly stabilized now.  Prices have pretty much stabilized at the national level, though there is local price movement.  Granted, there is a huge foreclosure overhang, but the market is working through those foreclosures, working through those workouts, transferring those assets to productive hands.  I don’t see the need to drive MBS down further, and I don’t think as a long-run matter we want to be skewing demand towards housing construction. It’s an easy fix for a weak economy.  It’s easy to get those construction teams out there putting foundations in and putting up frames, but if we haven’t built too much housing now, I am not sure when in our history we ever have.  Having said all of that, I do believe I can bring myself to support alternative B on the grounds that we already have made a commitment to  purchase the full allotment at the next two meetings, and perhaps not enough has changed since that decision two months ago. One thing I like very much about alternatives B and C is the new final paragraph announcing the winding down of our presence.  I think it will be interpreted as an “all clear” siren, a signal of our view that the financial market crisis is more or less over and the conditions are no longer unusual and exigent.  I think that’s a good signal to send.  I think it will contribute to a little more confidence at the margin in the recovery. I believe we should let mortgage-backed securities roll off as they mature.  I think that the primary credit rate is worth thinking about and studying, but again, like President Fisher, I was caught unawares by that issue and would like to go back and put some numbers down on paper about potential slopes of the yield curve and in the primary credit rate and think about what it means for the term deposit facility and our overall configuration.  President Plosser mentioned this as well. The TALF sentence—I’d like to see it remain the way it is.  I still haven’t seen evidence that the CMBS market is remedially fixable.  Quantities are low, but it sure looks like fundamentals are troubled there. “Holdings” I think would be a useful change.  I support President Kocherlakota’s suggestion that we reword our reference to our assets in terms of “holdings.” I also support President Bullard’s suggestion to move paragraph 2 of alternative C into paragraph 2 of alternative B, although if we don’t do that after today’s discussion of inflation dynamics and output gaps, we might want to think about replacing the phrase “substantial resource slack,” with “low marginal cost.”  [Laughter]  But we can debate that later.  That concludes my remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their personal opinion and preferences, but does not engage in any argument or disagreement with others.


Passage number 234.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m sorry.  I’m a little confused about what President Kocherlakota said. Would you repeat your suggestion about holdings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker admits to being confused and asks for clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 235.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, sure. The last sentence of paragraph 3, alternative B—I want it to read, “The Committee will continue to evaluate the size and composition of its holdings of securities in light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions of financial markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage is discussing a potential change to the wording of a sentence, indicating disagreement or contention about the language being proposed.


Passage number 236.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. A number of people have commented that they were flatfooted by the primary credit rate proposal.  That was the warning to give you plenty of time to think about that in the context of all the other things we are looking at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that people were surprised by the primary credit rate proposal and that they should take time to consider it along with other factors.


Passage number 237.
 MR. LACKER. Well, this is our last meeting before the Board of Directors meeting at which you want to suggest that we execute.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply stating that this is the last meeting before the Board of Directors meeting where a suggestion will be made.


Passage number 238.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We will discuss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the following passage as it has not been provided.


Passage number 239.
 MR. HOENIG. Just one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a straightforward statement or question without any indication of conflicting opinions.


Passage number 240.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We will discuss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply states that there will be a discussion, without indicating any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 241.
 MR. HOENIG. Just need one to execute.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of a request or requirement.


Passage number 242.
 MR. LACKER. I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement by Mr. Lacker, with no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 243.
 MR. HOENIG. So you don’t have to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply makes a statement.


Passage number 244.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. We’d like to have an input.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses a desire to receive input without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 245.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Having a recommendation available in case the Committee decides at the next meeting to take a step does not mean that we have to take a step.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that having a recommendation available does not necessarily imply that a step has to be taken by the Committee.


Passage number 246.
 MR. LACKER. I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a direct quote from Mr. Lacker, so there is no contention or disagreement present in this specific passage.


Passage number 247.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But I hear your concern.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "But I hear your concern" indicates that the speaker acknowledges and understands the other person's worry or issue.


Passage number 248.
  MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B.  I think the continued monetary policy accommodation is appropriate.  The unemployment rate is at 10 percent, and core inflation is below my guideline of 2 percent. I agree with the economic markers that are listed in the paragraph on inflation—the rates will remain low for an extended period of time due to low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, and I do put substantial weight on all three of those. I was fascinated to hear Governor Kohn’s discussion of real rates and how the natural real rate might be low for some period of time.  That did stand in contrast to President Plosser’s discussion about how policy really might need to chase the real rate up.  As Don discussed, there’s a need to replace consumption expenditures and other types of investment, and I believe that, inherent in Charlie’s commentary, he did not have that same type of need.  Really, this is just resource slack finding its way into a real rate discussion.  I think it bodes well for us to have a robust discussion of these issues and recognize that it finds its way into a number of different market indicators.  I tend to side a little bit more with Governor Kohn on this for that reason. Although the unemployment rate is 10 percent and is expected to improve only slowly— that’s the bad side—I still believe that a funds rate at about zero plus our large balance sheet is about as much as we can do and as much as we should do.  I heard President’s Yellen’s very good point about how we need to be patient—if we’d instead been able to adjust policy in a more accommodative fashion, then we’d be able to rebound a little bit more quickly, but because we can’t do that, this is a reminder that we need to be patient in this attitude. I agree with that. I do think that the first-order effect of our large-scale asset purchases last spring was a nonlinear change in confidence that changed the tone for the way the economy was going.  I  think it’s probably very hard to come up with meaningful stimulative effects out of that, but at any rate, I do believe that we will need to recalibrate policy in a number of ways in 2010. I support the winding down of our lending facilities, as stated in alternative B.  I support generally redeeming the MBS and agency debt as they mature as a very light way to head towards getting our balance sheet in the right direction.  I don’t think that that will be a move that’s too accelerated towards restrictive policy.  And I support the continued preparations that you have described in thinking about our exit strategy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, the speaker expresses agreement with alternative B, supports continued monetary policy accommodation, and agrees with several points made by other speakers. There is no disagreement or contention evident in the passage.


Passage number 249.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you. President Pianalto" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a brief expression of gratitude towards President Pianalto.


Passage number 250.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before beginning to shift the current stance on monetary policy, I would like to see the economy on a more solid footing.  Therefore, I support alternative B. I am clearly in a minority.  In fact, I think I am the only person so far that was going to raise concerns about adding paragraph 4 to the alternative B language.  I agree with the assessment that conditions in financial markets have been normalizing, and I see great value in informing the public after this meeting about the termination of our special liquidity facilities, but I am concerned that adding this paragraph to our statement today might imply that we are beginning to tighten the stance of policy.  So I was going to suggest that we avoid any confusion at this point and issue a separate statement.  But releasing two distinct statements doesn’t seem practical, and no one else has suggested it. One suggestion I had was to add a word like “separately” in the beginning of paragraph 4, so it would read something like, “Separately, in light of the ongoing improvements in the functioning of financial markets,” et cetera. But that said, the only other comment I wanted to make is that, just like many others, I concur with President Rosengren’s comments around making changes to the primary credit rate.   It would be helpful to have more discussion about that at our next meeting.  And if we do make a change, then coupling it with the introduction of the term deposit facility or other exit strategy communications would be preferable.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MS. PIANALTO is expressing her own opinions and concerns but acknowledges that she is in the minority and no one else has suggested her proposed solution.


Passage number 251.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Warsh.


Passage number 252.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Four quick points.  First, I support alternative B with the Fisher-Kohn amendment about the reluctance by businesses to add head count.  While I’m sympathetic to the views President Lacker described on the incremental net benefits of our MBS purchases, which I have discussed for some time, we’ve now said that we were going to do it, and there’s nothing that we’ve learned between the last meeting and this meeting that would cause me to say that now is the right time to say, “Just kidding.”  So I think we should live up to what we said, because it would be, I think, a confusing retrenchment to go back to a smaller purchase level, even though, as a first impression many months ago, I would have been sympathetic to that view. Second, I support ending the existing liquidity facilities, and I guess I’m of the view that we shouldn’t relegate that to a separate statement.  We should make it a virtue.  We put these facilities in place. They did all that we expected them to do and probably more.  They’ve served their purpose. It is time for them to move on, and I think we shouldn’t be sheepish about that.  I take that last line as seriously, I think, as President Yellen does.  When we say that we’re “prepared to modify,” I don’t think that’s boilerplate at all.  I think that says we’re still very attentive to what’s going on. So, with respect to TALF or any other facilities, we need to be more aggressive as the financial conditions and economic conditions warrant.  I think we’re prepared to do so, but I don’t think we should shy away from that.   Third, on the question about the language around the purchases of securities, I’d like to make two points on what President Kocherlakota said.  First, I just like saying that, “Kocherlakota.”  [Laughter] By next meeting I will be able to say the whole name without—.  So that’s my first highly value-added point on the suggestion.  My second is that I think we should think about how to describe this mix of redemptions and purchases.  I’m not sure this is the right moment, but I think he does spark a pretty interesting thought.  And just one other word for consideration if we take this discussion up in January, rather than choosing purchases or holdings, I wonder whether “portfolio” is better. “Portfolio” takes into account that mix of what you might be adding and what you might be subtracting—it has an allocation point associated with it. So I don’t know the perfect words, but I think it’s an interesting discussion. And finally, I support Brian Sack’s recommendation on the runoff of MBS as an interim solution. I think it might be an interim solution that, at least in my eyes, lasts for more than this intermeeting period, but at least for now, I think that’s a prudent idea.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Warsh expresses his support for alternative B and the Fisher-Kohn amendment, as well as the ending of existing liquidity facilities. He also agrees with President Yellen's statement about being attentive to what's going on and being prepared to modify actions as needed. He suggests considering the use of the word "portfolio" instead of "holdings" or "purchases" when discussing the mix of redemptions and purchases. Finally, he supports Brian Sack's recommendation on the runoff of MBS as an interim solution.


Passage number 253.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite message expressing gratitude to someone referred to as "Governor Duke."


Passage number 254.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B.  I am worried that the backup in mortgage rates as the purchases wind down could be on the high side of projections, primarily because I’m concerned about who might emerge as the substitute buyer.  The Treasury programs and the GSEs are approaching the point where they need to reduce their portfolio holdings.  My conversations with bankers indicate that they’re completely unwilling to purchase mortgage-backed securities without knowing exactly what’s going to happen with our purchases and with potential sales. So considering President Kocherlakota’s—I can say it, too— suggestion in that light, I think we should talk a little bit about what we might do on sales and the   composition of the portfolio.  But I wonder if changing it without any further clarity on that might not cause even more concern over purchasing MBS. Second, even if we find ourselves in a position where we’d like to provide more stimulus, it’s not clear to me that the last couple hundred billion reserves have really made an awful lot of difference. At the same time, if we resume purchasing the mortgage-backed securities, it would make it even easier politically to push resolution of the GSEs even further into the future.  And I firmly believe that the emergence of the GSEs from conservatorship, just as many of the larger financial institutions are coming out of government assistance, and determining what future they might have are going to be prerequisites for the restart of private mortgage markets.  I don’t see how housing markets return to normal without the full spectrum of housing finance. Third, the role of TALF in CMBS—it seems to me that, with the newly issued CMBS, the first new deal that came to market was so conservatively underwritten and had so much investor protection in order to be able to qualify for TALF that that was the very reason that it attracted the investor interest that it did.  And I would hope that that process would actually be able to continue through the next six months, and I’m uncertain that we could do more past June.  So I’m not as worried about that one ending in June.  And I fervently wish we had been able to do the same thing for residential mortgage-backed securities.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 255.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 256.
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think the nature of this discussion so far has confirmed what I suspected coming into this meeting, which is that we’re right on the cusp of starting to make hard decisions. We’re not quite there yet, but everybody is positioning themselves.  And in that spirit, I want to position myself.  [Laughter]  While supporting alternative B, I want to draw a distinction between the substance of what I think we are doing  with the actions indicated in paragraphs 3 and 4 of alternative B and the way in which we’re communicating it. I have no problem with the first; I do have some concerns with the second.   With respect to substance, I think what we are saying in paragraph 4 is that we had a series of very special programs that were addressing blockages in credit markets that were instituted over the last year or so.  The unusual blockages and the large dysfunctionality in credit markets has substantially, though not totally, abated.  And under these circumstances we are winding down most, and eventually all, of these programs.  Second, I think we’re saying that we’re wrapping up the large-scale asset purchases that we announced in March.  Third, we’re continuing, obviously, the zero interest rate policy.  And, fourth, we haven’t made any decisions on exit as of yet. So I’m fine with all of those. On the language, I think paragraph 1 captures well the consensus around the table with the Richard-Don amendment, which I think would be very useful.  Let me jump to paragraph 4, because I think paragraph 4 does have the potential to surprise markets.  I don’t think the actions themselves will surprise markets—I think this is what’s anticipated.  But the fact of including it in this statement, as Sandy suggested a few minutes ago, may be a surprise and will begin to, or could begin to, elicit a lot of speculation as to whether this is, in fact, the beginning of a staged, already planned exit. As all of you know, the amount of speculation among market actors as to what the exit plan is, with dates and quantities, is very high right now.  So the last sentence, as Kevin and others have suggested, ought to be taken seriously by us, and not be considered as boilerplate. I have to say, on the merits I’m quite comfortable with the winding down as anticipated, with the possible exception of CMBS. That brings me to paragraph 3.  When Brian Madigan sent around the language last week, I looked at it and, for the reasons I have already indicated, I was a little uncomfortable, but I felt  that it was okay. I thought that the last sentence of paragraph 3 was on the verge of being anachronistic, but wasn’t quite there, so that it could await the January meeting.  Brian Sack’s informative and admirably forthright briefing yesterday injected some doubt into my mind about that, because of the anticipated runoff issue. Again, it’s not that the anticipated runoff seemed ill-advised as a substantive matter, but I do have some concern about what’s being communicated by allowing those runoffs to happen.  Will there now be a firm view in the markets that we are just going to let these things run off, notwithstanding what may happen in the future. If there’s a fair chance that that will be the inference drawn, then we would be faced, if conditions deteriorate in the future, with a decision that would be regarded as a significant change in policy, a switching on and off of the lights as it were, rather than turning the dimmer switch a little bit in one direction or another.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is discussing his position on alternative B and expressing some concerns about the communication surrounding the actions indicated in paragraphs 3 and 4. He acknowledges that he is comfortable with the substance of what is being proposed, but has concerns about the potential market reaction and the perception of a planned exit. Overall, there is no explicit disagreement or contention present in this passage.


Passage number 257.
  For that reason, I was actually somewhat attracted by Narayana’s suggestion MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. That’s another beautiful name.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the speaker was attracted to Narayana's suggestion, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 258.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO. Even though, obviously, our policy inclinations are probably different, I took Narayana’s suggestion to be a kind of general statement of the Bullard doctrine, which Jim patiently repeats every six or seven weeks in this room—[laughter]—about the need for flexibility depending on circumstances.  I think that, while I could live with waiting one more month or six or seven weeks, to change that last sentence of paragraph 3, I have to confess to some uneasiness as to what we’re projecting to markets in staying with this sentence, given the way I think that paragraph 4 and the slight changes of wording in paragraph 3 will be understood. One final point—to Jeff’s point on MBS—I have two reactions to that.  One, for reasons many people stated in the go-round yesterday, mortgage rates and residential housing could still  be key to the path of recovery next year, and thus may be important to affect or to observe the effects of one way or the other. But, secondly, in the absence of conventional monetary policy easing possibilities, because of the zero bound, we found in March we had two choices.  We had the agency MBS, basically, and then we had Treasuries.  And Treasuries raise a whole different set of concerns about the possible interaction with fiscal policy and maybe even foreign exchange policy that I think a lot of people around the table wanted to avoid.  So I think it’s not just about the mortgage credit markets, even though to some degree it is about mortgage credit markets. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of one speaker expressing their thoughts and perspectives on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 259.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. "Thank you, Vice Chairman" is simply expressing gratitude towards the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 260.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m very happy to see that we’re going to have the discussion on sequencing in January.  I think it’s going to be very, very important to see if we can reach a consensus view on strategy and tactics.  The market is definitely wondering what those strategy and tactics are going to be.  Until then, I think it would be useful not to debate this too much in the press, because I think that just creates confusion.  I notice that in the primary dealer survey, the communications score we got this time came down a bit, and I think some of our discussion about asset sales versus no asset sales might have contributed to confusion on that front. I’m not going to say where I stand right now on how to do the sequencing, but I do want people to start thinking about two broad issues.  One is the timing of asset sales, and on that, I think there are two major views:  one, starting with draining reserves and raising the short-term rate with asset sales held in abeyance, maybe used, maybe not; and, two, conducting asset sales first, and then moving on to raising short-term interest rates later.  I think that’s a really important thing that we’re going to have to sort out.  The second broad issue is the sequencing of   reserve-draining operations versus the increase in the IOER rate.  The market thinks that we’re going to drain a lot of reserves first and then raise the IOER rate, but we may decide to do the reverse. So I think we need to have a thorough discussion about that issue. In terms of the statement, I favor alternative B.  I’m with pretty much everyone else.  We’re withdrawing quite a bit of accommodation, frankly, as we taper off the asset-purchase programs and phase out most of the liquidity facilities over the next few months.  We don’t really know how important liquidity facilities are in terms of their backstop function, so until we actually take them away, we’re not really going to know exactly how much accommodation is being withdrawn. I think the “extended period” language still works.  I thought it was interesting that the primary dealer poll suggested that, if you keep it in, then it’s going to be at least three more meetings before the Fed might tighten.  Obviously, it’s actually four, because you would take it out potentially at the next meeting, and then there would be three more meetings after that.  So that fits pretty well with the informal poll that I talked about at the last meeting, where “extended period,” in my view, was at least six months.  So I’m glad to see that the dealers are on the same page on that as I am. As far as President Kocherlakota’s suggestion on holdings, I’m uncomfortable with that.  Here’s the reason why: I understand what you’re driving at, that there is this question of redemptions.  But “holdings” suggests a two-sidedness that “purchases” does not.  I think if you put “holdings” in there, you’re inadvertently going to raise the question of whether asset sales are now on the table in a much more assumed way than what we might want to imply there.  So I think that’s the problem with it.  I understand the motivation, but “purchases” is one-sided, “holdings” is not.  Finally, on the new issue of CMBS, I know that’s a decision for the Board.  I think that in the relatively near future the Board does need to clarify with the market, though, whether that’s going to be extended or not extended.  There’s a pretty long runway for people to develop that and bring it to market, so I would say by late January or early February it would be useful to clarify whether that’s going to go away or whether that is going to be extended beyond June 30.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing various views and options related to strategy and tactics, but there is no disagreement expressed.


Passage number 261.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  As usual, it was a very informative and diverse discussion. Let’s talk a bit very broadly. We’re going to come back in January and talk a lot about tactics. Let me just address for a moment this broad question:  Is policy too easy or too tight at this juncture.  You know, there is a fairly substantial view out there—Paul Krugman and Joe Gagnon, for example, have expressed it—that by the Taylor Rule we are still several hundred basis points too tight, that we should, therefore, be doing a lot more asset purchases.  President Yellen, I think, was alluding to that.  So I think there is a respectable view which says that we should be looking to ease further rather than to be tightening.  The reason I personally, at least, am not convinced that that’s the right way to go is that the connection between what actions we can take at this point and effective easing in the markets is not at all clear.  For example, on the one hand, mortgage rates are already extraordinarily low—it’s not clear that we can lower them much more.  And there are certainly risks associated with substantial further expansion of asset purchases, including destabilizing inflation expectations, causing commodity prices to rise, or causing the dollar to start to fall, all of which could lead to a reaction which would be actually a net negative. So while I see merit in the idea that we should, in some sense, be at an easierstance than we are, I think we are, in fact, getting to the point where the connection between our tools and the state of the financial conditions is becoming much less clear. That being said, I have listened to President Bullard now for three or four meetings, and even I can begin to hear that after a while.  [Laughter] I think that we should not rule out additional purchases. We might want to consider a program of modest purchases, which could be varied, and consider doing that in a way that’s responsive to broad conditions and, specifically, to something that we’ll learn a lot more about in the next few months, namely, what happens to the mortgage rate and the housing market after our purchases end.  So I think that’s something we want to keep in mind as we think about our broad strategy. Should we do less, as an alternative. I think it’s good for confidence and good for predictability for us to begin to normalize policy, to begin to operate in a way that people are more familiar with.  We are coming to the point where we can do that, and I view this closing of some of these facilities as being an important step.  I don’t think that actually tightening policy is a good idea, for the reasons I just said. I think that the economy is still quite weak and that we should not, at this point, either tighten or strongly signal a tightening at this juncture.   The signaling is very important. For example, relative to President Lacker’s and others’ suggestion about cutting back slightly on our purchases, the $100 billion here and there is small change, as far the magnitudes are concerned.  President Plosser is holding his forehead.  [Laughter] What’s far more important in this context is the signaling.  What are we saying.  Are we saying, therefore, that we have decided to begin a process of tightening.  I worry much more about the signals than I do about the actual purchases at this point, and so I think we have to be very, very careful.  I do think that what we are doing has been quite constructive.  Regarding these side risks of the dollar and excess speculation and so on, while we have to monitor those carefully, at the moment I think those things look, as best we can tell, to be all right.  And therefore, again, given the state of the economy, I don’t think we should be actively signaling a tightening process at this point. I would note—despite the commentary of the dealers about three meetings and so on—that in the previous forward guidance episode we changed the statement about considerable period, and two meetings later we raised interest rates.  I mean, it was a meeting of intermediate language, and then the next meeting we raised rates.  So I don’t think that we’re constrained to six months by any means. So my general preference is alternative B, with maintaining, importantly, the “extended period” language for the time being, trying to minimize changes that would be viewed as premature signals, either of tightening or ease, and that’s a very important aspect of the language. But, at the same time, I think what we do want to signal is normalization as much as possible, that we are exiting from extraordinary facilities where we can, and that we hope that it will inspire confidence that we are moving towards more normal policy. Let me talk a little bit about some of the specifics that were raised in the language.  I think there is a good bit of support for President Fisher’s idea in paragraph 1 about staffing.  I didn’t focus on it today, but, in fact, in last November’s statement, the sentence “Businesses are still cutting back on fixed investment,” also said “and staffing.”  We cut that phrase for this meeting’s statement.  So it does seem appropriate to say that, even though we’re not seeing further declines in employment, we’re not seeing hiring either.  So, how does it go.  “Businesses are still cutting back on fixed investment, though at a slower place, but remain reluctant to expand payrolls.” Is that what we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 262.
 MR. KOHN. And, I think you could say “and.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement, expressing an opinion or possibility without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 263.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. “And remain reluctant to expand.”  Is that the right word— was suggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is presenting a statement or suggestion, but it does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 264.
 MR. KOHN. Add to payrolls.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It consists of a statement without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 265.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. “Still cutting back on fixed investment, though at a slower pace, and remain reluctant to expand payroll.”  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that businesses are still cutting back on fixed investment, although at a slower pace, and are reluctant to expand payroll.


Passage number 266.
 MR. FISHER. Don, you had the best words, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement expressing admiration or agreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 267.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. What were your words, Don.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be disagreement or contention between the speaker and Don regarding the latter's words.


Passage number 268.
 MR. KOHN. I said “add to payrolls.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Kohn.


Passage number 269.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. “Add to payrolls”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "add to payrolls" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement that refers to the act of increasing the number of employees or workers.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 270.
 MR. KOHN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the fact that Mr. Kohn responds affirmatively ("Yes") to a statement or question that likely expresses a contrasting or opposing view to his own.


Passage number 271.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right, that’s a little better.   On the inflation sentence, I think there should be a barrier to make changes.  I understand that several people have preferences for the language in C.  I think someplace where we might head at some point would be to combine those two.  For example, if we want to retain the reference to resource slack—this is just a suggestion for the future, I’m not going to propose this right now—we could say something like “With substantial resource slack likely to continue to dampen cost pressures, and with longer-term inflation expectations stable,”—then the second part of the C—“the Committee expects that with appropriate monetary adjustments inflation will remain at levels consistent,” and so on. So that’s a direction we could consider.  I’d note that one issue is that making that change today would constitute a change in our inflation forecast, and I don’t think it really has changed from inflation being subdued to being consistent with price stability.  It seems that that would be a natural step to take when inflation risks and levels and forecasts seem closer to thepercent target. So my recommendation, based on “less change is generally better,” would be not to make that change today, but to recognize that going forward that reference to monetary policy actions and price stability would be perhaps a constructive direction. Regarding the third paragraph, I appreciate the thrust of President Kocherlakota’s suggestion, and I think we do have to think about—again, as President Bullard has suggested— how we might do additional purchases, and, if so, how we can do that in a way that’s more responsive to incoming data.  That being said, I share the Vice Chairman’s concern that switching to the word “holdings” at this point is going to be jumping the gun, in the sense of being too strongly suggestive that we can adjust the portfolio either up or down.  And we have not yet, I think, come to any kind of conclusion or agreement about how we’re going to deal with asset sales, that is, what priority or what order they would have.  So I’m reluctant, for that reason, to do that. But, again, this, like Governor Warsh’s “portfolio” comment, is a suggestion, a direction, that we’re going to want to go toward as we have greater clarity among ourselves about how we want to manage our balance sheet. Several people objected to paragraph 4, but I thought the consensus mostly was to include that—again, as a symbol of our exit.  The one question I would put before the group would be the sentence on the TALF.  We could simply drop that sentence, if there is interest in doing that. Brian, would that be a lacuna that would be troubling.  We’re not referring to some of our other actions or programs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 272.
 MR. MADIGAN. I think that presumably would be interpreted simply as “the Federal Reserve has nothing new to report for the TALF.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing an opinion or speculation.


Passage number 273.
”CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So, for those who are concerned that paragraph 4 is too strong a signal, or who are concerned specifically about CMBS, that might help in that direction.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states that for those individuals who have concerns about paragraph 4 being too strong or specifically about CMBS, the mentioned statement might offer some help in addressing those concerns. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 274.
  MR. EVANS. Haven’t we already announced these dates tentatively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement asking if the dates have already been announced tentatively.


Passage number 275.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We have announced them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "We have announced them" does not imply any contention or disagreement. It simply states an action that has been taken without indicating any opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 276.
 MR. EVANS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 277.
 I guess the question is the perception would be if you sort of ratify some dates but not the others is that a signal that— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m just putting it forward for the group’s consideration.  The difference is that the language here, “anticipated expiration dates,” is a somewhat different sense from the previous announcement, which was that it’s being “extended to.”  There is some information there in terms of the likelihood of a continuation of this program, but, personally, I’m fine either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply presenting their thoughts and providing some analysis on the topic.


Passage number 278.
 MR. FISHER. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, I think Janet’s point was that we not consider the last sentence boilerplate, that we are serious about it, and that we will adjust if needed.  Wasn’t that your point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply clarifying and summarizing Janet's point.


Passage number 279.
 MR. LACKER. Actually, she was talking about paragraph 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 280.
 MS. YELLEN. Actually, I was talking about paragraph 3.  The same applies here.  It’s just that the time for putting together these deals is so long that to wait until anything close to June to say “the facility is still available” is problematic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 281.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We take the point that the Board needs to think about this very soon. And one can argue that this language does not preclude, obviously, extensions—it says anticipated expiration date—the last sentence says “prepared to modify,” and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement acknowledges a point and points out that there is room for extensions or modifications, but it does not present any opposing views or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 282.
 MR. TARULLO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot attend the meeting tomorrow due to a scheduling conflict, but he will provide a written report with his thoughts and recommendations.


Passage number 283.
 Richard suggests a parenthetical saying this is not boilerplate, this is— MR. FISHER. No, no, [laughter]. To be accurate, I would amend the last sentence to say, “The Federal Reserve is prepared—honest to God, really, and we mean it”—[laughter]—“to modify these plans.” I would not be in favor of taking that penultimate sentence out, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 284.
 MR. PLOSSER. I think we should not take it out, because I think listing all the programs that we’ve done and omitting this one would be noticed, and it might be noticed in a significant way—I think that’s what President Evans was saying.  So unless we really intend to do something different, I think it would be a mistake not to include it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is expressing agreement with President Evans and stating that it would be a mistake to exclude the mentioned program.


Passage number 285.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In the passage given, there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 286.
 MR. LACKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 287.
 My sense is that it would be interpreted that something is—  MR. PLOSSER. Something’s afoot, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 288.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Under President Fisher’s suggestion, we’ll put the last sentence in bold. [Laughter]  We’re nodding—this is worrisome here.  [Laughter] Is that acceptable. All right. My proposal, then, is to make the change about hiring in the first paragraph, and to make no additional changes to alternative B, noting for the future that we will want to consider modification of paragraph 3, the description of our portfolio, and that all of these things appropriately should be part of our discussion of strategy and tactics, which we have promised and we now have to deliver for January. President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The laughter and the mention of "worrisome" may indicate lightheartedness or surprise, but there is no clear indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 289.
 MR. LOCKHART. This may be too fine a point, but I have a thought about the use of the phrase “adding to payrolls.” In light of the increase of temporary workers, I am wondering if the business community thinks when they add temps, or they add contract workers, they are adding to payrolls, when what we’re trying to say is they’re not adding permanent hires, which is the fine distinction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply offering a thought and seeking clarification about the use of a specific phrase.


Passage number 290.
 MR. FISHER. That’s why I used the word “overhead” originally, but I think it’s too fine a point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. Fisher acknowledges that he initially used the word "overhead" but later suggests that it might be too specific or nuanced for the situation being discussed. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 291.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, of course, in the November report, even including temporary hires it was still a negative number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 292.
 MR. LOCKHART. Right. But we are getting anecdotal feedback that there’s a sort of sequence—you add hours, then you add temps, and then ultimately you add permanents.  And we are getting anecdotal feedback that there has been a pickup in temporaries.  I just raise it to make sure we are communicating what we want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply sharing anecdotal feedback and raising a point for clarification or assurance in communication.


Passage number 293.
 MR. KOHN. I think it says “remain reluctant,” so isn’t that what we’ve said.  It’s not as if they’re not doing it, but they’re being very cautious about it, so I think it’s okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, is expressing agreement with the statement made and providing further explanation to support his agreement.


Passage number 294.
 MR. LOCKHART. Fair enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Fair enough" indicates agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 295.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other comments.  [No response.]  All right. Brian, are you prepared to read the changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement followed by a request.


Passage number 296.
 MR. MADIGAN. There’s just one change, Mr. Chairman.  My understanding is that we’re adding to the fourth sentence at the end of the first clause another clause, so after the words “slower pace” we add, comma, “and remain reluctant to add to payrolls” and then semi­colon. There are no other changes to alternative B as it appears on page 3.  Also, the Committee’s vote will be covering the directive on page 8 of the handout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply explaining a proposed change and clarifying the existing text. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 297.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. And we will have further discussion dealing with redemptions going forward.  On that issue, for example, in my July Wall Street Journal editorial about our exit strategy, I explicitly noted what the redemption expectations were for the next   couple of years. I noted that between $100 and $200 billion a year would roll off, and I included that as part of my description of how we would exit.  So it isn’t an entire surprise in that respect.  If there are no other questions, we’re prepared to take a roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing additional information and setting expectations for future discussions.


Passage number 298.
 MR. LUECKE. As Brian indicated, this vote will cover the directive on page 8 of the handout and the statement on page 3 with the modifications that Brian read.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is describing what will be covered in the vote based on what Brian has indicated. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 299.
 Chairman Bernanke Yes  Vice Chairman Dudley Yes  Governor Duke  Yes  President Evans  Yes  Governor Kohn  Yes  President Lacker  Yes  President Lockhart  Yes  Governor Tarullo  Yes  Governor Warsh  Yes  President Yellen   Yes  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Why don’t we take a 15-minute coffee break and come back for the special presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mentions of "Yes" after each person's name could indicate agreement or affirmation. Additionally, the suggestion to take a coffee break is a neutral statement.


Passage number 300.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me call on Jeff Fuhrer who will introduce the special  topic. Jeff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 301.
 MR. FUHRER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In thinking about how to introduce this topic this morning I was tempted to extend the Titanic metaphor of yesterday afternoon. Were I to do that, I might note that First Officer Wilcox and Ensign Sheets had left the Committee in the middle of the frigid North Atlantic, clinging to flimsy life boats, while the sharks of high unemployment and highly uncertain inflation circled hungrily. Fortunately, the intrepid crew of the R.M.S. Carpathia, headed by officers Michael Dotsey from Philadelphia, Mark Wynne from Dallas, and Jeff Fuhrer from Boston, were steaming their way to extricate the Committee from its rather precarious circumstances.  However, I chose not to extend that metaphor.  [Laughter] Further, in part, because, unlike Batman, who seems to have an endless supply of tools in his utility belt to take care of any circumstances that might arise in Gotham City, we don’t actually have any such tools to extricate you from your predicament.  So, I will move on and leave that belabored metaphor alone.  In weighing the options for monetary policy in the coming years, inflation plays a pivotal role. If inflation stabilizes at its recent level and then rises gradually to the Committee’s implicit goal, while unemployment declines towards a rate consistent with full employment over the same horizon, many will consider this an acceptable outcome.  If, on the other hand, inflation continues to decline in the presence of elevated unemployment, falling more significantly below the Committee’s goal, then the Committee’s policy decisions could become much more complicated. Which of these outcomes materializes will depend on what determines inflation in the short run. So what does determine inflation.  In answering this question, I am reminded of one of my favorite stories, which involves Sigmund Freud and one of his graduate students (and which is probably entirely apocryphal).  The student was troubled about Freud’s theory that all dreams reflect wish fulfillment.  She had a recurrent dream in which she murdered her young children, and she found it impossible to believe that this dream reflected her wishes.  When she posed this dilemma to Freud, he thought for a moment and replied, “But don’t you see that your dream simply reflects your wish to disprove my theories.”  [Laughter] Like Freud, economists love to be clever, and also like Freud, our deep and abiding love of our own theories may make it difficult for us to see their flaws.  In considering the possible trajectory of inflation, I believe we should contemplate the alternatives with un-Freud-like humility.  The fact is that we don’t know what will happen to inflation.  In recent years, inflation has certainly fluctuated, but it has been quite stable by the standards of the 1970s and 1980s.  It appears to have been so far only modestly responsive to the significant declines in employment, activity, and labor costs. And, while short-run inflation expectations have generally tracked short-run movements in inflation, some measures of long-run expectations have remained remarkably stable.  As a consequence, it is difficult to know whether inflation in this turbulent period will respond to economic conditions as it did in the turbulent 1970s and 1980s, or instead remain placid in the wake of recent and ongoing upheaval, taking on the imperturbable, sphinx-like demeanor that was characteristic of inflation in the period that we now fondly remember as The Great Moderation.  Our goal today, then, is not to provide evidence that irrefutably explains how inflation has behaved and where it must go, but instead to impose a degree of rigor on the discussion, to raise questions based on our best theoretical and empirical analysis, and, most importantly, to spark a discussion among the principals at this table that will help us better understand each of our imperfect frameworks for thinking about inflation. And in that regard, I would just note that, at breakfast this morning, such a discussion started to emerge—a rather engaging, interactive discussion about some of the issues that we’ll talk about today.  So I’m hoping that maybe some of that sense will spill over to the discussion this morning.  Now let me turn it over to Mike Dotsey, who will make the first presentation.4 The materials used by Mr. Dotsey are appended to this transcript (appendix 4).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a lighthearted and metaphorical introduction to the topic of inflation and monetary policy.


Passage number 302.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. First, let me thank the staff for an outstanding effort in putting this all together and, indeed, coordinating among different Reserve Banks.  We now have an opportunity for questions or comments.  Let me start with a question for you, Mike.  You talk   about statistical models of gaps, but I think they look to be mostly constructed from single- variable analysis, looking only at GDP.  Take your example with the productivity shock—if you also looked at, say, productivity or unemployment and so on, you would get more information, and you might be able to identify the shock in that case.  So wouldn’t a multivariable analysis reduce some of your concern about statistical models.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In this passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply asking a question and making a suggestion to consider using a multivariable analysis for better information. There is no disagreement or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 303.
 MR. DOTSEY. I really can’t answer that. I haven’t done that research, and I haven’t looked into that. I don’t know if Andreas, who’s also with me today, has anything he could add.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have the information being asked for and suggests that Andreas may have additional information.


Passage number 304.
 MR. HORNSTEIN. The short answer, to be honest, is yes.  For this particular example, the way it’s structured, you rely on price rigidities.  So with a productivity increase, output is not going to move so much and employment contracts.  A particular example would predict that if you look at more information, you might reassess what you think about the gap.  On the other hand, the way these gaps are usually constructed, you generate the trend output path—you don’t use that kind of information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 306.
 MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman, if you take the model as a maintained assumption, it tells you how to calculate the gap, and you do use all those variables.  So when they talk about model- generated gaps, that’s exactly what they’re talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining the use of a model to calculate the gap and clarifying the meaning of "model-generated gaps."


Passage number 307.
  I think the difficulty arises, as their memo and the Chicago one illustrate, in that different models give you different estimates of the gap, and different estimates of how productivity shocks affect what you regard as— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I thought the point was if you look at just the path of GDP and you took a quadratic trend or something out of that and looked at residuals, the gaps you would construct that way would not be necessarily economically meaningful for reasons we understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is discussing different models and their estimates of the gap and how productivity shocks affect it. There is no explicit contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 308.
 MR. LACKER. In a statistical atheoretical model.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply describes a statistical model and does not present any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 309.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But if you believed in their model, then productivity and unemployment data would help you identify gaps in their model—which is not a bizarre model; it’s similar to a lot of others. Questions or comments. President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating that if one believes in a certain model, then productivity and unemployment data can be used to identify gaps in that model. The statement about the model being similar to others also does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The "Questions or comments" statement at the end does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 310.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I was impressed with all of the papers. It was obvious that a lot of work went into them, and I’m very appreciative of that. I wanted to talk about two messages I took away from the Philadelphia–Richmond paper.  It’s more commentary than questions.  One is the discussion that President Lacker and Chairman Bernanke were just having about the difference between old thinking and new thinking, or old Keynesian and New Keynesian models, about gaps.  I think this difference is that just looking at a statistical trend as a way to figure out what potential output is or efficient output is can be misleading.  Just to cite the current example, output right now is about 8 percent below trend as measured from December 2007.  The question is: How much of this fall is efficient.  How much of this represents a deviation from potential output.  The theme that comes out of the Philadelphia–Richmond paper—and it’s basically a theme of all work on monetary economics for the last 15 years—is that there’s really no way to answer this question without a model. The second message that comes out of this paper is that measuring an output gap can be hard. I think that, at times, the paper, or the presentation, seems to imply that this is somehow a new problem with New Keynesian modeling when, in fact, it’s pretty much an old problem, which is true in all economics—we can come up with observationally equivalent models that, in this case, will give rise to different measures of output gaps and then different implications of optimal policy.  I think the Chicago paper points this out—that this is not something special to the New Keynesian approach to thinking about monetary economics, but rather it’s something that’s present in all macroeconomic models. In fact, I think the New Keynesian approach actually helps us with thinking about sorting across models because it brings so much more auxiliary information to bear compared to older approaches; for example, it requires consistency between household-level and firm-level expectations and observed data, and there’s consistency between asset pricing and firm investment decisions.  All of these kinds of restrictions are valuable sources of information that make it easier to use data to distinguish among existing models.  The point is that I think the Philadelphia–Richmond paper is right that these newer models don’t fully solve this identification problem—what are output gaps, what’s the right thing to do at any given moment in time. I think there are two parts to trying to respond to this problem. One is that we use a wide range of models, and this is something you see in the Bluebook—several models are considered.  We might even think of expanding that range of models.  And then there’s supplementing that with good judgment, which is what the Chicago memo, I think, is trying to argue; that is, if we bring enough good judgment to bear, we can actually sort through some of these issues.  That can be very helpful. The second part, which is something that’s more common in other parts of macroeconomics, is to use microdata as an auxiliary source of information beyond macrodata.  The EDO model, which is used at the Board, is one step in this direction because it uses sector- level data, but there are lots of other kinds of microlevel data that can be very informative.  For example, there’s this issue about whether or not inflation is backward-looking, that is, for example, whether, when firms set prices, they look backwards or not in terms of indexation.Well, we have lots of microdata on price setting. Mark Bills at the University of Rochester and Pete Klenow at Stanford University have basically spent the last decade on this issue.  The ECB has commissioned studies in a wide range of countries to do this in Europe.  It would be great to supplement some of our thinking about just building aggregate-level models with information from microlevel data.  Likewise, a lot of times the questions hinge on these latent or unobservable things in the macro model which we could actually try to get information about from microlevel data, for example, questions about firm financing costs, questions about the marginal efficiency of investment.  There can be uses for microlevel data to try to supplement what’s in the macro models. So by and large, I like the Philadelphia–Richmond paper and presentation, but I think they came across as far too negative about the state of play.  I think that we’ve made enormous progress in the last ten years in bringing models to bear that are useful for policy analysis, while at the same time they embed the ingredients of modern macroeconomics that have been proven useful in other contexts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses appreciation for the papers and agrees with their main points about the challenges of measuring output gaps and the potential benefits of using microdata in macroeconomic models. The speaker also acknowledges the progress that has been made in the field of macroeconomics.


Passage number 311.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There isn't enough context in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 312.
 MR. EVANS. There’s not a long list of people already.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement made by someone named Mr. Evans.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 313.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, you’re next.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. The phrase "No, you're next" suggests a contradiction or opposition to something that was previously mentioned or suggested.


Passage number 314.
 MR. EVANS. All right.  I’m a little reluctant to intervene so early because I have a series of rants that I could go on. [Laughter] And I apologize for that. Regarding your question, Mr. Chairman, I think you put your finger on one of the things that bothered me.  But, first off, I thought this was a terrific set of papers, and, they’re very helpful as we think about these issues.  I think the papers expose a number of Committee  members to a different type of discussion, one that economists tend to have, which you may or may not like, but, at any rate, this is what we do. I thought the Philadelphia–Richmond critique of statistical gap measures and New Keynesian models was just a little too mechanical and didn’t represent how we actually use these measures in this room.  They had the example of a beneficial productivity shock and a sticky-price model. If everybody followed that, their analysis says that, after a positive productivity shock we’ll get a positive statistical output gap.  We’ll see that output goes up, but the trend is going to be smoother and so it’s positive, while, in fact, what is actually taking place is that potential is a lot higher and output only went up by this much.  So it’s a negative type of gap. And if all we’re looking at is the output gap, as Mike properly noted, we’re going to mechanically make a mistake. But the question is: Have we ever gone through this.  We have.  The Greenspan Fed lived through this during the second half of the 1990s.  The debate between irrational exuberance and a once-in-a-generation productivity acceleration was squarely put on the table in those discussions, and, in the end, the productivity argument carried the day, and policy did not erroneously tighten. How did we end up there.  Well, Chairman Greenspan and the Committee dismissed looking only at single measures.  I’m sorry Dave Stockton isn’t here, because that was very uncomfortable as Chairman Greenspan would say, “Phillips curve—no, no, no, we don’t want to look at that. Capacity, no, no, no.”  And nobody could quite figure out exactly which resource slack measure he wanted to look at, but he was looking at resource slack.  He used other information beyond the comparison of actual output with a simple trend.  So if we think about the productivity shock example in the Philadelphia–Richmond memo, in a sticky-price model, because output cannot expand to potential, labor input is going to fall.  This comes out of all the  model simulations.  Ellen McGrattan has papers where you see that from this type of shock.  So labor slack is negative. What about inflation signals.  A positive statistical gap relative to a linear trend would call for upward price pressure, so we’d be worried about inflation picking up. But in fact, in the model, the true output gap is negative and there’s downward pressure on inflation because marginal costs are lower.  So, indeed, in the second half of the 1990s, we saw a good deal of such downward cost factors. We were paying attention, and we did not get caught up in just this single output gap measure.  Fundamentally, we scratch our heads when we have different measures that don’t line up.  That’s a real-time warning, and we try to reconcile these conflicting signals. We look at our models and our assumptions more closely.  Just think about how the Greenbook gives us a good view on structural productivity—each Greenbook, which is more often than we really need it because it doesn’t change that much—but still, that’s quite good.  And then there’s other anecdotal information.  Chairman Greenspan kept saying—and I know I didn’t understand it when he first said it—that we heard plenty of business reports of higher productivity and earnings analysts’ five-year-ahead forecast smoothed were telling us something and that turned out to be right. So the bottom line is that we lived through an example that’s like the most troubling example in the paper, and I think we passed it.  So that was pretty good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker expressing their thoughts and opinions on the papers and providing a real-life example to support their argument.


Passage number 315.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I guess it was a productivity episode also in the jobless recovery after 2001 where we saw unemployment high relative to output—somewhat similar. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making an observation about a historical period.


Passage number 316.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker, the only thing that puzzles me in what you said is the implication that we don’t use models.  We do use models.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing puzzlement but does not argue against the statement made by President Lacker.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 317.
 MR. LACKER. We do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "do" implies that Mr. Lacker will express a contrasting opinion or point of view.


Passage number 318.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. And alternative models.  The staff uses both large macro models that try to deal with aggregation and complexity, and they use smaller models.  I think, as you say, there’s only one model in town.  I don’t think you can write down a Keynesian model that doesn’t have a role for gaps in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 319.
 MR. LACKER. I didn’t mean to imply that you or the Board staff don’t use models.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is clarifying that they did not intend to imply anything negative about the other person or the Board staff.


Passage number 320.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 321.
 MR. EVANS. Could I make a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker is asking for permission to make a comment. The use of "could" implies a possibility of disagreement or opposition to their comment.


Passage number 322.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans has a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that President Evans has a two-hander, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement of fact.


Passage number 323.
 MR. EVANS. This is a line of commentary that I don’t always follow, that the gap is somehow a special variable, an endogenous variable.  In the context of writing down an equilibrium model, you could write—I’m pretty sure this is true—the equilibrium decision rules, which are a function of the relevant state variables, which could be transformed so that the output gap captures that part of it.  That would say that, given our policy response function parameters, this is how everything responds to the gap, and we’re following through on it.  So it requires art to know how we should be responding to those things, but it’s not prima facie wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 324.
 MR. LACKER. I’m not sure what you’re saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they are unsure of what the other person is saying.


Passage number 325.
 MR. EVANS. When we say the output gap looks like this and so I think that policy ought to respond in this fashion because disinflationary forces are going to change things a little bit, there’s nothing in that that is in principle against the model, and we’re the central bank in the middle of that model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 326.
  MR. LACKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage only provides a statement from Mr. Lacker without any indication of contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 327.
 MR. EVANS. Okay. Then I didn’t understand your comment about when we talk about output gaps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of a lack of understanding.


Passage number 328.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given statement simply states a title "President Yellen" without any context or information to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 329.
 MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want first to thank the authors and presenters for raising a host of important issues about inflation dynamics.  Uncertainty about the longer-run inflation outlook is quite high right now, and the extent of disagreement among forecasters is quite large.  Even so, as I read the papers I was asking myself if there were some morals here for current policy.  I identified three that emerged from the staff contributions and the broader literature, and I just wanted to take a minute to highlight what I thought the policy conclusions are. First, the papers and broader literature suggest a very strong theoretical rationale, and I see significant empirical evidence, for the view that the level of economic activity matters to inflation. The general principle that very low levels of economic activity—whether they’re measured by marginal costs as they are in the New Keynesian model, or by output gaps, capacity utilization, or unemployment—cause inflation to fall is a common thread across a broad set of macro models used for monetary policy analysis.  As Jeff Fuhrer noted, without some connection between real activity and inflation, these models just have no linkage between monetary policy and inflation. As Jeff noted, models with slack fit the inflation data reasonably well, and over the past year Phillips curve type models do a pretty good job of explaining the decline we’ve seen in core inflation. This is a point that I made and President Evans made as well a couple of meetings ago.  Going forward, with marginal costs obviously very depressed and considerableslack in evidence by any measure, these models predict continuing downward pressure on inflation. A second clear policy takeaway from the literature and presentations is that, without question, inflation expectations are an important determinant of inflation.  And, as with slack, there is considerable uncertainty about how to measure those expectations and about what forecast horizon is relevant.  But in the current situation, a wide range of inflation expectations has been holding fairly steady, and I think the presentations suggest that well-anchored inflation expectations should help to counter the disinflationary pressures arising from very low levels of economic activity over the next couple of years.  This is something that makes me less worried that I otherwise would be about outright deflationary outcomes. The third policy conclusion to my mind is the one I want to emphasize the most.  There is obviously a great deal of uncertainty about the exact nature of the inflation process, and I conclude that that’s something we have to take account of as we formulate monetary policy.  There’s a large literature on optimal monetary policy under uncertainty, and it lays out several key principles. The first is that there are relatively simple policies, and Taylor-type rules are a class of them, an excellent example.  These policies are robust in the sense that they work well across a range of different models and degrees of difficulty in measuring gaps, and there is a very large literature documenting this.  As we know, the policy choices of this Committee have come reasonably close to the predictions of some variant of the Taylor rule for the last several decades, and, as the Bluebook indicates, most variants of Taylor-type rules currently indicate, as I said before, that the funds rate should stay near zero for a long time.  A second principle of optimal policy under uncertainty is that policy should be formulated to guard against particularly undesirable outcomes, and this principle to my mind suggests we should stay at the zero bound for an extended period because we can easily raise rates, but it’s hard to lower them. A third principle is that policy responses to different economic indicators should depend on the quality of the signals they are sending about the state of the economy.  And in the current situation, the level of unemployment and the degree of slack in the labor market that we see is so enormously large by every measure that it is sending a strong signal now, and that’s something that we should be responding to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's own thoughts and interpretations of the literature and presentations on inflation dynamics.


Passage number 330.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude directed at Governor Kohn.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 331.
 MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a question rather than a comment, and it’s for Mike. I had trouble understanding the paragraph or two that you had in your paper about the current situation. I guess you say we shouldn’t be sitting around this table talking about gaps.  So what should we have been talking about this morning.  And within this model, how do you explain what has happened over the last two years.  We’ve had an enormous drop in output and a significant decline in inflation. So how would you have designed this morning’s discussion if you had had an opportunity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The question posed by Mr. Kohn suggests that he did not agree with or understand the perspective presented in Mike's paper, and he is seeking clarification or an alternative explanation.


Passage number 332.
 MR. DOTSEY. I don’t know if I can tell you exactly what’s going on in the economy today. That’s a little bit of a hard road to walk down.  But with regard to your first point, if I were sitting at this table, I would find the discussion among Charlie and Narayana and Jeff very productive. Charlie could have had his entire discussion without mentioning the word “gap” once. Basically he was talking about what kind of shocks he thinks are hitting the economy, given an underlying model based on, I guess, some of his own work and things like that.  What kind of impact would those shocks have on the economy, and then what should monetary policy’s actual response be.  That I find extremely valuable in my own thinking, and that’s the way I think about policy. The gap construct is something that, as Charlie commented, is going to be model- specific. But I find that when people rely on that too much without doing the hard work, which people have done around here in this discussion, of talking about what are the beneficial models that help us understand things and the disagreements we might have over them in terms of identifying what’s going on, then that can sometimes lead away from a productive discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 333.
  So I don’t know what you talked about this morning, but if you— MR. KOHN. So within the confines of the model, what happened over the last two years.  How did we get where we are, and what are the implications of that for policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the topic of the conversation but then proceeds to ask a question to gain more information and clarification.


Passage number 334.
 MR. DOTSEY. It’s unfortunate for the New Keynesian models that at this point it seems that what we had was a large financial meltdown.  What we do not have yet, but which is part of the big research agenda that’s just taking off, is a way to integrate the way we think about financial markets and their role in the economy.  So if I were trying to do things now, I might say I’m going to go look at Bernanke and Gertler and Gilchrist or I’m going to look at Kiyotake and Moore or maybe models like Diamond and Rajan and I might even pull away from the New Keynesian paradigm and try to understand what they’re telling us is going on in the economy, and then try to figure out a response. So I think there’s no getting around it, as Jeff Lacker says—we’ve got to put our models on the table, see where they fit things, and then figure stuff out imperfectly.  And in that discussion, if you want to use gaps and you find them helpful, that’s fine, and they may be a good communication device as well.  But I don’t think they’re essential.  They’re an artificially constructed device that you can just sort of think about or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the need for integrating the way financial markets are understood and acknowledging that models may need to be adjusted or new models considered. The mention of using "gaps" as a communication device is also not a source of contention.


Passage number 335.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A two-hander from President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing ideas. It simply mentions that there is a two-hander from President Kocherlakota, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 336.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. But the model is trying to account for all variability in the data, so it’s going to say something about the answer to Governor Kohn’s question about what has happened. What is the model going to say.  Some shock has taken place according to the model. What is the shock that has happened in the last two years, or what is the constellation of two or three shocks that have happened in the last two years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing the model's attempt to account for variability in the data and the question of what shocks may have occurred in the last two years.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 337.
 MR. DOTSEY. I would be no more informative on that than anybody here.  But one could say that one of the things that has happened in financial markets is that capital is not being allocated efficiently across the economy; that is, the firms that might be getting the capital in normal times, maybe smaller productive firms, are not getting it, and some larger, non­productive firms, perhaps because they have better balance sheets or have been around, are getting it, and that would look like a technology shock. But, then again, maybe we’re in a world where we have ambiguity aversion in our model, and all of a sudden people have become very, very uncertain about things or demanding large risk premiums, and, as a result, investment isn’t being done because it’s being priced in a crazy way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage presents two different perspectives on the reason for inefficient capital allocation in financial markets. One perspective suggests that it may be due to a technology shock, while the other suggests that it may be due to ambiguity aversion and high risk premiums. These differing perspectives indicate a disagreement or contention about the cause of the issue.


Passage number 338.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. But in the Philadelphia model that you use.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is simply introducing a topic without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 339.
 MR. DOTSEY. In the Philadelphia model where this is being soaked up as an inefficient investment shock that tells you that potential is going down a lot as well as output.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Dotsey, mentioning a model in Philadelphia and the observation regarding potential going down along with output due to an inefficient investment shock. It is a straightforward assertion rather than a point of disagreement.


Passage number 340.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement by Mr. Kocherlakota and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 341.
 MR. DOTSEY. I’m a little bit uncomfortable with that as the explanation, but that’s what that particular New Keynesian model would say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Dotsey, simply states his discomfort with the explanation given by the New Keynesian model.


Passage number 342.
  I’m trying to remember, I think the modelat Chicago also has a big role for some of these investment-type technology shocks as well and whether they are—  MR. EVANS. I would guess it does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and making a guess.


Passage number 343.
 MR. KOHN. How would it explain the decline in inflation, then. If potential has gone down along with output, why has inflation gone from whatever it is, 2½ percent to 1½ percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked by Mr. Kohn about the decline in inflation and seeks an explanation for it.


Passage number 344.
 MR. DOTSEY. Given that unemployment has gone up to 10 percent, and in Jeff’s graphs you thought that we had this 8 percent drop in marginal cost, or some giant gap, the question would be: Why hasn’t inflation gone from 2.2 percent to minus 2.2 percent, not from  2.2 percent to 1½ percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 345.
 MR. LACKER. Well, the answer is always going to be our policy role, right.  Isn’t it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is stating a fact or making an observation.


Passage number 346.
 MR. KOHN. We’ve changed targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement stating that the targets have been changed.


Passage number 347.
 MR. LACKER. The answer to why inflation did what it did would be a combination of the model and our policy role.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the answer to why inflation behaved a certain way would be a combination of the model and their policy role.


Passage number 348.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Mike was kind enough to mention Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist earlier. [Laughter] I would point out that Mark and other coauthors have updated that paper to include exactly those kinds of shocks, and they get disinflation and all of those things.  And what’s happening is that as there is a shock to the capital of the banking system that prevents credit from going through to purchasers, or small businesses, or consumers, or whatever, the drop in their demand is just a decline in the aggregate demand curve, and you get all the results you would expect from that. A two-hander from President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply elaborating on a previous mention of Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist.


Passage number 349.
 MR. EVANS. Well, let me just say that I agree with many things that Mike just said, and, in fact, in the specification that Justiniano and Primiceri  write down, the output gap is not a fundamental.  It’s a constructed variable, and it’s really the marginal cost pricing, as Jeff mentioned, that is going to be fundamental for how firms are setting prices.  So that’s absolutely right. It’s also in the language that we as economic researchers are comfortable with, and we can lay it out and understand it quite well.  Part of what we’re getting into is how we communicate with other people and with the public, and resource slack tends to be a pretty good proxy in a number of cases, so I think that’s why we keep coming back to it.  These memos are right to point out the cases where we are going to be misled by that, and then the question is:  How do we defend against that.  I think our track record is pretty good.  We always need to be reminded of this, and getting the models better would be great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the points made by Mike, Justiniano, and Primiceri. There is a suggestion of different perspectives on how to communicate with others and the usefulness of resource slack as a proxy, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 350.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states the title or position of President Bullard without providing any information about any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 351.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a simple expression of gratitude from one person to another. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 352.
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll try to keep my comments brief.  I want to talk a little about what I took away from some of this.  I found the papers very interesting and fun to read and think about. One of the lessons I take away from this—and it’s one that I’ve taken away for some time, and Jeff referred to it—is that a little humility may be in order, in terms of our ability to truly understand particularly short-run dynamics in the inflation process. One of the things that I think we learned from this discussion is that, depending on the model that you write down, and depending on the nature of the shocks that you allow to hit that model, you can get different outcomes, you can get different relationships between variables within that model. That means that we need to be a little cautious in our interpretation about how we rely in our policy discussions on one set of variables versus another set of variables in guiding our outlooks for inflation. One of the things that I have tried to convey in some of my comments over the last several months is that I have been worried that in the way we talk about inflation—particularly the future of inflation and deflation—we have become a little too fixated on measures of output gaps.  One of the things we learned from this is that, depending on which output gap you write down and what you think of the shocks, other things may matter, so we need to be a little more careful about “diversifying our portfolio” about what’s going to happen and protect ourselves from being put in a bad spot. So, I think humility is important.  I think the nature of the shocks is important.  I think the conversation between Governor Kohn and Mike Dotsey about what we think this shock is and what it did is a useful kind of conversation to have.  The problem comes when the output gap becomes a shorthand for a whole bunch of other stuff, and then it becomes a communication problem, because it may or may not be the right shorthand.  There may be circumstances where you need a different shorthand or a different measure.  And that’s where talking about the nature of the shocks becomes useful in how we think about it. If you focus on traditional measures of the output gap, it seems to me there are circumstances where, with excessive emphasis on trying to close that gap—I’m not talking about the current circumstances, necessarily—you may not be conducting policy in an optimal way or even increasing welfare. You may actually reduce welfare if you focus on the wrong metric or the wrong target with the gaps. So there may not be an easy, one-to-one correspondence at times between policy that’s welfare improving and policy that closes gaps, and we need to be cautious about that. Charlie Evans commented earlier about taking other variables into account, and it is very important that we do that. The last comment I’ll make is that I want to reinforce Janet Yellen’s point, because she and I agree on this—some people may find that unusual.  Given the uncertainty that we have about the class of models that we deal with, there’s a lot of work on robust rules.  Some of the staff in San Francisco—John Williams and others—have worked hard on this.  I find this work very useful, because they take models where we actually can compute optimal policy, and then ask what happens: What kind of simple rules could we use that would get us close to something that looks like the optimal policy.  There’s been a great deal of work on this.  The simple rules they write down typically are of a Taylor rule variety with an output gap and a deviation of inflation from some target.  One thing that comes out of those robust rules, though, is that the answer is not that the output gap doesn’t matter.  But in most of those exercises that I’m familiar with, the weight on the output gap in the Taylor rule tends to be pretty small.  I think that’s one of the things that is interesting about some of those rules.  The important thing about those robust rules is that the weight on the deviation from inflation target gets very big, and the weight on the output gap is relatively small in many cases. One of the helpful things that we could do is think about the class of robust rules and about how robust these rules are against the class of models that are on the table.  That could help focus our discussion and give us, again, this robustness in our policy thinking that could be very helpful.  So I’m very positive towards that line of research in the literature, because, as we can see here today, models are different, and they can give different outcomes.  We need to be cautious about what we know and how precise we are and not put too much weight on any one factor at any one point in time—“diversify our portfolio,” if you will.  Again, my argument for lo these many months is to try to get our language to look more robust and a little less focused on single metrics. I want to thank all of the Reserve Bank staff.  They did a great job, and I think this has been a very useful discussion.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker argues for a more cautious and diverse approach to understanding and interpreting inflation dynamics, suggesting that relying solely on one set of variables or measures may not be optimal and could potentially reduce welfare. They also argue for considering robust rules in policy-making and emphasize the importance of looking at different models and outcomes.


Passage number 353.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The given passage does not contain any content or information that could be disputed or cause disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude from an individual named President Rosengren.


Passage number 354.
 MR. ROSENGREN. I also want to thank each of the presenters for giving very good presentations. Over breakfast, as Jeff alluded to, President Plosser and I had, I thought, a very useful discussion about models and what was generating our results.  I asked him, given where the output gap was, and given where at least some measures of marginal cost might be, how he was getting inflation actually rising.  And his answer was, “Well, the driver is really inflation expectations.” I have one question for each of you. It will be quick.  Let me posit my questions to each of you first, and then I will let you all speak.  My first question is for Mike.  You’ve highlighted the difficulty with coming up with the output gap, and I think it’s well understood that there are a lot of ways to calculate the output gap, and there are estimation issues with the output gap.  But when I look at forecasts of inflation—if I look at the Blue Chip, if I look at professional forecasters, if I look at the dispersion in surveys—I find that the modeling of inflation expectations by economists isn’t much better than the modeling of output gaps.  Gary Stern gave us the advice that you need a model to beat a model as he was leaving.  So we’re not very good at modeling expectations; it seems like we have much the same problem when modeling the output gap. I’d like you to speak to the alternative, which is, how do we do a good job of modeling expectations, or what more work needs to be done. For Mark, my question is that, based on my understanding of at least some of the international literature, importers tend to price to the U.S. market.  If you could just put your work in the context of that observation, I think that would be useful for me. And for Jeff, in light of Mike’s comments, and his paper, I would be interested in your views of the implications of the way you model inflation, given the alternative that Mike has laid out in his paper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a series of questions and requests for clarification.


Passage number 355.
 MR. DOTSEY. That’s a really excellent question, which I’m going to answer in three parts. In the models that we’re all looking at, expectations are rational.  To the extent that that’s not a good approximation for how people actually form expectations, then that’s problematic for the models as well.  People like Jim Bullard have worked on models of learning and other types  of things, and a lot of those models probably can be incorporated to try to flesh out expectational issues, if we become uncomfortable with the assumption of rational expectations at high frequencies. Expectations are a dicey thing for the Committee to base policy on, because often they can be somewhat sticky, as you allude to.  If the Committee were to lose some of its credibility, often those expectations could look good, but you could have lost the game, and expectations are going to get out of hand. I think the late 1970s and then the disinflation of the 1980s was an example of that.  The inflation sort of led the expectations—we had this big run-up in inflation, and expectations followed it. On the way down, I think expectations of inflation actually followed the Fed’s moves as it was gaining credibility and probably made the disinflationary costs in actuality a lot worse.  So I think you are right to point out those types of things, but, again, all I can do is say we’ve got these models on the table, and that’s the best we can do.  And you’re right to question perhaps some of the assumptions underlying what is going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is acknowledging and addressing potential issues with using rational expectations in models and the potential impact of expectations on policy. He also recognizes the importance of questioning the assumptions in the models.


Passage number 356.
 MR. WYNNE.  On the question of the pricing to the U.S. market, we actually do consider this case. One of the contributions in our background paper is to push some of the existing literature forward by explicitly incorporating the so-called local currency pricing assumptions as opposed to the producer currency pricing assumption. If you go back to exhibit 6 in our handout, that’s what gives rise to these complicated additional terms in the Phillips curve expression to capture these deviations from the law of one price. If you don’t have people pricing in dollars for the U.S. market, you’re just going to have to worry about the domestic and foreign output gaps, or domestic and foreign real marginal costs. This is what makes it very tricky to test this idea that foreign influences matter, because you can also just write down a Phillips curve where all the foreign influences come in through a terms-of-trade-like term.  But it’s a gap—it’s a deviation of the terms of trade from its frictionless level. A lot of very subtle econometric issues come up then in trying to figure out why the terms-of-trade variable is in the Phillips curve expression.  Is it to capture deviations from the law of one price, or is it some sort of a summary statistic for all foreign slack.  I think it makes a big difference to the validity of the hypothesis. This was what motivated our final remark about why we really need to rethink some of the earlier econometric work, some of the good work that was done here at the Board of Governors, the work that the researchers at the BIS have done, and some of the earlier work we did on this question.  However, these terms-of-trade variables look like some of the variables people have traditionally included in Phillips curve regressions.  We know that oftentimes you’re going to need to put in energy prices or import prices or food prices in your traditional Phillips curve to get the fit to work.  And the theoretical framework we have laid out explains why these things may, in fact, matter.  But a lot more work needs to be done before we could actually apply this to some of the policy issues Jeff and Mike have addressed in their presentations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is discussing the considerations and complexities involved in pricing to the U.S. market and the need for further research.


Passage number 357.
 MR. FUHRER. Thanks for your question, Eric.  I would take on board some of Michael’s and coauthors’ caveats about the use of statistical gaps.  I think my approach would be somewhat similar to what the Chairman was saying in response to another question—we wouldn’t take a univariate approach in gauging the state of the economy.  We’d look to see what’s going on with unemployment, and I’d say it’s clearly elevated, and I don’t see evidence in traditional measures of reallocation to suggest that anything extraordinary is going on there.  Therefore, I would take on board that a good portion, maybe the majority, of the increase in unemployment is really reflective of slack resources.  When I couple that with the observations   on marginal cost, which are severely depressed, I think I have several measures that all are telling me roughly the same story.  So in that regard, at least from the point of view that the gap or utilization is a driving variable, I would expect some downward pressure on inflation. Now, as we suggested in the discussion around the table, inflation expectations might counterbalance that, but I would emphasize in that regard, at two levels, that what I said in my presentation is that the implication of the models is that the inflation expectation really implies a concern for future marginal cost and gaps, not just inflation expectations per se.  That’s at the pointy-headed rational expectations level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging and considering the caveats of statistical gaps and expressing their agreement with the Chairman's approach. They also mention that they don't see anything extraordinary happening in regards to reallocation and believe that the increase in unemployment is reflective of slack resources. Their observations on marginal cost also support their expectation of downward pressure on inflation.


Passage number 358.
  But let’s take a step back and think, along the lines that President Narayana Kocherlakota was saying, about the importance of the microdata—   MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Narayana Rao Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply mentioning President Narayana Kocherlakota's viewpoint and suggesting to think about the importance of microdata.


Passage number 359.
  [Laughter] MR. FUHRER. I’ll get the middle name next time.  [Laughter] The goal keeps increasing. At the micro level, let’s think about the story that motivates these kinds of models that we use, which at its base is not unreasonable, and that is that there are firms who are trying to set prices. What do they consider in trying to set prices.  They think about their cost structure.  That’s where the marginal cost comes from.  I would say that today the cost structure really is challenged. Wages are pressured to be quite low, and productivity appears to be fairly high.  So from the cost side, that puts downward pressure.  The other thing that they take into account is how much they can mark up over those costs.  That’s a factor of market power and current demand circumstances.  And I would say, there again, the ability to mark up over their cost structure is not terrific. So you don’t need the pointy-headed rational expectations model to tell you that the key determinants that fold into these models would suggest that, in current circumstances, the pressures on inflation, taking into account expectations and costs and gaps or whatever else, appear to be on the downside.  That’s the way I would answer that question. Now, I did say, as President Plosser emphasized, that we need to have some humility when we approach this. And I think that to date we are starting to see perhaps the beginning of a puzzle that says, as Mike Dotsey suggested, that inflation maybe should have fallen more than these models have suggested.  And I think we’ll be looking at that carefully, because if it doesn’t fall noticeably over the next year, we have some ‘splaining to do.  [Laughter] And that will require some additional thought.  So thank you for the question, and that’s what I would say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 360.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The Ricky Ricardo theory of economics.  [Laughter] President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The "[Laughter]" after "The Ricky Ricardo theory of economics" suggests that it is meant in a lighthearted or humorous manner, rather than being a serious or contentious statement. Additionally, the presence of "President Hoenig" without any context does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 361.
  MR. HOENIG. Thank you. Just a short observation.  This is, as others have said, very interesting in terms of inflation dynamics and output gaps.  And I agree that we need to use models and work them and then apply our judgment to the situation. But I also want to remind the Committee that we do need to begin to think differently in some ways.  I can’t help but recall that in 2003 Borio and White gave a paper at the Jackson Hole Symposium on issues around not so much bubbles but very strong expansion and the conditions we create that cause these cycles, if you will.  It means that you can look at where interest rates are relative to at least an estimated long-term equilibrium rate and at how fast credit growth is moving in a particular period of time.  If you reread that paper now, you will think they were on to something.  While we need these output gaps, and so forth, the financial system is driving a lot of what’s happening, and we need to bring that into the equation more directly.  Maybe that’s what you were referring to regarding the updates to the papers that you have been involved with.   There’s more to it than the output gap, and I’m a little worried, because of that, about making inflation targeting your goal, because you can have a very stable inflation environment for a while and have a very volatile financial environment with the excesses that go on there.  So I recommend that you all reread that paper.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their observations and suggestions, without directly contradicting or arguing against any other viewpoint. They are referencing a previous paper and recommending that the committee reread it to gain more insights.


