Passage number 1.
  Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee on  January 16, 2009  A conference call of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Friday, January 16, 2009, at 10:30 a.m.  Those present were the following: Mr. Bernanke, Chairman  Ms. Duke  Mr. Fisher  Mr. Kohn  Ms. Pianalto  Mr. Plosser  Mr. Stern  Mr. Warsh  Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lockhart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist  Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary  Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary  Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary  Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel  Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel  Mr. Sheets, Economist  Mr. Stockton, Economist  Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rolnick, Rosenblum, Sniderman, and Tracy, Associate Economists Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Account Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Mr. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Slifman, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Messrs. Leahy and Levin, Ms. Liang, Mr. Reifschneider, and Ms. Stefansson, Associate Directors, Divisions of International Finance, Monetary Affairs, Research and Statistics,  Research and Statistics, and Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors  Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  Governors Mr. Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, respectively  Messrs. Altig, Potter, Rudebusch, Sellon, and Sullivan, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, San Francisco, Kansas City, and Chicago, respectively  Mr. Gavin, Vice President, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 2.
 Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of RichmondTranscript of the Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call on  January 16, 2009  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody.  The principal item on the agenda today is to have a preliminary discussion on inflation objectives and that range of communication issues, and I will come back and provide some more introduction to that shortly.  We also should take the opportunity to talk a bit about the structure of the FOMC meeting, which we can then apply to the regular meeting coming up in about ten days. Before we get into the regular agenda, though, I would like in a moment to ask Scott Alvarez to describe the terms of the Treasury–FDIC–Fed deal with Bank of America.  That deal was originally scheduled to take place—or to be announced—after the close of markets today, and so my hope had been that I would be able to present this to you before completion or announcement.  In part because of market conditions, the bank asked for an acceleration to this morning, and so that news, obviously, is already out.  I apologize that we were surprised and weren’t able to provide as much advance warning as we would have liked.  In any case, I am going to turn to Scott and let him just outline what we did and why we did it.  The Richmond Bank was very much involved in this, as was New York.  After Scott’s comments, President Lacker, if you would like to add anything, you are welcome at that point to do so, and then we will have any Q&A that people want to do.  Let me turn now to Scott to give us a quick overview of the transaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion agenda and an update on a deal, without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 3.
 MR. ALVAREZ. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by saying  that a tremendous amount of effort went into this deal, and the folks at the Richmond  Reserve Bank—in particular the lawyers and the exam staff there—with some  support from the New York staff did a phenomenal job in putting this together.  This  proposal was motivated by significant losses that Bank of America announced this  morning. There are two kinds of losses. They announced some losses that were a  little above market expectations for Bank of America itself.  This is their first quarter  of losses, and the market is now expecting that this is the first of several quarters of  losses for Bank of America.  They are one of the more thinly capitalized banking  organizations, so losses for them are taken pretty seriously.  What was most important was a very large loss that Merrill Lynch declared for the fourth quarter today, much larger than market expectations—in the mid-20s pre-tax.  The concern was that a large loss on the Merrill Lynch acquisition, which Bank of America just closed on January 1, might shake market confidence in Bank of America itself. The proposal that Bank of America requested from us and that we ultimately agreed to provide is in two parts. One is a capital injection of $20 billion from the Treasury from the TARP funds—that is in the form of preferred stock.  It is very much like the preferred stock that was issued in the CPP (capital purchase program) to other banking organizations, except that the interest rate is higher.  It is a uniform 8 percent interest rate right from the start, rather than 5 accelerating to 9, I believe, under the CPP.  The capital injection has some conditions tied to it.  One condition is that dividends be restricted to a penny a share per quarter for the next three years.  There is also an executive compensation requirement that is more severe than the executive compensation requirements that apply under the CPP but very much like the exec comp restrictions in the Citi deal.  So the highest management of Bank of America, roughly the top thirty officials, had their bonuses cut 40 percent for the next two years, and their bonuses are based on the 2007 performance.  There are also restrictions on corporate activities, on the use of corporate jets, and on various extra corporate expenditures, which are subject to Treasury review. In addition to the capital injection, the U.S. government agreed to provide some downside protection for a period of time on a pool of ring-fenced assets.  This part was also modeled on the Citi deal.  The maximum size of the pool is $118 billion.  The pool includes a variety of residential and commercial real estate securities, including some structured instruments—CDOs and the like.  The underlying assets include a range of prime, subprime, and alt-A assets.  There are also some derivatives—in fact, a large derivative book on real estate and other corporate assets—and some leveraged loans.  The term of the downside protection is ten years on the residential-mortgage-based assets and five years on everything else.  The way it is structured, Bank of America has a deductible of $10 billion.  That is the first loss position on any losses in this pool. After the Bank of America loss position, the U.S. government will share losses on a 90/10 basis with Bank of America, the government taking the next 90 percent and Bank of America, 10 percent, for another $10 billion.  That $10 billion of losses is shared between the Treasury and the FDIC on a pari passu basis, which is slightly different from the Citi deal.  The Treasury will take $7½ billion in losses potentially, and the FDIC is willing to take $2½ billion. In exchange for providing that protection, the Treasury and the FDIC are getting $4 billion in preferred stock and some small amount of warrants as a premium.  The losses will be based on actual losses that are incurred in the maturity and sale of assets from the pool, not on mark-to-market losses.  So if the pool continues to exist after they have gone through that series of $20 billion in protection, then the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond stands ready to make a loan to Bank of America on the basis of the assets remaining in the pool.  That loan would be on a nonrecoursebasis—so recourse only to the assets in the pool.  Again, Bank of America would  share 10 percent of the losses alongside the Reserve Bank in that pool liquidation.   The Reserve Bank is getting a commitment fee on this loan that begins immediately  on signing the documents.  The fee is 20 basis points on the outstanding amount of  the assets, which represents the potential amount that the Reserve Bank could lend  against.  Once the loan has been drawn, the Reserve Bank would also get an interest  rate of OIS (overnight index swap) plus 300. That interest rate is the same that we  have used in the Citi deal. The restrictions that I went through on the preferred stock  that the Treasury gets are also part of the asset ring-fencing proposal and will last as  long as the ring-fence continues to exist.  That is the summary of the deal.  President  Lacker may have other comments to make, and I am happy to answer any questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about a deal and describing the details of the proposal.


Passage number 4.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided in the question to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage so that we can assess it.


Passage number 5.
 MR. LACKER. In putting this together, our staff benefited tremendously from what has been learned over the past two months in New York from trying to put pencil to paper and negotiate the details of the legal agreement pursuant to the term sheet for Citi.  We were able, at the margin, to improve in several respects on a couple of the provisions of this ring-fencing arrangement.  In our case, actually, the collateral isn’t going to be the underlying securities.  It is going to be just Treasuries. But the loan agreement stipulates that the repayment amount is the amount of the outstanding balance of the loan minus the amount of credit losses they incur on the underlying assets.  In addition, we have a trigger point for advancing the credit that is a bit tighter than before and a couple of other minor things. But I want to thank the New York staff and the Board staff as well for doing a great job in helping us put this together. This obviously is an uncomfortable thing for any central bank to do. The terms of this deal are very consistent with the Citibank terms, so it seems like a consistent follow-through in terms of the conditions involved for the institution that triggered this intervention and the terms and structure of the intervention.  So we were happy to cooperate with the System in carrying this out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 6.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks, President Lacker.  I agree with Jeff that this is uncomfortable. It is a significant improvement, I would say, over some of the things we have had to do in the past in that the Treasury obviously is taking by far the bulk of both the capital investment and the fiscal risk and the FDIC is fully engaged as well.  The FDIC also announced its intention to expand the loan guarantee program to allow for up to ten-year covered bond type of instruments, which will be interesting.  They are going to go out for comment on that, and we will see how that works out.  So they are very much engaged. I would make a couple of other points.  One is that we also had the benefit of knowing somewhat longer in advance than had been the case in other situations and so had more time to determine what strategy to follow.  I think the agreement will reflect that greater time and greater attention. Finally, and this perhaps anticipates some of our later discussion, we have been very attuned not only to the credit risks but also to the monetary policy implications of these deep-tail loans. We don’t expect to have to make the loans, but if we do, we want to make sure that they don’t create balance sheet problems in terms of our monetary policy.  Both in this case and in the final negotiation with Citi, we have worked it out in a way that, if we make loans, it will be on a tranched basis so that we wouldn’t have to make a loan of $300 billion or $100 billion in one shot—rather, somewhat smaller loans that could be better managed from a monetary policy point of view. So that is the overview. Let me see now if there are any questions for Scott, for me, or for Jeff. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is agreeing with previous statements and providing additional information.


Passage number 7.
 MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  You may remember that, back when we first started down this path, we had a discussion—at least I raised the subject—about a decision tree and about our assessing possible outcomes.  I can say this in front of the group; this is an inside question.  After that discussion, President Geithner and I had   substantial phone conversations, and I was assured that there was a decision tree and that we were thinking through all the different possible outcomes.  My question is the following: What probability did we assign to this kind of problem arising from B of A, particularly when they announced the merger with Merrill.  I am curious as to whether we envisioned this as a possibility. If so—and, of course, circumstances change over time, and nothing is perfect—what reasonable probability did we assign when that merger was announced that we might have to step up to the plate.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a follow-up question that is not related to this about an outside response to a question that I anticipate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, the agreement took place over the Lehman Brothers weekend in a situation of considerable stress and anxiety.  But it was a freely negotiated agreement between Bank of America and Merrill.  There was no government assistance, and there was no request for government assistance.  It was a commercial decision.  At that time, we were actually quite happy to see it happen because we were concerned about the pressures on Merrill. But it was their decision, and we had no particular reason to think that there would be extraordinary losses in this case. Of course, the world has changed in just a few months, and this whole situation was stimulated by a call from Ken Lewis just a few weeks ago to the effect that the losses that Merrill Lynch was going to report at the end of the fourth quarter had risen on the order of $10 billion or $15 billion in just a couple of weeks, in terms of what they were reporting to Bank of America.  So these losses were not anticipated, certainly not at the time of the merger agreement, and they were actually quite a shock. We were a little disappointed in Bank of America’s monitoring in that they seemed a bit behind the curve in terms of following the developments at Merrill Lynch.  But there were enormous losses at Merrill Lynch that emerged very quickly and that surprised  Bank of America and us as well. I don’t know if I am answering your question, but we did not anticipate this problem when the transaction was originally agreed to.  You had a follow-up question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they were "disappointed in Bank of America's monitoring" and that they "did not anticipate this problem" when the transaction was agreed to. This suggests that there was a difference in expectations and understanding between the speaker and Bank of America.


Passage number 9.
 MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is a separate question:  How do we expect to counter concerns that we are basically underwriting greater concentration as we go through time.  In essence, what we are doing here is providing emergency lending to underwrite heavy concentration by virtue of a merger.  So I would just appreciate your thoughts or perhaps the thoughts of other members of the Committee on how we deflect that kind of concern if it arises in the marketplace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question posed by Mr. Fisher regarding concerns about underwriting greater concentration through emergency lending. There is no clear contention or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 10.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It is a legitimate question, President Fisher.  This particular transaction, as I was just saying, was different from, say, Bear Stearns, where our intention was to arrange a merger in order to stabilize the company.  In this case, as I said, it was a freely undertaken business transaction in which the government was not involved. It is clear that, on the one hand, we are seeing a consolidation of firms and some increase in concentration. At the same time, the industry overall is shrinking and needs to shrink, and that is going to be a structural problem going forward.  I think the right approach—and I have said this most recently in my speech this week—is that there needs to be a wholesale policy response to the question of “too big to fail.”  President Stern, of course, is very familiar with this issue and has written on it. That could involve breaking up firms.  It could also involve a tougher regulatory regime for so-called systemically relevant firms.  There are different ways to address it. It must be addressed.  It is very important to address. But right now we are doing the best that we can to address the immediate threats to the system.  I think we are making progress.  As I said before, the Fed’s role is still there, and it shouldn’t be there at all ideally, but it is now at least subsidiary to the Treasury and the FDIC.  I am hopeful that going forward the Administration will be able to develop a systematic, comprehensive approach to the banking problems that will leave us out of it entirely, or at least keep us in our appropriate liquidity provision role.  So the answer to your question in short is that it is very important, but we can’t address it simultaneously with addressing the near-term threats to the system. But the regulatory and legislative response clearly has to address those issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different aspects of the banking industry and suggesting potential solutions to address the issue of "too big to fail." There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 11.
 MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Again, I pray that we keep this in mind, as obviously we are doing, as we go through time because our actions might counter our intentions if we are not careful. Thank you for addressing the issue.  I appreciate it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing gratitude and appreciation for the chairman's addressing of the issue.


Passage number 12.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I think that speaking about it is, obviously, one useful way of counteracting the concern.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 13.
 MR. ROSENGREN. My question was whether the Treasury had a criterion for when they thought ring-fencing was the most appropriate way to deal with a problem versus alternative ways of dealing with these problems.  We have had two cases now in which we have done ring-fencing. The circumstances have been very different.  So is there a criterion that is being worked with the Treasury and the FDIC for when those are appropriate actions to take and when other options should be considered instead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply asking whether there is a criterion for determining when ring-fencing is the most appropriate solution and when alternative options should be considered.


Passage number 14.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, first, there are three classes of firms.  There are the so-called healthy firms that are eligible for the CPP.  There are the very sick firms that require emergency assistance.  And somewhere in the middle are the targeted-investment programs— Citi and BAC are now the two examples of that.  These are firms that were not immediately in a state of failure but were obviously under serious stress, and there is a set of criteria for those firms and the way we approach those firms.The specific combination of capital and ring-fencing is, to some extent, a matter of judgment—you know, looking at the situation of the individual firm, the market conditions, and so on. But there is a general feeling—I think we all may be seeing this—that the preferred capital approach is reaching its limits.  The markets don’t view preferred capital injections as being a perfect substitute for common equity. On the other hand, there is resistance on the Treasury’s part to injecting significant amounts of common equity because they don’t want to own the bank, among other things.  So you need another mechanism, and ideally the mechanism would be a good bank/bad bank or a purchase of assets—a way of getting some of the downside risk off the balance sheet. This has been the most effective way essentially to provide contingent capital without creating a capital instrument.  As we go forward, I expect to see more combinations of what are effectively capital injections and removal or ring-fencing or insuring troubled assets.  I think we will see more of that going forward, but a substantial amount of individual analysis of this particular case led to the particular combination of measures.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and discussing different approaches and options, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 15.
 MR. LACKER. I just wanted to follow up on a couple of things that President Fisher asked about and add a bit of color to your response about earnings.  There are press reports today coming out of the Bank of America earnings call that suggest that they learned about these losses only in the days following their shareholder vote on December 5 or something like that.  These were actually accumulating from just early November, and the erosion of earnings took place over a five-week period at Merrill, so they accreted within the organization.  They knew about it to some extent, as it was happening in late November and early December. In response to Richard’s question about a decision tree, the way this played out over the Lehman weekend is notable.  This initiative of the two firms was a direct response to hearing aconclusive, definitive statement from the Secretary about his unwillingness to provide government support for Lehman.  So for all that has been said about the handling of the Lehman case, the difference between the orderly resolution of Merrill, given this merger, and what would have transpired had they tried to take a chance on going it alone has to be counted as a beneficial side effect of Lehman—a kind of rare, direct evidence of some incentive effects here. One thing I am concerned about with these ring-fencing aspects—this is a comment to you, Eric—is that they leave a substantial part of the risk, both upside and some downside, on the books of the institution. So they have the inconvenient property that defraying some of the costs of that risk is part of the calculus of anyone considering injecting new equity in the firm.  Some prospective equity investor that takes them a bit out of the hole of this thing is going to be benefiting existing debt holders as well.  This debt-overhang problem ought to be the subject of some attention here because ultimately we want to get away from dependence on government support. To some extent, these preferred injections, because they are dilutive, have us in a tipping point kind of thing in which equity holders are scared off by the prospects of future dilutive injections. So we are sort of stuck with just the government as the potential equity source until they come far enough out of it that the tail risk for debt holders is large enough.   I think that deserves some thought.  Initially we took a look at an SPV (special purpose vehicle) approach, more like Bear, specifically for this reason—that it would lift the assets out of the institution and help us get more rapidly to a point where we didn’t have this debt-overhang problem.  My understanding is that there was a concern at Treasury that this should resemble, as closely as possible, the Citi deal, so that it was patterned after that and could be sold as kind of a continuation of the Citi-like structure.  This issue about common versus preferred was a surprise in this—in December we learned that there was a real concern about the appearance of B of A’s tangible common equity ratio, which is below that of some top-tier banks like JPMorgan but above that of Citi.  They were concerned about the erosion of that, and that was their chief investor-confidence issue that motivated this.  Understanding that a little better and what motivates that on the part of the investor community would be useful as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly providing additional information and raising some concerns or questions.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Hoenig.


Passage number 17.
 MR. HOENIG. Just a quick question. Given the way AIG was structured and the possibilities of being able to pay back the loan with a sale of assets or operating units, and Citicorp is now looking to sell off units, have we given any thought to requiring that, if these things aren’t dealt with even in an extended period of time, they would be required to sell off units to pay this back.  That would address some of Richard’s and my concerns about the enabling process that we are providing for this continued increase in concentration of these resources that are themselves unsound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Hoenig regarding a potential solution to address concerns about the concentration of unsound resources.


Passage number 18.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I would welcome any assistance from an appropriate governor or supervisor. We have been concerned about Citi from a supervisory perspective for some time.  One of the key problems was the difficulty of managing and dealing with risk in such a complex and loosely structured organization.  So we—the Federal Reserve, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York—had been pushing Citi to try to rationalize, sell off assets, refocus, and improve risk management and management competency for some time.  That wasn’t motivated primarily by a concentration issue but was just trying to make Citi a more viable firm.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their efforts and concerns regarding Citi's risk management and profitability, without disagreeing with anyone or presenting conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 19.
 MR. WARSH.  A couple of things. First, in the Citi case, as an example, the markets are putting a lot of pressure on them to slim down and sell off assets.  I think that, as quickly as they can rightly restore their brand and their business, they and their shareholders will have every  incentive to do so. I think that is already happening.  Under the terms of the CPP, negotiated chiefly by the Treasury, the company has the option to get rid of the government ownership at different periods. I think it will be a sign of strength when they are able to do so. In addition, there is an incentive—and Scott can correct me on the terms—that, if they were to pay back the government by year-end ’09, then the options, the warrants in effect, that the government would get would be half what they otherwise would get.  So generally under the CPP you will see the strongest of this group looking to distinguish themselves for being stronger, by November/December of this year—to try to say that they are different, that the options and warrants they have given the government will now be reduced because of the redemption feature.  But in square answer to your question, there isn’t some compulsion that somehow the government needs to be paid back first among the order of preferences for their liquidation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and giving their opinion on the matter.


Passage number 20.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement followed by a question.


Passage number 21.
 MR. BULLARD. Thank you. Just coming back to President Fisher’s question:  How are we going to play this going forward.  Should we expect more deals in the category of Citi and B of A.  How are we going to draw the line sometime in 2009 about how to do this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and asking for clarification on the future plans and approach.


Passage number 22.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, speaking for myself, I am not going to draw the line somewhere that involves the failure of a firm the size of Bank of America.  But that said, we need to find better solutions to this problem, and the new team—Geithner, Summers, and Christina Romer—is very focused on trying to use the available TARP money, which of course was just approved yesterday, plus other funding and other authorities, to develop a more systematic and more comprehensive approach to the banking crisis.  We have been trying to support that analytically, and we are certainly also going to support it politically, because it is   very important that this be done both in a consistent and a well-thought-out way and that fiscal authorities take the appropriate responsibility. So let me just say that I know President Lacker was uncomfortable with this arrangement.  I am certainly very uncomfortable with it.  But for whatever reason, our system is not working the way it should in order to address the crisis in a quick and timely way.  Until the reinforcements arrive, I don’t think we have much choice but to try to work with other parts of the government to prevent a financial meltdown.  But I am very sympathetic to the view that the faster we can get a comprehensive, appropriate fiscal response—and that is the goal of the new Administration—the better off the country will be and the better off the Federal Reserve will be. Okay. If there are no other questions, maybe we could turn to the main topic of inflation objectives. Let me make just a couple of very short introductory comments.  First of all, obviously, we have talked about this issue many times before.  I think in 1995 President Yellen was involved in a debate or a discussion on this topic, so it is an oldie but goodie.  The reason that there has been interest—and I feel this interest has welled up to some extent from the Committee as a whole—is that, in the current situation, there are some circumstances that might make an explicit numerical objective more attractive. There are a number of considerations, but the two I would mention are, first, that we do face, if not deflation, certainly some disinflation; and disinflation, if it proceeds too quickly, can be counterproductive because it raises real interest rates.  So to the extent that we can, through expectations management or policy communication, reduce disinflationary pressures, that is a positive.  This is one way perhaps to do that.  At the same time that we are using every power we have to try to fight this incredible crisis, there are concerns on the other side that, by expanding our balance sheet and the like, we risk inflation increasing in the medium term.  It is important   for us to communicate that we will be effective and timely in removing that stimulus, so that we will not have an inflation problem during the exit from our current policies.  In that respect, there may be some special features of the current environment that make this topic worth thinking about once again. Now, we have been through this process a number of times.  As I mentioned, we have made some steps in this direction with our communication strategy—our projections, for example, particularly the long-term projections we are planning for January.  So I think the question is whether we want to take another step.  If so, what should it be.  We all agree—and we have discussed it also on numerous occasions—that this has to be managed very carefully from a political perspective.  I think we need to go slowly on that front.  Don and I and the staff met this morning with some representatives of the Administration.  I did not detect any strong opposition on the substance, but they didn’t want to incur heavy political costs themselves or use up political capital at the beginning of the Administration.  Their view was that whatever we did needed to be very carefully managed to avoid getting blown out of proportion in the political sphere. So we will work very carefully and closely with the Administration in thinking about this, not only in the substantive details but also in terms of the political communication. One point that was made in the meeting this morning, which may affect our thinking on timing if we do decide to go forward, is that the new President has already appointed one member of the Board and will have two more slots to fill.  We should pay attention to the schedule of appointments, and to the extent that appointments by the new President can be known and can be consulted in this process, it might ease the political consideration somewhat.  That is something we may have to take into account, and it may somewhat affect our timing.So we do want to discuss today a bit of the substance of what we would like to do.  But I think we should all have a sensitivity—whatever steps we take—to the need to do it very carefully from a political perspective and perhaps think about the extent of the change, the step we want to take, to balance a more dramatic or discrete step against whatever additional costs or risks there might be from a political perspective.  I just want to emphasize that and note that it probably suggests that we should go a little more slowly than at the January meeting.  Certainly it is a good idea at this point to get a sense of the Committee’s preferences to give me guidance in doing my consultation and getting feedback on further steps. Let me turn now to Brian Madigan to introduce the topic, and then we will do a go-round on this issue. Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 23.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. Are there any questions for Brian.  If not, would anyone like to comment on this issue.  I see President Yellen.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply a sequence of statements and questions.


Passage number 24.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. We have had some work here by the staff about what kind of press release we might do, and the focus has been on explaining how it relates to the dual mandate in some particular situations.  So I think this is absolutely right. President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and stating that the focus of their work on a press release is aligned with the idea of explaining how it relates to the dual mandate.


Passage number 25.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 26.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 27.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 28.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Also in the interest of time, I’ll be brief.  We have said a lot about this subject—it is hard to picture much that hasn’t been said.  Yes, I do believe that we should adopt a specific numerical objective for inflation.  We should be clear why and what we’re doing.  I just can’t help but start thinking about this question from the point of view of our taking actions over time in a repeatable process that generates a consistent pattern of behavior.  That point of view leads you to certain answers to some of these questions.  From that point of view,  whatever we do and whatever we imagine for that policy rule, surely it generates an average rate of inflation.  So the question before us is, Why not reveal that.  Why not state that.  Why not figure out what that is and state that to people. Now, contrast that with some suggestions and some discussions that seem to have the flavor of let’s state now what we think, on a one-shot basis, that inflation is going to be from 2010 to 2015.  I think of this as announcing a consistent pattern of behavior that we think we’re sticking to.  That approach has a real advantage over the long-term projections approach.  If we’re going to be doing long-term projections every quarter, I don’t see how we avoid the problem we’ve had with the third­year-of-the-projection approach to signaling our inflation intentions.  Every quarter that projection could come out differently, and that’s going to be an acute problem in the coming months when the composition of the Committee changes, obviously.  How does it relate to our dual mandate.  I agree with Jim.  It’s no problem.  Let’s imagine that we’re following a pattern of behavior that we view as optimal with respect to our dual mandate.  Surely that generates an average rate of inflation.  Why not announce that.  If we announce that, it does not have any implications for our pursuit of our dual mandate. The time frame is sort of a separate question, I think.  This is a question for what we say in any given meeting or in any given quarter about how we view the economy evolving over the next couple of years—what we view as our outlook.  How we view inflation is likely to come back to what we view as its long-run average, and, gosh, that could change.  It could be quick in some instances; it could be longer in some instances.  I don’t see any reason to pin ourselves down to a particular time horizon. How would this change the way the Committee does its work.  Well, I think it would inevitably change how it communicates.  I think we’d pay a little more attention to inflation.  In particular, we’d tend to underemphasize language that treats inflation as an autonomous development in the economy (which we tend to use too much now), and we’d use more often language that implies our responsibility for the path inflation is likely to take.  I think we would serve ourselves best by not changing our inflation target very much at all and communicating about it in a way that conveys that we intend to revisit this only very, very rarely.  I do not think this would interfere with our ability to deal with financial stability.  It is hard to picture how allowing uncertainty about our inflation objectives would help with financial stability.  If anything, it seems as though the opposite would be true, especially given the experience in the 1970s.  About these other questions, a single number to me seems obviously preferable.  Total PCE and 1½ percent would be my choices.  That concludes my remarks, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own beliefs and opinions without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 29.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a polite expression of gratitude followed by the name of the person being thanked.


Passage number 30.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  For many years now, I have believed that providing the public with an explicit numerical inflation objective would enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy for a variety of reasons.  One of the principal benefits would be an improvement in communication, thereby enhancing the FOMC’s ability to fulfill both of our mandates.  I believe that an explicit numerical inflation objective would help to anchor inflation expectations, and strongly anchored inflation expectations should improve the efficiency of wage- and price-setting decisions and lead to better economic performance.  Although the research findings are not conclusive, I think that foreign central banks operating with explicit numerical objectives have, on balance, more firmly anchored inflation expectations than have other central banks.  Anchoring inflation expectations also could be especially crucial during current economic conditions, but my support for specifying a numerical objective is based on my regard for its value in all circumstances.  In principle, establishing an explicit numerical inflation objective need not diminish or assign less weight to our objective for maximum employment.  Rather, establishing a numerical inflation objective should help us achieve our employment goal over the long run.  Because the Committee has already reached a broad consensus on an implicit inflation objective, announcing an explicit inflation objective should not materially change the way we respond to economic conditions. However, an explicit inflation objective may be most valuable in times when achieving it appears to be more difficult.  Right now, as several have mentioned, people are concerned both about the possibilities for future deflation and future inflation.  The existence of an explicit commitment would enable us to explain more clearly to the public what we are trying to accomplish and how we intend to do so.  It would require us to explain how we plan to achieve our objective when we see actual and projected inflation deviating from our objective. I favor an objective expressed in terms of an average over the medium term of, say, three to five years, but the communication value I see is not that tightly connected to a specific time frame.  Evidence of successful inflation targeting should be revealed in a closer alignment of inflation expectations with the inflation objective, particularly in the case of the longer-term horizon.  My preference for a total versus core inflation measure depends on the time frame chosen, but a longer-term target specified in terms of total CPI inflation seems like the best option to me.  I favor the CPI because it is not subject to revision, and many contracts are specified in terms of the CPI. Concerning the issue of an inflation objective versus a price-level objective, I prefer the inflation objective.  I am more persuaded by having at least the experience of some foreign central banks in implementing inflation targets than by purely theoretical arguments for price-level targeting.  I think our objective should be stated in terms of a number with an acceptable range around that number.  While I prefer the CPI, I recognize that the PCE measure has become the focus   of our attention, and I have been on record as suggesting an objective for PCE inflation of 1¾ percent.  But in light of our recent experience, I am now leaning toward an objective for total PCE inflation of 2 percent to provide a larger buffer against zero lower bound events.  I would provide a range around that number of plus or minus 1 percent to let the public know that some variation in actual inflation is acceptable during that time frame.  But, again, the size of that range would depend on the horizon that we select.  Recognizing our dual mandate, I think publishing our longer-term growth and employment projections would remain a valuable part of our communication strategy. So in conclusion, I do regard the establishment of an explicit numerical inflation objective as a natural step forward in our Committee’s progress toward better communications.  I recognize, however, that gaining support for such a framework at this time could be challenging.  I would feel much better about launching this endeavor if I thought that this step in our communication strategy would be welcomed by the Congress and the Administration rather than resisted, but I will leave managing the politics up to you, Mr. Chairman.  As you said clearly in your opening comments, you are well attuned to the political environment.  I also agree, though, with President Yellen that extending the Committee’s economic projection horizon buys us a lot of what we are trying to achieve without some of the political risk.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

While the passage discusses the potential benefits and drawbacks of establishing an explicit numerical inflation objective, there is no direct contention or disagreement within the passage. The author lays out their own beliefs and preferences, but does not directly challenge or refute any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 31.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude from the speaker, President Hoenig.


Passage number 32.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As a general statement, I think I am on record as having supported and continuing to support an inflation objective.  A numeric inflation objective, as we have talked about before, would help communicate the Federal Reserve’s commitment to price stability. Of course, that said, we all realize that in the past this Committee was reluctant to push for its implementation in part because such an articulation of price stability mandate needs  strong support from the Congress.  In the current circumstances, this support may be likely; but in the longer term, if inflation were to require strong tightening policy, I think support would fade quickly away.  Also, it may be difficult to make the case for quantification of only one of the mandates as we have talked about before, thus making this action, if we were to move toward an explicit target, a temporary action just by circumstance.  I would be opposed to establishing a numerical inflation objective at this time if it were only a temporary measure in response to the current crisis. In my view, if we go this way, we need clear congressional agreement, at least in a resolution, and the mandate should be considered by all parties as permanent.  I see little benefit in adopting a temporary numerical objective.  Such an approach would likely undermine our credibility in establishing a permanent objective at a future date.  If by circumstances or if we think the odds are fairly high that an explicit numeric objective at this time would be temporary, I believe we would be better served by focusing instead on our communication strategy, as President Yellen has outlined—at this time, for example, clearly indicating that inflation below 1 or some percent was unacceptable and would call for aggressive policy action, as we have already taken. In terms of implementation of a permanent numerical objective, though, I would favor a medium-term range of 1 to 3 percent.  I would prefer overall CPI but certainly can live with PCE as we have been doing at this time, with an explicit statement that we are targeting the midpoint of 2 percent.  That makes it a target, and the range gives some maneuvering room, but we are headed always toward 2 percent.  This is as other central banks have done.  I would say I am not in favor of price-level targeting at all, in part because of the difficulty of communicating such an approach to the public in any successful way.  If, however, we are going to decide to go down this road toward inflation targeting or even price targeting, I guess I would back off this idea of longer-termprojections just because I think of the added confusion that it would perhaps cause.  I will leave my comments at that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, expresses his views on establishing a numerical inflation objective. He discusses the potential challenges and considerations of such an objective, but there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 33.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, President Hoenig.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 34.
 MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I have long favored adoption of inflation targeting, and as with the policies to address “too big to fail,” it appears to me that the time has finally come to go down this path.  I think the arguments in favor of inflation targeting are by now pretty familiar.  I don’t view it as a significant departure from the way we conduct policy in normal circumstances.  Obviously, the past 18 months have not been normal circumstances.  So in many ways, I think it is institutionalizing and making explicit things we have typically done in any event.  I do think inflation targeting has the potential on the margin to improve accountability, to address the potential time-inconsistency problem, and to improve communication.  I am struck by the fact that, if we had an explicit inflation target, it would probably help in the current circumstances, where there is, indeed, a good deal of concern both inside the organization and externally about the potential for deflation.  I think it would have also helped six months ago, when there was a good deal of concern that inflation was getting away from us and getting out of hand because of what was happening with commodity prices and so forth.  So I think it would be valuable in all of those regards, but I do not want to oversell it.  I think, as I said, it is largely institutionalizing the way we have conducted policy for several years now under normal circumstances. I will certainly leave to you the political judgment as to how to best proceed and what the timing ought to be.  Let me just make a few other comments here.  As several others have said, Jim and Jeff among them, I do not see any problem on the substantive level with adopting an inflation target and the dual mandate.  In the long run, sustainable growth and price stability go hand in hand, and indeed I think we can explain that.  I would have a mild preference for adopting a range rather   than a point estimate just for credibility reasons.  If you adopt a single numerical target, I think people are going to say to themselves, “Well, there is either an implicit range around that or their ability to hit that number right on the button is low.”  But I do not think that is a show stopper, quite honestly, one way or the other. I do not worry about our ability to respond to financial crises.  I think the central bank always has the flexibility and the responsibility to respond to those situations when appropriate, and even preemptively, if we see something in asset prices that the Committee judges at the time to require a response on our part. I do think an important issue, and one on which personally I would like to see more evidence and more work done, is what the appropriate time horizon is.  Presumably we are going to conduct policy as we have been to achieve our objective of price stability over time.  If the time horizon is too short, you run the risk of excessive volatility in interest rates, assuming that’s your instrument but perhaps even if not.  If the time horizon is too long, it is meaningless.  My guess is that we are talking about something like four or five years, but I would like to see more evidence on that particular subject. I do have a preference—it is not a strong one—for the PCE index only because I think that is a better measure of inflation and the one we ought to be paying attention to.  With regard to the numerical specification, I have long favored something like the European Central Bank target of 2 percent or a little under.  That gives us some room on the downside.  But having been around this Committee for quite a while and observing the great concern with deflation not only in the current circumstances but back earlier this decade when the economy was, in fact, expanding, I think we do need to recognize that and be careful that whatever number or range we pick is not too low.  After all, most of the benefits of selecting and achieving an inflation target come from maintaining   inflation at a stable, low level. It probably does not matter very much whether the number is 1½, 2, or even 2½, as long as it is low and as long as we achieve it.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for inflation targeting and provides reasons why it would be beneficial. There are some preferences expressed for certain aspects of inflation targeting, but overall, the speaker seems to be in agreement with the idea.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since the passage provided is incomplete and does not contain any information or context about President Rosengren, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 36.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like President Evans, I met with my academic advisory council this last week.  It is composed of a variety of academic economists from around Boston. As you might expect, there were widely divergent views on the advisability of inflation targeting and the nature of what it should look like, but I nonetheless think that some of the observations they made were of interest.  First, those who thought that a target was a good idea thought the lower bound of that target should be 2 percent.  That’s higher than they would have advocated previously and certainly higher than many members of the FOMC have advocated.  Second, those who thought a target was a good idea argued for a large range, at least 100 basis points, reflecting the difficulty of actually remaining in our target range and, again, larger than I think many have discussed in the past.  Third, many felt that we would have a difficult time explaining to the public our target because we might have great difficulty hitting that target and it might make the Federal Reserve look ineffectual.  So there was a surprising concern about actually moving toward a target at this time. My own view is that a target may make sense to highlight that we will take actions necessary to avoid deflation and that we will remove the accommodation quickly enough that inflation will not be a significant problem when the economy does eventually recover.  I do have some caveats.  First, as I have mentioned before, this is the second time this decade we have been concerned about a zero lower bound, and it is significantly limiting our actions at this time.  We should take into account the cost of being in this position too often, and I think that argues for a higher target rate than I would have argued for two years ago.  At a minimum, the middle of the  range should start with a 2, not a 1.  Second, as we experiment with a target and given the variability we have seen in all inflation measures, we should start with a larger range than I would have argued for a few years ago, probably 100 basis points is reasonable.  Third, just by observing where inflation has actually been over the last decade, it seems as though a revealed preference for inflation ranges has been roughly 1½ to 2½ percent.  I think an open question is whether our preferences should change based on hitting the lower bound this time. In terms of the other questions, I will just be very brief.  Like others, I think it will be very difficult to have a price-level objective.  I just think it is too difficult to communicate.  It will be a big enough challenge to explain inflation targeting.  So I would not be in favor of moving to a price-level objective.  Second, the Congress may ask that we also provide a target for the unemployment rate if we adopt an explicit inflation target, and we should ask ourselves whether that is a tradeoff we are going to be willing to make.  Finally, regarding communication, most of our communication recently has been on the PCE measure.  I think changing as few things as possible probably makes sense. So I would be an advocate for using the total PCE.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of Mr. Rosengren summarizing the views of various economists and sharing his own opinion on inflation targeting. While there may be differing views among the economists mentioned, the passage does not highlight any specific disagreements or arguments.


Passage number 37.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply consists of a polite statement and a greeting from "Governor Kohn."


Passage number 38.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a brief statement of gratitude directed towards President Lockhart as a sign of appreciation or respect. There is no evidence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 39.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have gotten a lot out of the discussion today. I have to say that I am still really forming my opinion both on some of the more important arguments in favor of this or that and on the details.  But I think what I can best do at this point is just to give you a sense of how I am leaning, which I think is broadly in line with what many of the members have already stated.  I favor an explicit target.  I think going beyond simply the approach of extending the forecast makes sense.  I favor an inflation objective versus a price-level approach.  I think the price-level approach, particularly for the broad public, will be more difficult to communicate.   I can see arguments on both sides of a point versus a range.  On balance, I favor a point forecast of 2 percent, a round number.  For many observers of our policy, some range would be understood, and I do like a range from a management point of view because it gives us a better chance of hitting it. But from the point of view of clarity with the general public, I could be convinced that a point, as long as it is a round number, would make sense. I tend to view the approach that I am laying out as really espousing what I call a “serious guiding principle,” which allows for pragmatic consideration of conditions at any given time and, therefore, does preserve some flexibility, as Governor Kohn emphasized.  Of course, if it is too soft a guiding principle, then it is not taken seriously.  It is not credible.  So I think we want to communicate it so that it is understood that, as a guiding principle, it is to be taken very seriously.  I do not see this in conflict with the dual mandate.  I think we would be communicating a guiding principle for the inflation part of our dual mandate.  I tend to favor a medium-term horizon—three to five years.  I think that is a credible horizon.  I also favor a headline number.  Because we have been using the PCE measure, although it requires a bit more education for at least the broad public, I think headline PCE is a good approach.  But I would certainly be easily convinced to go with headline CPI. To anchor expectations on the part of households, as President Bullard discussed, I think the approach needs to be one of simplicity.  One test that I would use would be to find out if the average informed citizen can recite our policy or our approach back to us.  That is why I favor a round number of 2 percent—because it is memorable and because I think the average person would get it.  What we are doing here really is formalizing a consensus that already exists.  In that respect I find myself broadly in favor of what most have emphasized.  I do like a staged approach to deal with the politics of the matter.  Under the current circumstances, there is such sensitivity out in the political  world that it may require a staged approach.  I agree with the comment made earlier, Mr. Chairman, that you would be in the best position to judge how to stage it.  So as I said earlier, I am still forming my opinion, but those are my leanings at this point.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is stating their own opinions and preferences, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement with others.


Passage number 40.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Fisher—back from the Galapagos, by the way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage is a simple statement relaying the return of President Fisher from the Galapagos. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 41.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes, and where you can see how creative destruction works over very prolonged periods, Mr. Chairman.  I recommend it to anybody who would want to truly get away from what we constantly worry about. Mr. Chairman, you have heard a broad range of views, and that broad range of views indicates the difficulty of reaching a decision in short order here.  In terms of my own preferences, from a theoretical standpoint rather than go through each particular aspect, I would basically ask that I be recorded almost point by point as President Plosser early on articulated.  We are in exact agreement from the standpoint of what we might seek to achieve theoretically.  I was taken by President Evans’s comments, however, in terms of the validity of ultimately having a price objective, but his concern that now is not a good time.  I was particularly struck by his phrase that this exercise may be orthogonal, as he put it, to the current financial crisis.  The only disagreement I have with President Plosser is that issue of timing, and I would probably say that, unlike President Evans of Chicago, I am not open-minded on the subject.  Let me explain. I do not believe the issue right now is the political environment. We went through this argument before in 2007.  My views are clearly recorded.  I was quite concerned about the politics of this, given my background and given that I am neither an academic nor as intellectually potent as the rest of the people around this table or on this video screen.  I worry about those things.  What I worry about most, though, is the last time we discussed this we were basically fiddling while Romewas beginning to burn, and I worry about the market perception of our focusing on this issue at this time.  Let me be blunt from the standpoint of what we have been able to achieve. We basically are working our way out of a deep end zone, just to use a football analogy.  Charlie will appreciate this since they decimated the Dallas Cowboys.  We have fumbled sometimes, and we have been sacked a few times, but I think we are beginning to build street credibility, and that street credibility comes from the evolution of our understanding of these issues.  As President Lacker and you said earlier in discussing the Bank of America transaction or the new support program, we are learning more as we go on.  I think we have more respect in the marketplace. I think the New York Desk is gaining—not that they did not have credibility before— and we have achieved a great deal in terms of these new programs we are undertaking.  We have a financial crisis upon us.  I do not believe that has been alleviated, and I think we are just at the beginning of the game.  We are deep in the end zone.  We are beginning to work our way down the field, and I worry that being viewed as engaging in a theoretical discussion, which has lots of niceties to it and a lot of attraction to it ultimately, may just make it look as though we are not keeping our eye on the ball or keeping to our game plan. So I would argue very strongly from my sense of those with whom I talk in the marketplace that this is not a good time to proceed with this endeavor.  We can think about it.  I think the discussion today has been very thorough.  Again, I line up with President Plosser in terms of what I would ultimately like to do.  I do not have much of a difference of view there.  But I do not think, Mr. Chairman, that this is a good time to proceed from a financial market perspective and the way we are being perceived in the outside world, whatever the validities may be; and I do not think anybody can doubt, certainly on the hawkish side, my credentials on this issue of inflation, even to the point of standing all by myself against a much wiser majority.  I am deeply concerned about thedeflationary gearing that we are encountering right now.  But I do not think it is the time to talk about this, and I think we should just keep our eye on the ball of what we have been doing and basically running the business that we are running the way we are running it currently. I want to conclude with just underscoring another comment by President Plosser, which is that words and communication are not enough.  Our actions speak infinitely louder than our words, and right now I think our actions should be devoted to getting ourselves out of the mess we find ourselves in.  I think we are making progress on that front, and I do not want to be distracted from it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with President Plosser on the issue of timing of a certain endeavor. The speaker believes that now is not a good time to proceed, while President Plosser holds a different view. This is evident in the following statement: "The only disagreement I have with President Plosser is that issue of timing, and I would probably say that, unlike President Evans of Chicago, I am not open-minded on the subject."


Passage number 42.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. First Vice President Cumming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "First Vice President Cumming" does not imply any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions the title and position of the individual being referred to.


Passage number 43.
 MS. CUMMING.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I believe it would be very helpful under the current circumstances to adopt an explicit numerical objective for medium-term inflation of 2 percent for PCE inflation, given the real risk of deflation and the likelihood that deflation fears will become an important part of the public’s concerns about the steep global downturn that we are now in.  In some ways, as many have noted, it would be a small step.  The analyst community and much of the public already believe that we have an implicit objective of 1½ to 2 percent, and our effective reaction function probably also reflects that.  We could emphasize that continuity with our past practice if we adopt such an objective.  But it is also a large step, as the Chairman himself noted at the start of the discussion.  The implications of such an explicit objective in the current circumstances for our behavior are very important and not necessarily easy to explain—for example, that we would be willing to accept some inflation above our objective for some time—and really requires a carefully crafted speech or even a series of speeches, as well as that political dialogue. I note again that, much as the Chairman’s speech earlier this week really laid out what our current monetary strategy is, such a speech or series of speeches could be very useful. What would give that kind of education campaign real power is a unified FOMC behind the speech.  Being unified means a wholehearted endorsement and a consistent message from all of us about the explicit objective, right down to the chosen number.  The normal, healthy debate during benign times can produce great anxiety in stressful times like these, and it would be a large step because, to be effective, this move could not be portrayed as temporary or until the crisis seems to lift.  It would be a real advance in our practice, consistent with where we have been headed to date—others have noted this in a discussion earlier on this same topic—and also where overall central bank practice has been heading.  Of course, it would be correct to evaluate the success of such an objective sometime down the road. I would also like to see us keep it simple for the most effective communication, as many have noted.  So I would see that as a medium-term objective of around 2 percent for the PCE; inflation at a flexible horizon, and here we would be thinking on the longer end of medium, as President Yellen described it, maybe leading into the longer term; and overall inflation, not core.  We do have a lot invested in PCE as what we believe is the right inflation measure, and I would advise continuing.  We would have an opportunity to relate that PCE inflation target to an equivalent in the CPI—for example, a CPI of 2½ percent with a PCE inflation target of 2. If we go ahead with long-term projections, which I would recommend, an explicit objective obviates the need for participants’ long-term forecasts of inflation because in the medium term we would all be working toward and would expect to meet the shared objective.  In such a framework, though, participants’ views on the long-run values of GDP growth and unemployment would be of great use to the public.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is mainly a suggestion for adopting an explicit numerical objective for medium-term inflation and discussing the potential implications and challenges of such a move.


Passage number 44.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Warsh.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 45.
   MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will keep my comments short mostly because I do not think my views have changed materially since we last took up this discussion.  On the merits, I remain skeptical of the benefits of establishing an explicit inflation objective, and in terms of timing, I think the timing is really quite poor at this moment.  Part of the reason for the skepticism is that I do not believe an inflation target would have or should have changed our conduct of policy during this period or most other periods that I could envision.  In substance, I think that establishing the objective is of far less consequence than the conduct of policy and the actions of this body.  Our credibility and commitment come from those actions—come from our reaction function to changing circumstances—far more than from what we say, and I think that is particularly true in times like this. I am convinced that the benefits of an inflation objective are small relative to the prudent steps that we have taken in terms of our longer-run projections—along the lines that President Yellen mentioned—in keeping expectations well anchored.  I am far less certain, however, that the costs of establishing an objective are small, particularly in a period like this. President Evans talked about this discussion being orthogonal to the financial situation.  I think that is quite euphemistic.  Among the questions the world and the markets have about the FOMC, this is not on the top of the list or maybe even on the first page of questions they have about us at this moment. The very nature, role, and responsibilities of the Fed are central and are being asked about in all corners, both in the Congress and in markets, and I think that we should not burden those discussions by adding the discussion of an inflation objective to get some modest benefits thereof in this environment.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Warsh, expresses skepticism towards establishing an explicit inflation objective and believes that the timing is poor. He argues that the conduct of policy and the actions of the Fed are more important than stating an objective. He also questions the costs of establishing an objective, particularly in the current financial situation. This contrasts with other members of the committee who may support the idea of an inflation objective.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude by someone addressing Governor Duke.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 47.
 MS. DUKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me say, first, that I have not been thinking about or discussing these topics since 1995.  [Laughter]  Nevertheless, before I got here I could haveguessed pretty accurately what the intention of the Committee was and what the targets of the Committee were. From that standpoint, I am not sure that articulating a specific objective is going to do much more to inform the general public as to how this Committee might act.  After hearing the discussion, I could, frankly, support in normal times almost any consensus opinion as to what that target should be—how it should be expressed, whether it should be a point or a range, and what measure should be used.  However, these are not normal times, and all of the discussion assumes communication and credibility. On the communication front, I never thought I would see a time when it was almost impossible to articulate the role of capital in the financial system or even the role of the financial system in our overall economy.  So I think this makes it a very difficult time to try to inform the public about something like an inflation target.  The second piece would be credibility.  First of all, we are in a situation with a fairly high level of uncertainty and a low level of confidence in our forecasts, and we are responding to those forecasts with untested tools.  So I think it is really difficult to be precise in what we think the outcomes are going to be.  Second, we have already strained our credibility a bit in our inability to meet the fed funds target for a period of time, and then we moved the target down to where the actuality was.  So I think that those two would make it very difficult right now.  Finally, in the political environment, my concern is that, in our efforts to support the markets and individual firms, we are running very close to the political independence line. Any political capital that we use in that sense is political capital that we need, and I do not think this is a time to use up a lot of political energy on the subject of inflation targeting.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The author argues that it is not an appropriate time to articulate a specific inflation target and that the current circumstances make it difficult to inform the public about such a target. The author also expresses concerns about communication, credibility, and political independence.


Passage number 48.
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Because I have made the case for balance sheet observation, I just thought I would share a couple of thoughts.  First of all, I appreciate your efforts and your thoughts on this matter.  I think the memo was informative and helpful, and your comments have been very welcome from my perspective.  I would make just one minor suggestion or at least comment.  My view about the balance sheet in terms of the FOMC’s role, in part, was not to set or particularly to target the balance sheet or a specific size of the base.  Both in the last meeting and currently, my point has been to think more broadly about putting caps either on sizes of   certain programs or on the balance sheet as a whole, recognizing full well, as you pointed out, that some of these programs are demand driven and they go up and they go down perhaps even from week to week in some cases.  I fully understand that, and my thinking along these lines is that we would try to set caps either for the overall balance sheet or maybe even for individual programs, that we would review them periodically and, if demand or circumstances arose where we felt it was appropriate to expand the size of the programs or create new ones and therefore adopt changes in the balance sheet accordingly, we could adapt the interaction between the Committee and the Board in that way. So I don’t want to be misunderstood as that I was trying to have a base growth target or even a balance sheet growth target in the way I was thinking about it.  I was trying to recognize—as you pointed out, Mr. Chairman—that there is an interaction here between the nature of monetary policy and the nature of the credit programs that we are managing.  We need to acknowledge explicitly that interaction and make sure, as these programs and these efforts evolve, that we take into account that interaction in an appropriate way.  That is the critical piece of what I think we need to think about.  Moving forward, I agree with you that we ought to try some new strategies and discussion in our meetings. I hope in the process—as you said, it is an experiment—we will work through a collaborative effort to achieve our objectives.  But this does relate back—as you pointed out in your comments—to our earlier discussion about inflation targeting and, in any communicative effort, we need to be able to link our actions that we take as a Committee on monetary policy and our charges, relate that to what we are doing and to our objectives in a fairly systematic way.  As you pointed out, and I agree with you, right now that is very difficult to do.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, starts off by expressing appreciation for the efforts and thoughts of the chairman, indicating agreement. He then goes on to explain his own thoughts on the balance sheet and suggests a minor comment or suggestion. While he acknowledges some differences in perspective, there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 49.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Thank you. President Stern" does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Stern, without any opposing or conflicting statements.


Passage number 50.
  MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I am comfortable with what you have proposed for the organization and content of the meeting.  As you said, I think we ought to give it a shot in January, and we may learn from that experience that there are some ways to improve it, but I am certainly comfortable in starting with that.  The only other thing I would add is that I have tried to give some thought as to whether we could set some metric or numerical objective for the balance sheet, the base, reserves, or something that would relate in a meaningful way to our objectives and would help address this issue. So far all I can say is that I have been stymied and have not been able to make any progress on how we would do that.  So I think by the nature of the fact that our tools and programs are not, at least on the basis of history, related to our objectives in any systematic way, we are going to have to do this as best we can judgmentally.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses comfort and agreement with the proposed organization and content of the meeting. They also mention trying to set a metric or numerical objective but express difficulty in doing so. However, there is no indication of disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 51.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" at the end indicates gratitude, but it doesn't imply any opinion or disagreement.


Passage number 52.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I really found this proposal of yours to be very helpful because my views have been evolving on this.  It is much more complicated, difficult, and interesting than even I guessed.  So I think our thinking will evolve on this, and it is an experiment as you mentioned.  I had previously thought that somehow introducing, as President Plosser mentioned, some type of cap on the size of the balance sheet or some range for that would be useful.  But you have certainly convinced me that the size of these programs is going to vary depending on a number of endogenous developments as well as on what we do.  So that is probably not so fruitful. But in terms of the responsibility of this Committee, when we start talking about the exit strategy for winding down the programs and getting our balance sheet back toward where it was at the outset, I recognize that this is quite some time forward and we will be lucky when we get to that point.  We need to be thinking about how the balance sheet looks as we exit this, and that is going to be a real challenge. That is why I applaud all of the suggestions about how we look at these  programs with respect to that exit strategy.  What we need to do is think about what the due diligence ought to be as we consider the risk that we are facing for policy.  Depending on how this plays out, there could be capital losses.  I do not know how large, but then as we try to wind this down, we might find that there is a lot more liquidity out there.  Our liabilities are larger.  We can’t extinguish that on our own, and that would have price-level implications under certain scenarios that would be very uncomfortable for us.  Now, of course, the Treasury could help us out with issuing certain notes, but then that gets us into how we are tied to the Treasury, and so that is just more complicated. Still I think that your proposal—for Bill Dudley and the New York Desk to talk about financial developments and the programs, being as explicit as possible and in a consistent fashion describing these programs and identifying the key parameters that will help determine whether the exit strategy is going more favorably or if we are at greater risk—I think that would be very helpful. When we get to the policy discussion on these programs, we could try to come up with some risk scenarios as benchmarks for things that we fear greatly or things that would go well.  These could be low probability.  Obviously, we are thinking that they are low probability.  The worst case would probably be if inflationary expectations rose and the economy were still in the doldrums or worse.  That is not my outlook, but if there was a loss of confidence in the United States relative to the rest of the world—again, I see that this is low probability—how would that influence what our balance sheet looks like coming out.  Even if it is a low probability, if it has a really high cost to our institution, at least being explicit about the risk that we are accepting as a Committee for the Federal Reserve would serve us very well. I am pretty sure that we are headed in directions like this, but I am just interpreting this now in terms of the due diligence that we might expect if somebody were supervising an institution like this and what they would be asking us to do.  I think that this will probably evolve, and I found this to be very helpful.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement and appreciation for the proposal being discussed.


Passage number 53.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks.  I hope the kind of analysis that we can do for the Committee will be complementary with improving our explanation for the public as we develop metrics and criteria.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing a hope that the analysis they can do for the Committee will be complementary to improving their explanation for the public, as they develop metrics and criteria.


Passage number 54.
 MS. DUKE. Mr. Chairman, as we have a number of different programs, all of which have different life cycles, I wonder if we might look at managing our balance sheet in the same way our financial institutions do.  That would be that we would communicate in terms of expectations and in terms of a strategy so that we would have a starting point, which would be wherever our balance sheet was at our meeting.  Then we might also adopt or at least discuss an expectation as to where that balance sheet is headed in the different subcategories.  For instance, in a bank you tend to talk of increasing or decreasing the loan portfolio at various levels.  In some of the programs, it might be an expectation of demand, and in others, it might be a specific decision as to supply.  But rather than discussing each proposal separately, we might actually take a look at the full balance sheet, if you will, and say in an intermeeting period that we would expect our balance sheet to move in this direction in terms of components.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a way to manage the balance sheet more effectively by adopting a strategy similar to financial institutions. They propose discussing expectations and the direction of the balance sheet in various subcategories, rather than discussing each proposal separately.


Passage number 55.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think that is a good suggestion.  But you said intermeeting period, and I think we would probably want to look at longer horizons as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing agreement and offering an additional idea, indicating a collaborative and constructive tone.


Passage number 56.
 MS. DUKE. And longer horizons as well.  But it would give some indication as to what we thought was going on with each type of program and the conditions that surrounded it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement providing information about the potential benefits of a program.


Passage number 57.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That’s a good suggestion.  Anybody else.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement acknowledging a good suggestion and then prompts others for their thoughts. The mention of President Fisher does not indicate any disagreement either.


Passage number 58.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, very quickly, Mr. Chairman, I think Governor Duke’s suggestion is very good, both short and long term.  I just want to thank you for the fairness of what you are suggesting here. I think it goes a long way to being inclusive and certainly to avoid disenfranchising the Committee, which is no one’s intention.  Like Gary, I’m stymied at trying to  figure out a metric.  But I think the important point is that we will at least be having a full-throated discussion of the interactions and the monetary consequences of our initiatives, and I just want to thank you for the proposal that you have made.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of the speaker expressing gratitude and agreement with the suggestions made by Governor Duke and the Chairman of the Committee.


Passage number 59.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you" and the mention of President Bullard do not indicate any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 60.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just following up a bit on some of these comments, I was wondering if you thought that some kind of metric like the permanent component or the consistent component of the expansion of the balance sheet is really what we are thinking about in a lot of these comments.  Maybe that is the kind of measure that we are trying to put together. A lot of your comments and everybody’s comments are that there is much reversibility in many of these programs.  They are temporary programs intended to address the financial crisis, and they will go away once conditions return closer to normal.  But there might be components that are substantial and are harder to reverse, and somehow we would like to get metrics about that so that we have some sense of what we are doing in terms of price-level implications or inflation implications over the medium term.  I do not know if you think something like that is sort of where we are headed, or is that just too difficult to get a handle on.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question and statement made by Mr. Bullard seeking clarification and potential agreement on the use of metrics to measure the long-term effects of certain programs.


