Passage number 1.
 Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on   March 17-18, 2009  March 17, 2009—Afternoon Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon and happy St. Patrick’s Day, everybody.  I’d like to start by welcoming Governor Tarullo to his first non-video [laughter] FOMC meeting.  Dan has been here for a while, and he’s already making very substantial contributions.  We’re happy to welcome him to the table.  I’ll also mention that we will have a dinner tonight, and our special guest will be Randy Kroszner.  This is a joint Board–FOMC meeting, so I need a motion to close the Board meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any specific points of contention or disagreement. It mainly contains introductory remarks and mentions a special guest.


Passage number 2.
 MR. KOHN. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement indicating that someone named Mr. Kohn has made a motion.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  The first item on the agenda is Desk operations and liquidity programs.  The FOMC asked for lots of information, and now you’re going to be sorry. [Laughter] We have a record number of presenters who are going to cover a range of issues relating to our balance sheet, our lending programs, and a variety of policy options. In order to make sure this is not a three-day meeting, I’d like you to hold your non-clarifying questions till the end. If you have clarifying questions, by all means ask them, but at the end we’ll have an opportunity for full Q&A for the presenters.  So let me turn it over now to Trish Mosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The mention of "laughter" suggests a light-hearted tone, but there is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Trish, does that proposal require any approval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking for clarification about the approval process for a proposal.


Passage number 5.
 MS. MOSSER. It does not, according to the authorization—but I’ll bow to Debbie for greater wisdom on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges their lack of knowledge on the subject and defers to another individual for further insight.


Passage number 6.
 MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, may I ask just one question on exhibit 17.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Fisher wants to ask a question about exhibit 17.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Surely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "surely" indicates a sense of agreement or certainty, suggesting that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 8.
 MR. FISHER. This is calendar year 2009.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a fact.


Passage number 9.
 MS. MOSSER. Yes, correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because the response, "Yes, correct," simply acknowledges agreement with what was said.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 10.
 MR. NELSON. As Trish noted, the subscription for the first TALF operation begins today.  The loans requested between now and Thursday will settle on March 25, exactly four months after we first announced the program.  Those months were spent canvassing potential ABS issuers and investors to determine the program design characteristics that would be most successful, evaluating the risks of the program and developing the associated controls, and working out the back-office arrangements. Nevertheless, the size of the initial TALF subscription is going to be modest, in part because potential borrowers are uneasy using the TALF to finance ABS purchases. Potential borrowers and primary dealers have largely been unable to work out mutually acceptable customer arrangements.  A particular sticking point seems to be assigning responsibility for the risk that a potential borrower is determined to be ineligible for the program at the eleventh hour, leaving the primary dealer, who is typically the underwriter, responsible for funding the issue.  Investors are also reportedly concerned that participation in the program will expose them to government interference in their business, a fear apparently confirmed on Friday when it became more widely understood that recipients of 13(3) loans will be subject to tighter restrictions when hiring noncitizens.  We are trying to facilitate agreements between potential borrowers and primary dealers, we are seeking to provide as much clarity as possible on the issue of hiring noncitizens, and we are addressing other issues as they arise. We continue to hope that participants will grow more comfortable with the program over time.  I note that revisions to the FAQs to help clarify some issues are going on right now.   The subscription that starts today is for the TALF program as initially announced.  The New York Fed will be extending three-year nonrecourse loans against newly  issued triple-A-rated auto, credit card, and student loan ABS and ABS guaranteed by the Small Business Administration.  The monthly operations will continue through this December unless extended by the Board.  The program has a $200 billion ceiling and is supported by $20 billion in credit protection from the Treasury. As you all know, the Board is prepared to consider increasing the size of the program up to $1 trillion, supported by up to $100 billion in credit protection from the Treasury. The expansion would entail widening the list of eligible collateral to encompass much of the universe of newly issued triple-A-rated collateralized obligations, for the most part backed by newly and recently issued loans.  Staff at the Board, New York Fed, Chicago Fed, Atlanta Fed, and the Treasury have been evaluating specific asset classes for possible inclusion in the program and have been developing prospective terms and conditions.  We are concentrating first on the largest asset classes and will recommend specific categories of securities for inclusion on a flow basis as we complete our reviews. As a first step in that expansion, we recommend that the Board approve adding four categories of ABS to the list of eligible collateral, starting with the April operation. The four categories are the first to be recommended because they have relatively straightforward structures similar to those already taken, allowing us to evaluate them quickly. Although they are smaller asset classes than the consumer ABS already accepted, they are the largest among the securities that can be evaluated quickly. The first three are the principal types of ABS that were excluded from the initial program because they are not backed by consumer loans:  ABS backed by loans or leases relating to business equipment, ABS backed by leases of vehicle fleets, and ABS backed by revolving lines of credit used to finance showroom inventories.  The fourth is ABS backed by the credit provided by residential mortgage servicers when homeowners miss payments.  Mortgage servicers have found credit increasingly difficult and expensive to obtain.  Accepting the ABS at the TALF should improve the servicers’ ability to work with homeowners to prevent avoidable foreclosures. All the assets proposed to be accepted will have maturities of three years or less, resulting in a good fit for the three-year term of the TALF loans.  The proposed new collateral classes are of roughly equivalent risk to the types already accepted.  After applying the recommended haircuts, which range from 8 to 13 percent, the risk to the Federal Reserve should be similar to the de minimis risk associated with the types of ABS already accepted as TALF collateral. We estimate that accepting the new categories of ABS would increase demand for TALF loans through December by $30 billion to $130 billion.  If the Board approves the additions, we would release revised terms and conditions and FAQs for the program on Thursday. We are also evaluating the other remaining major collateralized asset classes for inclusion under the TALF, for example, CMBS and non-agency RMBS.  Subject to Board approval, terms and conditions for these asset classes could be announced as 2 Materials used by Messrs. Gagnon and Reifschneider are appended to this document (appendix 2). early as mid-April.  Staff members have held extensive discussions with issuers, investors, and rating agencies about several asset categories and have narrowed down the scope of securities that we might recommend accepting.  For instance, CMBS would likely include those backed by solidly underwritten existing mortgages and by mortgages that are being refinanced, and RMBS would likely include those backed by mortgages exceeding the conforming loan limit and possibly mortgages to near-prime borrowers. Because a number of the assets envisioned for the expansion are more complicated than those currently taken or thus far proposed to be taken at the TALF, staff members are planning to recommend that a collateral agent be hired to assist with underwriting and that a portfolio manager be hired to monitor the assets accepted. Staff members are also evaluating the use of the TALF to address the legacy asset problem.  The Treasury has proposed that the Federal Reserve accept at the TALF older securities that were rated triple-A when issued but that may or may not still be rated triple-A. One reason to expand the TALF to legacy assets would be to increase demand for, and hence the prices of, the eligible assets, thereby bolstering the balance sheets of financial institutions. Another reason would be to remove the eligible assets from the balance sheets of their current holders, leaving those firms with cleaner, more transparent balance sheets and an improved capacity to attract new equity from private sources. In the Treasury’s proposed structure, the legacy TALF loans have five-year terms, but in other ways the facility resembles the existing TALF. Staff members have analyzed the feasibility of the legacy TALF proposal for a few asset classes, specifically 2005- to 2008-vintage CMBS still rated triple-A and subprime and Alt-A RMBS rated triple-A at origination.  Our preliminary assessment is that, for many of these securities, haircuts and other terms could be set that would adequately protect the Federal Reserve and the Treasury but would nevertheless elicit sufficient investor demand to be helpful.  We have concluded, though, that it would be necessary in some cases to set haircuts on a security-by-security basis.  Nevertheless, we believe that we could operate the program at sufficient scale and with sufficient speed by hiring an outside contractor.   Joe Gagnon and Dave Reifschneider will now discuss large-scale asset purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. Potential borrowers and primary dealers are unable to work out mutually acceptable customer arrangements, which is causing a sticking point in the TALF program. Additionally, investors are concerned about government interference in their business and there is disagreement about the risk and eligibility for potential borrowers.


Passage number 11.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Before you start, let me just say that I’ll give a briefing on the Treasury’s plans and all of these issues after the presentations here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is simply providing information about what they will be doing after the presentations. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 12.
 MR. GAGNON.2  Dave Reifschneider and I will review the papers on large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) that were sent to the Committee last week.  Considerable evidence indicates that policy-induced changes in the supply of long-term bonds affect bond yields. As noted in the top panel of your first exhibit, a memo circulated to the FOMC last December reviewed the economic literature on this question and  reported that a Federal Reserve purchase of $500 billion of long-term Treasury securities could plausibly reduce the 10-year Treasury yield by 20 to 100 basis points.  Such a purchase would also be expected to lower long-term private yields.  Generally speaking, public and private long-term debt markets are closely linked, and correlations of changes in yields across these markets have historically been very high. However, in recent months these correlations have declined noticeably, raising the possibility that spillovers across markets may currently be lower than normal. The middle panel presents evidence on the effects of recent central bank communications on bond yields. On November 25 (the first column) the Federal Reserve announced a program to purchase $600 billion of agency debt and agency MBS. On December 1 (the second column) Chairman Bernanke stated that the Federal Reserve was considering purchasing substantial quantities of long-term Treasury securities. On December 16, the FOMC stated that it stood ready to expand its purchases of agency securities and confirmed that it was considering large-scale purchases of Treasuries.  On each of these occasions, the 10-year Treasury yield and long-term private yields fell substantially.  On January 28, the FOMC did not indicate any change in its stance toward purchasing long-term Treasuries, whereas market participants reportedly attributed a significant probability to such a move.  Long-term yields rose markedly.  None of these moves appears to be attributable to economic news. As Trish mentioned, on March 5, the Bank of England announced that it plans to purchase £75 billion of mainly long-term sterling Treasury securities.  The final column shows that a range of public and private long-term yields fell sharply after the Bank of England’s announcement. Household mortgage rates are quite a bit stickier than yields on traded securities, which makes them unsuitable for inclusion in the table.  However, as shown in the bottom panel, most of the decline in Treasury yields since mid-November (the red line) has passed through to conforming 30-year mortgage rates (the black line).  I’ll now turn the presentation over to Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is presenting evidence and observations related to the effects of large-scale asset purchases on bond yields.


Passage number 13.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. The top panel of your next exhibit reviews the basic channels through which buying agency MBS or long-term Treasury securities potentially influences the real economy.  The primary mechanism is through a broad improvement in financial conditions.  As Joe discussed, such purchases reduce yields on the targeted securities. In addition, the evidence suggests that these reductions spill over to yields on corporate bonds and other long-term instruments; if so, these interest rate movements should spark higher equity prices and a lower real exchange rate. In turn, household spending, business investment, and net exports should strengthen in response to lower borrowing costs, higher wealth, and greater international price competitiveness. As illustrated in the middle panel, the stimulus from an LSAP program hinges on the extent of financial spillover.  The table shows a sequence of predictions from the FRB/US model for the response of real GDP to purchasing a further $500 billion in agency MBS, assuming successively greater spillovers.  As shown in line 1, even though the program is assumed to lower MBS yields and mortgage rates by 75 basis points, the boost to the level of real GDP would be small in the absence of any spillover to other financial markets.  But if, as in line 2, the fall in MBS yields leads to lower corporate bond yields and other interest rates, the boost to the level of real GDP climbs to ½ percent by 2011.  Expanding the spillovers yet further to the stock market (line 3) and the real exchange rate (line 4) more than doubles the amount of stimulus, to roughly 1 percent by 2011. Other simulations, not shown here, suggest that the stimulus provided by purchases of long-term Treasury securities also is highly sensitive to the extent of financial spillover. But if such purchases were to reduce the general level of interest rates, boost equity prices, and lower the dollar, then the resultant stimulus to real activity would be only modestly lower than that provided by an MBS-only program, as indicated in the memo line of the table. As noted in the bottom left panel, these FRB/US simulations do not capture all the potential ways in which an LSAP program could stimulate real activity.  For example, lower mortgage rates could boost home prices, thereby stimulating household wealth and spending. Theoretical calculations suggest that a percentage point decline in interest rates could boost house prices as much as 15 percent; however, empirical estimates suggest that the increase might be closer to 2½ percent.  In addition, lower interest rates might, via mortgage refinancing, transfer income to cash-strapped borrowers from more affluent households who are net lenders.  Calculations suggest that such income transfers could provide a modest boost to consumption.  As indicated by the red line in the figure to the right, when refi effects and 2½ percent higher house prices are incorporated into the FRB/US simulations, the stimulus from a $1 trillion LSAP program—evenly divided between Treasuries and MBS—rises noticeably. Effects are larger yet if house prices increase by the theoretical 15 percent (the green line). Turning to your next exhibit, these results imply that asset purchases have the potential to compensate for the inability of conventional monetary policy to ease further. As noted to the left, the staff assumes that the federal funds rate will remain essentially at the zero bound for several years, as illustrated by the black line to the right. But unconstrained “optimal” monetary policy would call for the fed funds rate to fall even lower, were that possible (the red line).  To overcome this shortfall in conventional monetary policy would require additional fiscal and unconventional monetary actions. The middle panels illustrate how the Greenbook outlook for unemployment and inflation might change if the Committee opted to expand the current program of buying agency debt and MBS by either $500 billion (the red line) or $1 trillion (the green line). Under the smaller program, all the additional purchases are MBS; under the larger program, purchases are evenly divided between MBS and long-term Treasury securities. Both programs are assumed to generate a full range of financial spillovers but no boost to home prices or any increase in consumption from   refi-related income transfers; in addition, monetary policy in both cases is set “optimally,” subject to the zero lower bound constraint.  As shown to the left, both programs limit the rise in the unemployment rate and cause it to fall more quickly than in the baseline (the black line).  All told, the larger program fills roughly half of the gap between the staff forecast and what hypothetically would occur under unconstrained monetary policy (the blue line).  As shown to the right, both programs would also mitigate the fall in inflation that is projected in the baseline. The bullet points at the bottom offer a few caveats to this analysis.  First, these results depend importantly on extensive financial spillover effects; unfortunately, empirical evidence on the size of stock market and exchange rate effects is slim.  Second, gauging the economic effects of further asset purchases is quite difficult under current conditions, even if extensive financial spillovers do occur.  In particular, households and firms may be reluctant to increase spending in the face of so much uncertainty, and credit constraints may limit their ability to respond to improved financial conditions; alternatively, cash-strapped households may be more responsive than normal to any boost to income provided by an LSAP program.  Finally, the effectiveness of an LSAP program in stopping an unwelcome disinflation might be greater than the simulations indicate if large-scale asset purchases directly bolster the Fed’s credibility.  I’ll now turn the presentation back to Joe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is presenting information and analysis without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 14.
 MR. GAGNON. Exhibit 4 presents some risks that might arise from expanding LSAP programs.  The most important risk, which is covered in the upper panel, is whether large asset holdings might threaten the Federal Reserve’s ability in the future to achieve its monetary policy objectives.  Spence Hilton will be discussing this issue in the context of the overall balance sheet of the Federal Reserve, and Brian Madigan will discuss potential new policy tools to ameliorate this risk.  Large-scale holdings of marketable assets are not likely to constrain the Federal Reserve’s policy stance in the future. With short-term interest rates pinned at the zero bound, asset purchases provide macroeconomic stimulus, and asset sales provide macroeconomic restraint.  If it were deemed necessary to raise short-term interest rates, and holdings of long­term assets appeared to conflict with this goal, these assets could be sold off or potentially used as collateral for reserve-draining short-term operations.  However, outright sales of long-term assets could lead to a financial loss; and some of the tools that could be used to drain reserves without engaging in outright sales are still under development. Moving to the lower panel, even though fiscal revenue is not an objective of monetary policy, it may be of interest to note that LSAPs are significantly increasing the income generated by the Federal Reserve.  This is because the interest rate earned on long-term assets is much greater than the marginal interest rate paid on liabilities.  However, by increasing the leverage and maturity mismatch of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, LSAPs increase the volatility of future income. Your final exhibit discusses strategies for pursuing LSAPs.  The upper panel reviews three classes of long-term security that the Federal Reserve is authorized to   purchase: Treasuries, agency debt, and agency MBS.  As Dave discussed, under current market conditions, we believe that MBS purchases provide a somewhat greater macroeconomic stimulus than equivalent purchases of the other two classes.  This primarily reflects our view that MBS purchases will reduce private interest rates more than an equivalent volume of Treasury purchases.  However, in light of the considerable uncertainty surrounding our estimates of the spillover effects across asset markets, including a significant share of Treasury securities and a modest share of agency debt in any expansion of Federal Reserve purchases may be a prudent strategy. The lower left panel shows that the spread of mortgage rates over MBS yields rose in December with the surge of refinancing applications.  These two series have been highly correlated in the past. The staff projects that current low mortgage rates and the Administration’s new Making Home Affordable program are likely to create another, more sustained, surge in refinancing applications in coming weeks.  As discussed in the panel to the right, there are some potential actions the Federal Reserve could take to hold down the spread of mortgage rates over MBS yields and thus enhance the macroeconomic impact of its policies.  These include focusing purchases on new-production MBS to support new loans rather than seasoned loans.  Another possibility, if it were determined to be consistent with the Federal Reserve’s statutory authority, is selling put options on forward MBS to help mortgage originators hedge the uncertainty of their application pipelines.  Perhaps even more unconventionally, the Federal Reserve could provide some assurance through its communications to the market that low mortgage rates are likely to persist for several months or more. This might reduce volatility in rates and thus reduce originator hedging costs. It might also ease the crush of homeowners trying to refinance at the same time, which strains the currently reduced capacity of mortgage originators and puts upward pressure on mortgage rates. Thank you. Nathan Sheets will now discuss foreign currency liquidity swaps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily presents information and potential strategies related to expanding LSAP programs.


Passage number 15.
  MR. MADIGAN. As Spence Hilton noted, it could be very useful to have an additional tool for draining substantial volumes of reserves from the banking system and shrinking the monetary base.  Either the issuance of Fed bills or an enhanced supplementary financing program run by the Treasury on behalf of the Federal Reserve could be particularly helpful. The staff has drafted legislative language that would authorize these tools.  Because the Treasury would have a substantial interest in such programs, and because we would need the Treasury’s support in advancing such legislation, we have been discussing this subject with the Treasury.  Our presumption is that we would not seek legislation both for Fed bills and for an enhanced SFP.  Rather, we and the Treasury together would raise both possibilities with the relevant congressional committees to discuss the substance and the political prospects for each. On the basis of those discussions, one approach or the other would be advanced. To give adequate assurance to the Federal Reserve and to the markets that these tools will provide the capability to tighten monetary policy as necessary and when necessary, the tools would have to be effectively under the Federal Reserve’s control.  Two possible constraints are of particular concern:  the public debt ceiling, and possible interference by a future Treasury. To ensure that a binding debt ceiling does not disrupt the conduct of monetary policy, Fed bills or Treasury bills issued under an enhanced SFP program would have to be excluded from the debt ceiling.  And to ensure that a future Treasury could not block the implementation of appropriate monetary policy, the Federal Reserve either will need to be able to issue its own obligations as it sees fit to carry out its statutory mandate, or it will need to be able to direct the Treasury to do so as its proxy.  However, the Congress may see the exclusion of Fed bills or SFP obligations from the debt ceiling as an unwarranted dilution of the congressional responsibility to appropriate government monies and to authorize the issuance of federal debt.  And we recognize that the Treasury is concerned about the potential for issuance of such securities to interfere with the Treasury’s responsibility for managing the public debt.   Draft legislation prepared by the staff would assign the primary responsibility within the Federal Reserve for the issuance of Fed bills or SFP bills to the Federal Open Market Committee.  This seems appropriate because the main purpose of the tool, as we see it, is to ensure the capability of the FOMC to tighten monetary policy when appropriate. We see Fed bills as a tool on the liabilities side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet that would essentially be symmetric with our asset-side open market operations. The legislation should also address several other key issues.  In that regard, we have included the following specific elements in the draft legislation we sent to the Treasury:  First, Fed bills would be full faith and credit obligations of the United States in order to maximize their acceptability to investors, to make them as close  substitutes as possible for Treasury securities, and to minimize the interest expense of such obligations.  Second, for similar reasons, Fed bills should not be subject to state and local income taxes.  Third, the Treasury has suggested a statutory maximum maturity of Fed bills in order to limit interference with Treasury debt management.  We have recommended a maximum maturity of one year.  Treasury staff members prefer a shorter maximum term.  Finally, we have recommended that the Fed not be required to notify the Treasury a fixed number of days before issuing Fed bills or scheduling issuance of SFP bills, but rather that the legislation indicate qualitatively that issuance of Fed bills or SFP bills should minimize interference with the conduct of the Treasury’s regular debt management responsibilities. As President Plosser and others have noted, there are pros and cons to the Fed bills and expanded SFP proposals.  And even with the support of the Administration, the political prospects for such legislation are not clear at this stage. It is possible that the Federal Reserve may need to accept some changes to the draft legislation to obtain passage. One possible change that might help make the program acceptable to all interested parties would be a sunset provision under which the authority to issue such obligations expires after, say, five years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage discusses the potential usefulness of additional tools for draining reserves from the banking system and shrinking the monetary base. It also addresses potential constraints and concerns related to the implementation of these tools. The passage concludes by mentioning the possibility of accepting changes to the draft legislation in order to obtain passage.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you for a very thorough set of reports.  Out of those reports, there was, I believe, one action item we’ll come back to—besides ratifying the open market operations—which is the swap proposal that Nathan discussed.  But let’s open now for questions to any of the staff.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude for the reports and mentioning a specific item that they would like to discuss further. They then open the floor for questions.


Passage number 17.
 MR. FISHER. If I can go back to the beginning, or almost the beginning, and ask some questions about the TALF in terms of lessons learned—I understand that Barclays has put together a pass-through certificate program that seems to have some acceptance, at least in the hedge fund community. Could you bring us up to date on that and what it means in terms of the functioning of the TALF.  Does it facilitate it.  Does it make it more complicated.  Did you expect it.  And is it something that’s going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a request for information and clarification.


Passage number 18.
  MR. NELSON. I’ll do the best I can. First of all, this is something that we’ve been allowing the private sector to develop. It’s not like some of these other instances where we’ve worked with the private sector to develop special purpose vehicles like the MMIFF.  These are private sector efforts.  These things first came up in discussions when we were trying to think of ways to make the program useful for real money investors.  Part of the challenge in the TALF is that the objective is to encourage an investor class that normally hasn’t invested in asset-backed securities to move into that space, namely, leveraged investors.  Traditionally, asset-backed securities have been held by real money investors, like pension funds and insurance companies.  So we were trying to think of ways that the program could be made more attractive for those investors. One way to do that would be to have a special purpose vehicle purchase the asset-backed securities and take the loan and raise the haircut part of that transaction by issuing equity.  That equity could conceivably be a tradable security which could be invested in by real money investors. When we looked at that a month or so ago, it didn’t necessarily seem as if it was going to be successful, though my understanding is that it has gotten more momentum in recent weeks.  In particular, the one thing that I think would really make it take off would be if those equity tranches could be rated by the credit rating agencies, and I am not sure where that effort stands. Another reason these special purpose vehicles came up was our requirement that we only lend to U.S. entities. Many hedge funds are actually foreign entities, but we viewed it as acceptable (and I may not get this exactly right) if there was a U.S. arm of that entity with a U.S. operation—an actual person, a manager there—that would be a U.S. entity that we could lend to.  So to some extent there was an effort to set up vehicles along those lines. Then, lastly, there has been interest in potentially insulating the financial institution from some things like the H-1B   visa issue that I just mentioned or some other consequences of the program itself.  I don’t think any of these things are likely to be moving forward for this subscription, but rather they are continuing to be reviewed by the private sector and being developed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward explanation of the development and considerations of special purpose vehicles in the TALF program.


Passage number 19.
 MR. FISHER. But just so I understand this, let’s assume that this proceeds.  I perceive it as having significant momentum in the investment community.  The SPVs would be performing basically a clearing function. They create a CUSIP-identified tradable security.  The people that could buy those securities would not have to worry about all the ramifications of the TARP in terms of the political ramifications that seem to be spooking the hedge fund and other communities—is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is seeking clarification and confirming an understanding with the other person.


Passage number 20.
 MR. NELSON. Well, it’s not clear, and I think that’s the rub right now.  The folks that are concerned about compliance, I think, have written our regulations to say we will look through such structures to the ownership entity to make sure that the compliance protocols have been followed. On the other hand, when we say whom we’re actually lending to, I think that language has been more along the lines of—in particular, say, for whether or not it’s a U.S. entity—“it’s okay to set up one of these entities.”  And because those two efforts are not yet completely lined up, that’s why I believe these things are still under development and there are still open questions that need to be answered before it’s clear that they will be able to go forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Nelson is discussing the lack of clarity and alignment between regulations regarding compliance protocols and lending to certain entities. He acknowledges that these issues are still under development and there are open questions that need to be addressed.


Passage number 21.
 MR. FISHER. Would you say that this search for new engineering is a function of the discomfort of the hedge fund community and the investment community with the TALF, given the TARP restrictions that are placed on top.  I’m just trying to understand where this came from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply trying to understand the reason for the search for new engineering in relation to TALF and TARP restrictions.


Passage number 22.
 MR. NELSON. I think it came up for several of these reasons.  That’s certainly one of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Nelson simply expresses his opinion that there were multiple reasons for something, and one of those reasons is mentioned.


Passage number 23.
MR. FISHER. But I can see where this could also certainly be suspicious politically.  I’m just trying to understand how this TALF thing is going to unfold, because there seems to be some momentum in this direction, at least from the standpoint of Simpson Thacher, who are the lawyers behind it. Forget about the dealer relationship to the Fed—it’s between the dealers and the investment community where there’s still this odd linkage here.  It’s becoming increasingly complicated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their understanding and confusion regarding the TALF (Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility) and its political implications. They are trying to grasp how the TALF will develop and pointing out the complexities involved, particularly in the relationship between dealers and the investment community.


Passage number 24.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. In terms of the order, I think the SPV was initially a device so that real money investors could get involved in the TALF.  But then, as all the political considerations became more severe over the last couple of weeks, people thought, “well, hey, we could also use it for this second purpose—to provide some distance from the government and the TARP restrictions.” But the original impetus was for real money accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply explaining the evolution of the SPV's purpose, starting with its initial intention for real money investors to get involved in the TALF, and then later using it as a means to provide distance from the government and TARP restrictions.


Passage number 25.
 MR. FISHER. One of the reasons I’m raising it is that I think we’ve got to be careful not to get the cart before the horse here, and in the presentation, I realized, just looking down the path, we’re talking about legacy assets.  We’re going to have to get the first setup correct before we go further down the path. At least I would recommend that to the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing a cautionary concern and recommending a particular course of action to the committee.


Passage number 26.
 MR. NELSON. Yes, and we have remained very focused on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Nelson affirms that they have remained focused on something without any indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 27.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That’s very good advice.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "That's very good advice" implies agreement and positive sentiment. "President Hoenig" is not providing any conflicting information or opposing view.


Passage number 28.
 MR. HOENIG. Just a clarifying question. Can you quickly give me a matrix that says what TALF issuance we’re talking about and how much, starting with the original $200 billion and then the various add-ons, up to the total—just so I understand what we’re talking about in each issuance or expansion of the TALF program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and understanding of the different issuances or expansions of the TALF program.


Passage number 29.
 MR. NELSON. At this time, our estimate is that, over the life of the program, the collateral that was approved initially—that’s beginning today, and that’s consumer ABS and Small Business Administration ABS—that should amount, we think, to $100 billion.  So we won’t make it to $200 billion unless the program is expanded.  The additional asset classes that we’ve proposed to the Board for inclusion, which would largely complete the asset-backed securities space, as well as mortgage servicer advances, would add another $30 billion.  So those combined would still not bring us to $200 billion.  The rest of the analysis is really very tentative. So our effort is to be as inclusive as possible, and we’re looking at the major collateralized high-quality asset classes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and estimates without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 30.
 MR. HOENIG. This would go all the way to legacy commercial-mortgage-backed securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement describing the involvement of legacy commercial-mortgage-backed securities.


Passage number 31.
 MR. NELSON. No. At this point I was thinking in terms of newly issued securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a statement made by Mr. Nelson about his thoughts on newly issued securities.


Passage number 32.
 MR. HOENIG. Newly issued. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that something is newly issued.


Passage number 33.
 MR. NELSON. The range that the teams have provided goes from $50 to $500 billion depending on a number of issues, including whether or not warehouse financing is available, whether or not investors can grow comfortable with the rather extreme mismatch between the maturity of the TALF loans and the maturity of the underlying securities. So that last step conceivably would still not take us to the $1 trillion.  But it is, I must say, very uncertain because they’re still just scoping out those securities.  Now, legacy assets would then add on to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the range of estimates provided by teams, expressing uncertainty about the final amount and mentioning additional factors that may impact the final figure.


Passage number 34.
 MR. HOENIG. That’s helpful. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses gratitude for the information received.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context. The given statement, "President Lacker," does not provide enough information to ascertain whether there is contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 36.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have several questions and a comment at the end. First, a compliment to the New York staff:  I thought that the material distributed ahead of time outlining all of the asset programs was very informative, very well laid out, and very succinct. My compliments to you on that work.I have a question for Ms. Mosser. This has to do with the comparison between a program of agency and MBS purchases like we’ve been pursuing and what a program of U.S. Treasury purchases would look like.  My understanding is that you plan your announcements and the size of your purchases a little bit in advance.  Would we get any more flexibility by using Treasuries rather than MBS or are they pretty much the same.  Would you get a little more flexibility to vary the size of the purchases week to week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of compliments and a question for clarification.


Passage number 37.
 MS. MOSSER. It’s a different kind of flexibility.  In the mortgage-backed securities program, although we do buy across the curve in all coupons, we are focused very much on the TBA, or the forward delivery market, which trades weeks and months in advance of delivery.  If that’s the market that you’re trading and buying in, you have a huge amount of flexibility from day to day to respond to prices in that market and just to buy more forward contracts or fewer or do a dollar roll and offset some of those if you have to.  But then on delivery day you get, as we did last week, $160 billion of securities.  So in that sense of flexibility—can you respond daily to market events, for example, tighter spreads, narrower spreads.—it’s very easy to do.  That’s a very deep, liquid market; it’s a very homogeneous market, even though what you get delivered is fairly heterogeneous. In the Treasury market, it’s a different kind of flexibility.  We can buy in various parts of the Treasury curve.  In the mortgage market, it’s very hard to move around the mortgage yield curve easily, but it’s easy to do that in the Treasury curve.  So I’m not quite sure what you mean by flexibility. If you mean sheer quantity, they’re probably about the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply provides an explanation of the different types of flexibility in the mortgage-backed securities program and the Treasury market.


Passage number 38.
 MR. LACKER. Let me follow up.  When you buy Treasuries, when you do a coupon pass, do you settle the same day or next day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 39.
 MS. MOSSER. Next day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is simply stating a transition to the next day.


Passage number 40.
 MR. LACKER. Next day. These MBS and agency securities—they settle once a month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that MBS and agency securities settle once a month. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 41.
  MS. MOSSER. Several times a month, but yes.  It depends on the type of security, but yes, basically once a month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply confirms the frequency of an unspecified activity.


Passage number 42.
 MR. LACKER. I see. So if I looked at it from the point of view of what happens to bank reserves, it’s just a once-a-month hit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 43.
 MS. MOSSER. Well, it’s once a month per type of security.  So there are actually several days a month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing information about the frequency of a certain activity.


Passage number 44.
 MR. LACKER. I see. So it’s staggered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is simply stating that he understands the situation.


Passage number 45.
 MS. MOSSER. But it’s very periodic and very, very predictable when they’re going to settle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the predictability of settlement.


Passage number 46.
 MR. LACKER. Right. For Spence, I was very interested in the forecast of the balance sheet, and we’ve been talking about that for the last couple of meetings.  You have the forecast going up in a straight line to the end of the year, and I take it that’s just because you forecasted the end-of-year balance sheet, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply seeking clarification on the forecasted balance sheet.


Passage number 47.
 MR. HILTON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of someone acknowledging or agreeing with something.


Passage number 48.
 MR. LACKER. Do you have a sense of what it’s going to do between now and the next meeting.  Have you done that exercise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asked by Mr. Lacker to the other person.


Passage number 49.
 MR. HILTON. Not really systematically in the way this is put together.  Our sense, though, between now and the next meeting, is that what we’re going to be buying is fairly predictable. I’m not sure what the settlement dates are, but if the settlement dates were smooth, we would be expanding pretty much at the same pace.  I’d expect the liquidity facilities, though, to hang out where they are and maybe, on balance, come off a little bit further, barring some sort of a stress period. So I would anticipate that we’re predominantly in an expansion phase right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing their own perspective and opinion on what they expect to happen in the future.


Passage number 50.
   MR. LACKER. So, in principle, if I asked you to write down numerically, as you did for the end of the year, a forecast for the monetary base at the next meeting, say, you could do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if the person can provide a numerical forecast for the monetary base at the next meeting.


Passage number 51.
 MR. HILTON. Yeah—with a nice confidence interval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "with a nice confidence interval" is simply providing additional information and does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 52.
 MR. LACKER. Subject to the usual caveats.  [Laughter] A question for Mr. Nelson.  You named a bunch of asset categories that you’re considering for the TALF.  What criteria are you using to pick those asset classes. I mean, what sort of principle or objective is driving those choices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question being asked.


Passage number 53.
 MR. NELSON. Our objective is to take as broad a set of assets as possible, consistent with choosing ones that can be taken efficiently, that we can figure out ways to take with acceptable risk to the Federal Reserve System and to the government.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The objective stated is clear and the speaker mentions taking assets with acceptable risk, indicating a prudent approach.


Passage number 54.
 MR. LACKER. But just ABS, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is simply confirming that the subject being discussed is ABS (Asset-Backed Securities).


Passage number 55.
 MR. NELSON. Well, all collateralized assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Nelson.


Passage number 56.
 MR. LACKER. Oh, collateralized assets. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of information or clarification.


Passage number 57.
 MR. NELSON. But of relatively simple, straightforward structures, so that we can manage and understand the risk—but, nevertheless, as wide a group as possible.  We’re just on the way to that at this stage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a process of managing and understanding risk in a wide group.


Passage number 58.
 MR. LACKER. Okay. I’m just curious.  It’s sort of striking.  The original impetus involved certain securitization markets, where I thought we were motivated by particular observations that suggested distress. Are the problems we see in markets widespread across securitization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing curiosity and making an observation about the original motivation for certain actions. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 59.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Separate from conforming mortgage markets, where we have a different program, all other ABS markets, to my knowledge, are pretty much shut down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Despite the use of the phrase "to my knowledge," the statement presents a clear contention that all other ABS markets, apart from conforming mortgage markets, are currently shut down.


Passage number 60.
 MR. LACKER. And then a question for Mr. Sheets.  You talked about moral hazard. This institution that you talked about—or any institution in this category—presumably has overseas operations in which they have liquid liabilities and less liquid assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 61.
 MR. SHEETS. Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage is a simple statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 62.
 MR. LACKER. And I think we talked about this at the last meeting, right.  That’s where you first briefed us on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 63.
 MR. SHEETS. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 64.
 MR. LACKER. So, over that period—it’s been almost two months now—could an institution like that have reduced its vulnerability to the possibility of having a funding problem in another currency. Could it have let its deposits run off, maybe sell the assets upstream to the parent. And if that’s true, then wouldn’t the presence of this program influence an institution’s incentives to take steps in the weeks ahead to protect against potential funding problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a hypothetical question and seeking clarification about the influence of a program on institutions' incentives.


Passage number 65.
 MR. SHEETS. That’s obviously a profoundly important question, and let me just address it at several different levels.  In terms of the specifics of that particular institution, one of the things that’s been a challenge for us is to get good data—for a range of such institutions.  So it’s hard to state categorically what this institution or other institutions have done with their balance sheets over the last couple of months. But I do think it’s very telling that in mid-February the stresses on the financial sector and the banks were, if anything, even more pronounced than they were in mid-January.  Yet we didn’t hear the same kinds of reports, and we didn’t observe the same stresses as in January, which may very well point to exactly the phenomenon that you’re indicating here—that the institution did things to reduce its vulnerability to these sorts of pressures.  So I think that is going on, absolutely.That raises the question of whether this sort of a facility would dull those sorts of incentives. As I said in my remarks, we’ve done everything we possibly can to structure this in such a way that it would be attractive to an institution only as a very last resort—the fees that we’re charging, the additional collateral, and so on and so forth.  Nevertheless, we can imagine instances where the drain on the foreign currency funding might be very intense, and even a well-managed institution might have problems raising sufficient collateral and resources on its own. We can also imagine instances where the foreign central bank is not enthusiastic about lending against even good collateral for an institution.  The Bank of Japan, in particular, remembers an instance from the late ‘90s when the Federal Reserve was not enthusiastic about lending to Japanese institutions because of what were perceived as political pressures in the United States, and they’ve asked us to consider the possibility that something similar might happen to them, and they wouldn’t be able to lend to U.S. institutions.  So notwithstanding the moral hazard risk, which, as I said, we’ve done everything we can in this proposal to attenuate, we still see that there would be plausible states of nature where it would be prudent to have these foreign currency swap lines in place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 66.
 MR. LACKER. If I could just follow up, Mr. Chairman, I take it that the institutions, the half dozen you referred to, are bank holding companies in the United States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a direct question and does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 67.
 MR. SHEETS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. The presence of "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 68.
 MR. LACKER. What steps have we taken—particularly regarding the one you referred to as being especially vulnerable—to encourage them to reduce their vulnerability to funding risks in foreign currencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 69.
 MR. SHEETS. I would have to defer to the regulators.  I don’t know if Trish has some information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sheets is simply stating that he does not have the information and defers to the regulators for it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 70.
   MS. MOSSER. I also would defer to the supervisors on this.  But we have had conversations with the supervisory teams of a couple of these institutions (not just the one) since we decided that it was worth investigating, and nearly all of them are deleveraging abroad as they are deleveraging here and attempting to reduce their liquidity risk.  I think that eliminating that risk in a really short period of time is probably unrealistic, considering the size and scope of operations, including very traditional banking operations—which, we all know, are subject to runs—that several of these institutions have in many countries.  And many of those countries do not have, for example, the deposit insurance schemes that the United States does, which means the institutions are more vulnerable there.  I think the possibility of completely shutting down and eliminating the risk in a short period of time is probably unrealistic, although movement in that direction is a good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Mosser, mentions that eliminating liquidity risk in a short period of time is unrealistic, while also stating that movement in that direction is a good idea. This suggests a disagreement or conflicting viewpoints on the feasibility and timing of risk reduction.


Passage number 71.
 MR. LACKER. Is it our sense that they’re doing all they could.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any sense of contention or disagreement. It simply states that "they" are doing all they could.


Passage number 72.
 MS. MOSSER. My impression is that they are moving in that direction.  I wouldn’t superimpose my views over the supervisors’ about whether they’re doing everything they can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their impression without expressing any contradiction or differing opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 73.
 MS. BAILEY. I’m not quite sure how to frame “all they can.”  I think the supervisors— particularly with the company that’s probably the most international of all—have clearly gone through their funding. It has set up appropriate funding mechanisms within those countries where they are being looked at, and they have taken good significant steps to try to address some of the vulnerabilities. They’ve had outreach meetings with the different central banks.  So during the last year, they have actually been taking a lot of aggressive steps to try to minimize the vulnerability associated with that.  But some of the organizations are big purchasers in foreign currencies. We just can’t shut that down that quickly, nor do we expect to.  It’s just not abelievable strategy for that funding mechanism.  But they’re looking more broadly both at the U.S. and abroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Bailey, acknowledges that the supervisors have taken steps to address vulnerabilities and minimize vulnerability associated with foreign currency purchases. However, she also disagrees with the idea of abruptly shutting down foreign currency funding and expresses that it is not a believable strategy. This disagreement is evident in her statement, "We just can’t shut that down that quickly, nor do we expect to."


Passage number 74.
 MR. LACKER. I guess I’m looking not for shutting them down, but for measures that could reduce the funding vulnerability, the liability–asset mismatch that gives rise to the risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion and asking for possible measures to reduce funding vulnerability.


Passage number 75.
 MS. BAILEY. They absolutely have been not only looking at those strategies, but also executing those strategies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that the strategies have been looked at and executed, indicating agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 76.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It consists of a speaker expressing gratitude.


Passage number 77.
 Chairman CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only states the positions of Chairman and President Plosser, but does not mention any disagreements or conflicts between them.


Passage number 78.
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A procedural question. We had seven presentations. Are we just going to do questions for now.  Are we going to have an opportunity to do a sort of go-around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It refers to a procedural question about the format of a meeting and does not contain any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 79.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. There will be a discussion period as well.  This is just for questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that there will be a discussion period without any indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 80.
 MR. PLOSSER. I just wanted to go by the rules.  On the large-scale asset purchases, I have a couple of questions about some of the underlying assumptions.  I was struck by the fact that the assumption was that, under an MBS purchase of $500 billion, the rates on corporates and Treasuries also go down. But the net effect of that, given the assumptions you made, was that corporate spreads rise by 20 basis points, whereas under a Treasury bill purchase, corporate spreads fall by 20 basis points. I’m puzzled about what model generates that kind of differential effect, and how much that might be driving some of the stimulation results that you’ve got.  I’m a little puzzled about what drives—well, I know what drives it; the numbers you put down drove it—but I didn’t know whether you thought that was internally consistent or whether there were economic mechanisms that you thought that was consistent with.   The second question I had was about the assumptions about the elasticities.  You’ve got a mortgage-backed security market that’s $7 or $8 trillion, somewhere in that neighborhood, you’ve got a $500 billion purchase—so that’s a little less than 10 percent of the marketplace— and you get a 75 basis point effect, whereas for long-term Treasuries you’ve got less than $2 trillion total and you do a $500 billion operation, and you only get a 30 or 50 basis point effect.  So there you’re participating in almost a third of the market, and in the other case only about 10 percent. It may be true that those are the right elasticities, but I’m wondering where those came from.  To get any effect in some of this stuff, you’ve got to have some sort of market segmentation going on so that you can play the yield curve game a little bit. The other question on that topic was related to President Lacker’s question.  The presumption of these programs, particularly the mortgage-backed purchases, is that there’s something amiss in the markets, that we’re trying to fix some intermediation problems, or there are some dysfunctions in those markets.  And yet it seemed to me that, as you expanded the so-called spillover effects and they got bigger and bigger and bigger, it goes against the very presumption of why you wanted to be in these markets in the first place—to try to promote intermediation and liquidity.  So I didn’t know how these two assumptions connected or reconciled with one another—how you could get both large spillover effects and maintain the presumption that these markets were dysfunctional. I wasn’t quite sure how those two pieces fit together. On the swaps, following President Lacker’s comments, I had some of the same questions.  It seems to me that you offered three reasons why these swaps might be needed.  One was this issue of not having enough collateral in the foreign country for the central bank to do the lending it wanted to do, and the second reason was the foreign central bank maybe wouldn’t accept the  U.S. bank’s collateral.  But the other reasons really had to do with the solvency of that institution. It seems to me that, from an operational point of view, if a bank is insolvent, it’s not clear we ought to be lending to them in the first place, so I’m not sure that’s a reason to be in this business. And given that it only applies to perhaps four or five banks, if it’s really a liquidity problem, it seems to me that doing this through the discount window is a much more natural way to think about what it is we’re doing and the problem we’re trying to solve.  You offered some concerns about how difficult that would be. I guess none of those seemed insurmountable to me.  And the fact of the matter is that we would probably be doing most of this lending out of New York anyway, so it’s not as if you’re going to have to worry about lots of the Reserve Banks necessarily having to get foreign currency. It just seemed to me that it might be a better way to go because (a) we do not want to lend to insolvent institutions and (b) the discount window seems appropriate for exactly that liquidity problem rather than designing another facility. The last question I have is about the announcement effects.  I worry that this is going to be interpreted by the markets as a veiled or not-so-veiled attempt to support one institution.  I think the markets will see through that very quickly.  I don’t know how to mitigate that if we decide to do it.  It could be viewed as a less than transparent effort on the part of this institution to support a particular institution, and I think that, in turn, may damage our credibility and damage our reputation in the marketplace.  I think if an institution is in trouble and we make the decision to help it in some way, then we ought to do it on its merits and not try to “back door” that solution through another mechanism.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, raises several questions and concerns about the underlying assumptions and economic mechanisms behind the large-scale asset purchases and swaps. He is puzzled about the differential effects on corporate spreads under different purchases, questions the assumptions made about market elasticities, and doubts the effectiveness and consistency of the programs and their impact on the markets. He also disagrees with the reasons for the swaps and suggests using the discount window instead. Additionally, he expresses concerns about the announcement effects and the potential perception that the institution is trying to support a specific institution.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 81.
 MR. GAGNON. If I could start with the first couple of questions, I think our views have been evolving somewhat as we’ve been working on this.  When I looked at the literature while I was working on the December memo, there wasn’t an agreed-upon way to normalize or scale   purchases like this. So what I did at the time was to take the most common approach, which was to look at the total size of the market across all maturities—and that was about $5 trillion for U.S. Treasuries. The idea was to consider a purchase over a broad range of maturities at the long end, say, maturities of more than three years, but I didn’t fine-tune it to segments or look at just the long end per se. You might want to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the phrase "our views have been evolving somewhat" and the statement that there wasn't an agreed-upon way to normalize or scale purchases. So different perspectives or approaches are being discussed.


Passage number 82.
 MR. PLOSSER. If you want to get a lot of response, it seems to me you’ve got to think about it as a segmented market of some kind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Plosser, offering a suggestion on how to elicit more response.


Passage number 83.
 MR. GAGNON. I have been moving in the direction that you’re thinking of about whether there are differential effects, but there’s just not an accepted view in the literature on how to do this—it isn’t even really discussed very much.  On the MBS market, if you take MBS and agency debt together and then net out the agency holdings of MBS, you get about $7 trillion.  But it’s not clear you should merge them in that way; if they were each treated separately, as two separate markets—agencies and MBS—those would each be smaller.  I wasn’t sure, I threw up my hands and said, “well, it’s roughly the same size.”  That’s how we got the $500 billion treated that way in each market.  Since we wrote the December memo, Treasury debt has gone up a lot; and it’s noted in our latest memo that, in fact, the range we get, which is quite large— 20 to 100 basis points—would need to be shifted down some, given that about $1 trillion of Treasuries have been issued just since we wrote the earlier memo.  So the ground is shifting beneath our feet. And I didn’t really pay attention to that until quite late in the process.  But these ranges are quite large. We just don’t know within a big range where the answer is. One final thing before I let Dave jump in is, given all of that, we still thought purchases of MBS, especially initially, would have a bigger effect on MBS yields than purchases of Treasuries would have on Treasury yields, because the MBS market was strained and spreadswere unusually high. We thought we could push the spreads down.  And they’re still on the high side historically, so there is still, I think, some scope to do that.  And if you keep going down that road, presumably, the scope to do further improvements of spreads does diminish.  In terms of your question, we have the effect of MBS purchases lowering the corporate spread to Treasuries.  Dave, is that right. And we have Treasury purchases raising the corporate spread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining their thought process.


Passage number 84.
  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 85.
 MR. GAGNON. So, again, we thought buying private assets would reduce private spreads generally to some extent, whereas buying Treasuries, which are the favored asset, actually might widen spreads.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating two different effects that buying private assets and buying Treasuries might have on spreads.


Passage number 86.
 MR. PLOSSER. Why is that.  Because the market would anticipate that we may go in and buy those other private assets, such as corporate bonds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a cause and effect relationship - the market would anticipate the purchase of other private assets if certain conditions are met.


Passage number 87.
 MR. GAGNON. The thought was that the Treasury purchases would be taking a safe haven out of the market and then that would lower Treasury yields more than other assets, so it would widen spreads. For MBS purchases, it seemed to us that just generally you’re helping remove private sector assets, so it should help all private sector assets relative to Treasuries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential effects of Treasury and Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS) purchases on the market and expressing their thoughts on the matter.


Passage number 88.
 MR. PLOSSER. It’s just a funny distortion, it seems to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments. It is just expressing a personal opinion.


Passage number 89.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. There is a funny distortion, but I think in some sense it can almost be a distraction.  One of the problems we had was—and we talked about this when we wrote this down—whether we should stick with this bigger own-yield effect on MBS than on Treasuries. And our sense is—I hope it came out in the memos—we don’t really know what the direct own-yield effects will be.  We had sort of an experiment on the first $500 billion—what’s the second $500 billion going to be.  So there’s this issue of scale that could change quite a bit as   you go through time.  Whether there are spillover effects from MBS into Treasuries or into high-grade corporates—there’s a huge uncertainty about that.   And for that reason, I think you shouldn’t interpret the model simulation evidence—to the extent it is evidence—as suggesting, “oh, MBS is the way to go because you get a much bigger bang for your buck on that than you would for Treasuries.”  I don’t think that’s the way to interpret it at all. I think the way to interpret the model simulation results is that buying large amounts of these securities, whether it’s Treasuries or MBS, has at least a fighting chance of bringing down the general level of long-term interest rates.  And if you can do that, and if that spills over into the stock market, the exchange rate, that sort of thing, then you potentially get a major stimulus to the real economy. If the program just becomes narrow on one particular market—suppose you just drive down MBS—then you might not get very much for that.  Maybe you would get a little bit more—maybe—in the case of MBS, because then you’re affecting mortgage rates and refi effects and house prices—maybe—but it’s not really where the big payoff comes from, at least as far as these particular stimulations go.  The big payoff comes from general reductions in the level of all long-term rates, and then these other things follow.  So we thought that was important.  That’s really the main way to think about the program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their thoughts and reasoning about the potential effects of buying MBS and Treasuries. They mention uncertainties and possibilities, but there is no direct disagreement or argument being made.


Passage number 90.
 MR. PLOSSER. What I was trying to get at was this issue that the payoff is lowering all long-term interest rates.  And your assumption is that you’ve got this differential spread effect.  Is that driving this notion that buying MBS might be differentially better.  Why wouldn’t you just buy Treasuries and get the spillover.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is simply asking a question and seeking clarification on the reasoning behind buying MBS instead of Treasuries.


Passage number 91.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Right. Joe and I may part company here, but I don’t think there’s a strong case that buying MBS is definitely more advantageous than Treasuries.  I thinkwe just don’t know enough about what size the effect is.  There are reasons to think that it might be bigger in the case of MBS, but it’s very difficult to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion but acknowledges that there isn't enough information to determine the definitive advantage between buying MBS (Mortgage-backed securities) and Treasuries. They mention that there may be reasons to believe MBS could have a larger effect, but it is difficult to say for certain.


Passage number 92.
 MR. GAGNON. I would just note that MBS yields have come down a lot more than Treasury yields over this period, so that would support our view.  Whether that would continue for the next $500 billion or the $500 billion after that—maybe not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement and a possibility without expressing opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 93.
 MR. PLOSSER. Well, that really prompts the other question:  What’s the appropriate way to think about the scales of these operations.  How do we think about diminishing returns in these markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It consists of a question asking about the appropriate way to think about the scales of operations and diminishing returns in markets.


Passage number 94.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It’s anyone’s guess, and it’s also the case, as Joe said in his remarks, that the more you focus on one market, the more you’re not really taking a diverse strategy on something in which it’s not quite clear how this is going to play out.  Also, the more you focus on one market, the more the question arises at some point:  Do you just decouple that market from everything else. I think the second question that you raised had to do with this issue of fixing market dysfunction and whether that was a potential conflict if you were getting this better economy.  Although we thought of the bigger MBS effect as maybe having potentially a somewhat bigger bang for the buck, because it might be helping to ease certain market strains, we thought in all cases that the reason for this policy is not to deal with the strains of financial markets per se.  It may have that effect by strengthening the economy and so on and so forth—an indirect effect— but the main purpose was to get around the zero bound by driving down the average level of long-term interest rates and getting other general financial conditions to improve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 95.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Trish, did you have a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 96.
   MS. MOSSER. Yes, I had a comment about how long this goes on.  It seems—both from our MBS purchase program and from the U.K.’s announcement—that a huge amount of the interest rate effect happens on announcement, not on execution.  It doesn’t grow over time as the purchases get bigger and bigger and bigger. Boom—the rates fall.  Discerning spread changes from the purchase levels is very tricky business, and so is the macro effect—I wouldn’t venture there. But that announcement effect happens because of the assumption that the central banks are going to keep buying for a while, not that they’re just going to do it for a month or two and then stop the program and go away.  I am fairly certain that in the U.S. we’ll see that reaction in mortgage spreads—if the determination was made to stop in July, the forward rates in July would pop right up and we’d be back to approximately where we were in January.  There’s a question already arising about what the Bank of England is going to do after three months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their observation and opinion about the impact of central bank announcements on interest rates and mortgage spreads.


Passage number 97.
 MR. PLOSSER. Well, uncertainty about our policies really creates a lot of problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a belief about the potential problems caused by policy uncertainty.


Passage number 98.
 MS. MOSSER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage only includes the statement "Yes," and does not provide any additional information or context to indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 99.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states "Okay. President Evans," without any conflicting or opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 100.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to congratulate you on being a tough taskmaster, with having us sit and listen to an hour’s worth of briefings without any questions.  I had seven, but I’m down to three now.  [Laughter] And I’ll be jumping around, too, because of that. I’d like to ask a question of Dave Reifschneider first, having to do with exhibit 3 on the inflation forecast under large-scale asset purchases.  Let me mention at the outset that I’ll reveal later on in this meeting that I’m not overly concerned about inflation, but having seen this chart, I’m suspicious of this, and it’s in the way that the analysis is done.  As I read the Bluebook, it seems that the unconstrained optimal policy has inflation rising because inflation expectations rise, and you have inflation expectations depend on errors in the Taylor rule, as I understand it. So I’m guessing that the model is seeing very accommodative monetary policy and translating that into increases in inflation expectations, and that’s why inflation is up.  Now, I’m going to guess that you do not have that same effect in these other forecasts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses suspicion and raises questions about the analysis and the inflation forecast.


Passage number 101.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context to indicate that there is contention or disagreement. It simply indicates that someone named Mr. Reifschneider is responding affirmatively with a yes.


Passage number 102.
 MR. EVANS. And that makes no sense to me because the whole point is to replicate an accommodative monetary policy.  So I would have come up with some translation of how accommodative and unusual this is and tried to feed this into it.  Success would be when you come up with a nontraditional policy that matches that the unconstrained outcome, because that’s what we’re trying to do with the optimal policy. My guess is that, if you went back and were successful, this inflation outlook would have more overshooting, right.  Over 2 percent. So I don’t think we can rely too much on that chart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 103.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I agree 100 percent.  When we were doing the Bluebook box, we had this discussion. We saw that this is a real limitation of the model—that in one case it gets to learn off of what the fed funds rate is doing relative to the rest of the economy, and in the other case it doesn’t know how to learn off of these large-scale asset purchases.  So we said, what are we going to do about it.  Do we just write something down.  Do we try to come up with the correct fix.  And the answer was, we had ideas for how to fix it correctly, but there is no way we’re going to figure out the right way to do this in a week.  So you are exactly correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the statement and discusses their own experience and thoughts on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 104.
 MR. EVANS. I like the model analysis.  I think it’s very useful, and I think this is just a limitation, and that’s how everybody should interpret it, because you’re doing a great job on the unemployment rate here.  That sort of tips you off. Let me jump to the balance sheet scenarios, because I looked at those scenarios, but didn’t see one that, in light of disinflation risk, I would like to see. If it were costly to have one  more, I would drop one of the others instead.  The ones that I’d like to see are where the Committee finds itself in a position where we need to raise rates, but we have a lot of sticky assets on our balance sheet, we’re not quite sure how to address that, and we don’t get legislative relief. While I do not put a high probability on this scenario, I think it’s important to understand it. What if inflation expectations rose.  I think it would have to be an exogenous increase— something that is not currently imbedded in my thinking and in the model analysis here—but, what if.  Certainly a lot of people are out there looking at our balance sheet—I think incorrectly—but they’re looking at it and saying “something’s going to get out of hand.”  So if we could see a scenario like that, including how we would have to grapple with balancing the conflicts, it would be very informative.  That’s more of a suggestion. Finally, I have a relatively elementary question about the TALF:  What is the value-added of the investor in the middle in this entire transaction.  We’re bringing hedge funds to the table, and I’ve thought, well, they’re going to help with price discovery to make sure that this issuance is really right, but I don’t know that that’s really a strong role.  There’s a lot of private capital on the sidelines—according to what everybody tells us—and they’re going to bring a very small part of it to the transaction.  But what they are demanding—I hear from everybody I talk to—are very high levered rates of return, which hedge funds are typically associated with delivering. This is going to be in relatively low-risk transactions—triple-A.  We’re not expecting to lose on them, but we could. But what does this mean.  We’re hoping this will kick-start a secondary market.  It’s that kick start—I don’t know where that comes from.  There’s capital on the sidelines. What will bring it to the table.  I would guess that they would start by looking at this and saying, “Well, the safest investment has 20 percent rates of return.  So from here on out the risk curve, the rates   should be higher.” I’m already hearing from a lot of contacts that this is very expensive, that they have to deliver this, and they’re not sure if they are going to participate very much. Is the risk–return frontier in some sense being moved up by this program.  Will competition really bring these returns down.  That’s what we always think, but I don’t know where competition is going to come from, because it’s on the sidelines.  I really have to understand why it’s on the sidelines and why it will now be forthcoming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement or contention in several parts of the passage. For example, when the speaker says, "What if inflation expectations rose," they are disagreeing with the current analysis. The speaker also expresses skepticism about the role of hedge funds in the TALF program, stating, "I don't know that that's really a strong role." Additionally, the speaker questions whether competition will bring down high levered rates of return and expresses uncertainty about why private capital is on the sidelines and whether it will now be forthcoming.


Passage number 105.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Do you think there’s an aggregation externality in liquidity—getting activity going again so that people issue and so on.  That would be one reason why it would stimulate additional activity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed to gather the opinion of the reader about the presence of an aggregation externality in liquidity and its potential to stimulate additional activity.


Passage number 106.
 MR. EVANS. Yeah. It seems like a hope at the moment.  And I’m not opposed to hoping a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Evans mentions that something seems like a hope at the moment, and he expresses that he is not opposed to hoping a lot. However, the passage does not involve any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 107.
 [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think that’s our best tool right now.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the speaker's belief that laughter is the best tool currently available.


Passage number 108.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Back to Mr. Sheets.  I’ve followed a few international liquidity crises over the years, and they often start in strange places, and my question is: Do we need to think about exotic currencies—currencies in which there is not really a dollar swap or foreign currency swap market that could provide funding, but where the institution in mind may have pretty sizable book.  The idea would be to try to nip something in the bud before it gets to a hard currency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Lockhart followed by a question posed by him.


Passage number 109.
 MR. SHEETS. This is an issue I’ve actually spent a fair amount of time thinking about.  Absolutely, it’s a concern. For instance, one of these major institutions has a fair amount of exposure to some of the secondary and tertiary emerging Asian currencies.  But the staff simply didn’t feel comfortable recommending the establishment of, say, 30 or 40 or 50 swap lines with foreign central banks. We see this proposal as providing a foreign currency backstop for theseinstitutions—a safety net of some stripe—which, hopefully, between giving them access to yen or euro or whatever the case may be, and their dollar holdings, would enable them to respond to stresses in some of these secondary markets.  I note that there is a risk.  We don’t see it as being significant, but there’s a risk that these institutions might mobilize collateral from some of these markets where there is liquidity support into some of these secondary markets; hence becoming more dependent on our liquidity facilities. But we didn’t see any way around leaving some residual liquidity risk. It’s a thorny, thorny issue. Mr. Chairman, President Plosser asked several questions about the swap lines.  Could I go ahead and answer those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their thoughts and concerns about the establishment of swap lines with foreign central banks, acknowledging the potential risks involved.


Passage number 110.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The word "sure" indicates agreement and certainty, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 111.
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is expressing gratitude, which does not indicate disagreement with anyone or anything.


Passage number 112.
 MR. SHEETS. First of all, let me underscore that we see these lines as being focused primarily and exclusively on liquidity.  What we have in mind in that third case is that an institution has been declared dead and is out of business; we’re suggesting in that sort of a scenario, it might be useful for the authorities to have access to foreign currency liquidity in the process of winding up the balance sheet and ensuring an orderly wrap-up, consistent with all of the legal protocols and so on. We’re not advocating a loan to an institution that’s actually insolvent as if it were a solvent institution. Your second question was on the discount window versus the SOMA approach or the swap approach. As I said in my remarks, it’s something we spent a lot of time deliberating.  On the one hand, there are certain aspects of this that have a discount window flavor.  On the other hand, there’s no history of the discount window doing foreign currency operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a response to questions and the speaker is providing clarification and explanations. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 113.
 MR. PLOSSER. We’ve done a lot of things without much history.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the actions taken without historical precedent.


Passage number 114.
  [Laughter]MR. SHEETS. On the other hand, SOMA is where we’ve done all of those foreign currency operations, and at the end of the day, operationally, we just saw the discount window approach as adding another layer of complexity.  We had to figure out how to get the resources from SOMA to the individual Reserve Banks in order to make the discount window loan.  But this was a very close call, and it really was an issue of zigging rather than zagging.  From an operational standpoint, we felt that SOMA was the better approach.  Trish, do you want to expand on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply discussing different approaches to foreign currency operations.


Passage number 115.
 MS. MOSSER. Not to be too technical here, but because this swap would be cash collateral, in that sense there’s not a loan actually.  The institution would have to produce cash dollars and get cash yen, or whatever, on the other side.  If they’re in the middle of a distress situation, where do they get that cash.  Well, they’re probably going to be getting it from the discount window, honestly, or perhaps from the PDCF or somewhere else in order to execute this transaction. So if there’s lending going on to an institution like this, it would be lending in dollars. We don’t want to impose where the cash dollars come from, as a practical matter.  We don’t know quite where their collateral might be.  It might be in the PDCF.  It might be in their bank. And it seemed, therefore, that to separate the liquidity swap part out from the lending part might actually have a few virtues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 116.
 MR. SHEETS. On your third question about the announcement effects, we freely admit that there are uncertainties surrounding the nature of those announcement effects.  On the one hand, as you described, there’s a possible adverse reaction.  On the other hand, at present it’s really no secret that major U.S. financial institutions are experiencing a range of stresses, so moves by the central banking community to further bulletproof liquidity in the global economy could be seen as a very positive thing.But I grant that there is uncertainty. We don’t know exactly how it would be received.  That is why we gave you this “proposal A versus proposal B” structure.  And if the Committee is concerned about the possibility of an adverse announcement effect or concerned that the announcement wouldn’t have manageable effects, then maybe the best approach would be a delegation to the Subcommittee; the Subcommittee could establish these lines closer to a time when it looked like they were actually going to be drawn on. The other thought I have in response to your comments is, even though we’re likely talking about only a half a dozen institutions that have these sorts of vulnerabilities, if adverse circumstances arose, the implications could be very severe.  So I think it behooves us to think through the possibilities beforehand, and, as necessary, put in place mechanisms to address those sorts of vulnerabilities to the extent that we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents different perspectives and acknowledges uncertainties, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict between the speaker and any other party.


Passage number 117.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Nathan, would you address an elementary question.  If we delegate the authority to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, why wouldn’t that appear in the minutes, for example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a request for clarification or explanation.


Passage number 118.
 MR. SHEETS. It would appear in the minutes.  But draft resolution B, which is the delegation to the Subcommittee, is not nearly as specific as draft resolution A.  This is just saying that the FOMC delegated to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee the capacity to negotiate these foreign currency swap lines—it doesn’t delineate the lines with the same degree of specificity that the other resolution does. In addition, it’s not saying that these lines are established—it’s only saying that the Subcommittee has the capacity to establish them if it so chooses. So it’s not as specific, and our view, at least, is that it wouldn’t be seen by the markets or by the world as indicating the same degree of urgency as an actual approval of the lines would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an analysis of draft resolution B and comparing it to draft resolution A, stating that it is not as specific and does not indicate the same degree of urgency.


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeable content. It is a polite expression of gratitude from President Pianalto.


Passage number 120.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of questions, and both of them have been answered indirectly through our give and take, but I wanted to make sure I was clear in my understanding of these issues.  Both President Hoenig and President Lacker have asked my first question, but I’m going to ask it in a third way, just to make sure I’m clear.  As we’re contemplating the extension of the TALF into these other, more narrow, categories, is it because there are critical problems in these markets.  Or is it also a supply issue.  That is, we can’t reach even the currently announced $200 billion if we are purchasing securities only in the categories that we’ve already announced. The second question is somewhat related, and, again, I think you’ve already answered this. Do we know who is purchasing the lower-rated tranches of the securities, and what price are they paying for them.  I know, Mr. Chairman, you said that the securitization market isn’t even existent, but a lot of my contacts have been saying that it is important to the functioning of the ABS market to also get those lower-rated securities purchased and trading.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is asking for clarification and confirming their understanding of certain issues, but there is no contradiction or dispute.


Passage number 121.
 MR. NELSON. Let me distinguish in my answer between those assets which we requested the Board to add this week and the completion of TALF 2.0.  For the assets that are being added this week, the objective is to fill out the ABS space, largely.  That’s the market that, in fact, shut down in the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the objective of adding assets this week to fill out the ABS space, which had shut down in the fourth quarter.


Passage number 122.
 MS. PIANALTO. So that means that there are both critical problems in that market and that, in order to get the dollar amount that we’re trying to put into that market, we need to expand the asset classes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Ms. Pianalto is discussing the problems in the market and the need to expand asset classes to achieve a certain dollar amount.


Passage number 123.
 MR. NELSON. These asset classes themselves are smaller than the ones that have already been approved, but they are, nevertheless, relatively large in size.  But it won’t get us meaningfully closer to the ceiling.  It’s addressing a market.  We’re addressing it at this point because the assets are quite similar to the ones that we’ve already added, so that we were able to review their risks and bring them on board quickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the size of the asset classes and their similarity to ones that have already been approved.


Passage number 124.
 MR. MADIGAN. President Pianalto, the reason for doing this is because those markets, like the other ABS markets are not functioning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the reason for doing something.


Passage number 125.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’re not trying to fill up the bucket.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about not attempting to fill up a bucket.


Passage number 126.
 MS. PIANALTO. If we wanted to take on less risk, we could stay in the one market.  There are enough of those securities. This is more about addressing the critical issues in those other markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MS. PIANALTO is presenting a potential solution to reduce risk by staying in one market and stating that there are enough securities available. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 127.
 MR. NELSON. Yes, that’s right. And, in fact, some of the sectors that we’re proposing for inclusion were harmed by the initial announcement because they are near substitutes to those things that we announced we were including. So it was very desirable to finish that phase.  I think that the answer is relatively similar in the next stage—it’s just that there’s much more review that needs to be done. Perhaps it will be done within a month, but it then moves to the larger space of markets that are also impaired but are similar in that they are the securitized, high-quality space of newly originated securities.  I’m sorry—your other question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the process and timeline for the next stage of review.


Passage number 128.
 MS. PIANALTO. Is there any activity on the lower-rated paper.  We are taking the triple-A.  Is there any activity in the lower-rated securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for information about the activity in lower-rated securities.


Passage number 129.
 MR. NELSON. I don’t exactly know.  In many cases, the lower-rated tranches are retained by the issuers, so that they’re able to issue the triple-A securities by retaining the lower rated. I don’t have any specific information about other lower-rated tranches that have been issued in conjunction with, admittedly, just a handful of ABS that are being issued at this subscription, and who is purchasing those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they do not have specific information about lower-rated tranches being issued alongside ABS.


Passage number 130.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
 MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions. The first one follows up on President Evans’s earlier question.  It’s one for Spence. I have been somewhat concerned about exit strategies. I think it’s probably going to be quite a while before we have to worry about it, but I think I’d feel better about expanding some of these programs if we did have that worked out. When I read the balance sheet scenarios, I was comforted at first to see that it’s going to be a very long time before we need to deal with this at all.  But then I looked at it a little bit more carefully.  I thought maybe there was something in the scenario you laid out that was inconsistent, because it was based on the March Greenbook forecast, but that assumed no additional unconventional policies. Then, in your baseline you added $500 billion in purchases of MBS, which, in the staff memos on that program, has quite a bit of macro impact.  It seemed to me that, with the likely impact of a $500 billion program, we would have a stronger economy than in the baseline. We would probably want to be raising rates in 2012 rather than 2014.  I guess that would be about the same time that the TALF was building up and might be difficult to unwind. So my question is: Have I misunderstood that, or have I taken too sanguine a message from your scenario about exit strategies. My second question is for Bill, and it concerns the extension of the TALF from newly originated asset-backed securities to legacy assets.  As I recall, there were just a couple of paragraphs in the memo on that.  But it seems to me to be a very big step, and I’m not sure I really understood it. Is this considered the PPIF program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Yellen expresses her concern about exit strategies and questions the assumptions and implications of the balance sheet scenarios. She is unsure if she has misunderstood the scenario or if she is taking too positive a message from it.


Passage number 133.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Yellen, in just a few minutes I will brief on all of the developments in the Treasury program, including this and the PPIF, and the FDIC role.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It states that the speaker will provide a briefing on various developments without expressing any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 134.
   MR. HILTON. Well, it’s a good observation.  The assumptions we took for the baseline were just purely the economic ones.  We did have an extension built into the outright purchase program in the baseline of $500 billion, as you’ve noted, but we did not try to calibrate a feedback effect, as you suggest, which would be a reasonable thing to do. That could move up a bit the period in which you might want to be otherwise raising the target rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Hilton acknowledges the suggestion made by the speaker and agrees that it would be reasonable to consider a feedback effect in calibrating the target rate.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 136.
 MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Some of my questions are for David and Joe. I’m looking at exhibit 3 again.  I think the overall analysis is beautiful, but this unconstrained policy with the negative nominal rates is not really a feasible outcome.  The truth is, you don’t know what would happen, because it’s not feasible.  But then, to put that on here as where we’d like to be in these pictures, I think, gives a little bit of a misleading idea about how we should think about these large-scale asset purchases.  Would it be possible to say, “If I could pursue an optimal unconstrained policy just on asset purchases, here’s how much I’d do, and here’s how I’d let it unwind”. Maybe that should be the baseline and we should skip the negative fed funds rate. Is that possible.  What would that look like. Would that get you all the way to the funds rate line, or throw that line out.  Or where would it take us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and asking for clarification or alternative options. There is no indication of any disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 137.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It’s possible. Unfortunately, I haven’t run it, and I’m kicking myself because we did talk about whether we ought to run it.  So I don’t know what the answer is. I do know that if you had a $2 trillion program and you went by our assumptions, you’d replicate the hypothetical and completely unattainable and maybe completely unrealistic unconstrained optimal policy line.  One question would be:  What’s the cost of buying all of these long-term securities.  I’m not sure what that is.  This is part of the reason we hesitated on running this. But if you were completely unconstrained, you’d probably buy everything youcould get your hands on in an attempt to drive long-term rates right to zero.  But presumably there’d be some balance sheet costs—I’m not sure how to calibrate or describe exactly what those costs are. Presumably, there’d be a shadow cost, so you wouldn’t buy everything you could get your hands on. But the basic proposition that “buy a lot” would be a good thing to do—yes, that would flow from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is discussing the potential consequences of a hypothetical scenario and expressing uncertainty about certain factors. There is no obvious disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 138.
 MR. BULLARD. So we have a baseline, which is just to stick with our zero nominal interest rate, conventional stuff, and not do anything else, just let the economy play out.  Then we say, “Well, we can improve on that with some asset purchases.”  But we don’t want to go too far, because you just get too far out of bounds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two options and mentions the need to avoid going too far in one direction.


Passage number 139.
   MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Reifschneider's agreement or understanding with something that was not provided in the given text.


Passage number 140.
 MR. GAGNON. One of the costs might be fiscal, in some sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a possibility or suggestion regarding the potential costs of something, without stating any opposing viewpoints or engaging in an argument.


Passage number 141.
 MR. BULLARD. The natural thing to ask is:  Why are there limits on this.  As I’ve said before, there’s the mystery of round numbers. Why $500 billion.  Why not $750 billion.  Why not $1.5 trillion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing curiosity and posing questions about the reasoning behind certain limits or numbers. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it’s the problem President Yellen raised, which is the exit strategy.  Is there a cost to exiting.  I think that’s the main constraint.  Also, there are probably some costs associated with having banks holding enormous amounts of excess reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's thoughts and observations.


Passage number 143.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think the staff decided that buying a trillion was feasible and buying $2 trillion may be feasible.  But at some point, it’s more of a question for you.  And what point is it just not feasible to go beyond, between the market problems you potentially create and the potential problems in setting up for exiting.  I don’t know what the limit is, but I think the gist of your question is: Whatever that limit is, would it make sense to go to it.  On this kind of analysis, the answer is “yes,” whatever that feasible limit is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. The speaker is acknowledging that there is a limit to how much can be purchased and is saying that it would make sense to go up to that limit.


Passage number 144.
   MR. BULLARD. Our job as policymakers is to somehow trade those off.  And I guess the model just doesn’t help us with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that their job as policymakers is to find a balance or trade-off between different factors, but the model they are referencing does not provide any guidance in that regard.


Passage number 145.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Reifschneider's response without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 146.
 MR. PLOSSER. But the question is: Wouldn’t it be useful to try to get some handle on it.  Suppose that limit’s not $2 trillion, suppose it’s $750 billion.  How do I think about what that number looks like, even within some ballpark.  I think it would just be very helpful for us to think about when those diminishing returns on the types of costs that the Chairman alluded to begin to kick in. And how do we think about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that it would be helpful to understand the potential costs and diminishing returns associated with a specific number (whether it is $2 trillion or $750 billion). There is no conflict or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 147.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Ms. Mosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 148.
 MS. MOSSER. There’s a completely different set of limitations, namely, how much the payment and settlement system can handle, depending on how compressed we make these purchases. We have not done this yet for Treasuries, but for mortgage-backed securities, we think that if we tried to buy $1½ to $2 trillion more this year, we would come close to breaking it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests a contention or disagreement regarding the limitations of the payment and settlement system in handling purchases. The mention of not having done it yet for Treasuries implies a potential disagreement or difference in opinion.


Passage number 149.
 MR. BULLARD. It’s great to know these kinds of constraints.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a positive opinion about knowing certain constraints.


Passage number 150.
  MS. MOSSER. It’s possible there’s a workaround for those sorts of things.  But if there is, we’d have to start it tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 151.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We could just acquire Fannie and Freddie directly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement suggests a potential course of action without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 152.
  [Laughter] MR. BULLARD. I can’t give up the floor without tormenting Mr. Sheets.  In your report, and in some of the questions, we’ve talked about moral hazard problems.  Your response, which I thought was a good one, was that you were going to do the pricing in a way that made it a backstop facility, so that you gave the proper incentives to financial firms to stay out of thisfacility unless it was absolutely necessary.  Is your sense that that’s going on with the other swaps, especially in Europe.  Are we pushing them so that they are avoiding the same problem on the other side.  Or do you think we run the risk of becoming a permanent part of the market for dollar funding elsewhere in the world, just sort of a routine thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and expressing their thoughts on the topic.


Passage number 153.
 MR. SHEETS. My sense is that the pricing of our dollar swap facilities globally, and particularly in Europe, is such that they had been attractive during times of stress.  But as the market has healed a little bit, they’re less attractive.  Let me just be really concrete here.  The outstandings to the ECB, as of early December, were about $314 billion under the swaps program.  At the end of last week, those outstandings were down to $168 billion.  So we have seen a sizable—slightly less than 50 percent—drop in those outstandings.  Similarly, global swaps outstanding in early December were $582 billion, and at the end of last week they were at $330 billion. So I think we’re seeing the program and the pricing work the way that we want it to.  During those year-end pressures and with exceedingly high stress, this liquidity was very attractive. As the situation seems to ease a little bit, it’s not as attractive.  I know that a number of our counterparties have had auctions where they’ve seen significant declines in participation.  Some that don’t have unlimited lines have actually seen some of their auctions undersubscribed.  Here’s another example of the decline on a much smaller swap line:  Australia was running about $27 billion outstanding in late November and is now below $10 billion.  So I think the pricing of these facilities—and Trish may want to expand on this—has been done so that the incentives are the way we want them to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is providing information about the pricing and usage of dollar swap facilities.


Passage number 154.
 MS. MOSSER. I think where the LIBOR rates are well inside, for example, one week and one month, those are the operations that are most undersubscribed and least used.  There’s   more in three-month, where the market rates are still more elevated—again, this is reflecting credit risk and balance sheet constraints at institutions and how long they’re willing to lend to each other. I think the ultimate question is:  If things continue to improve, will the swaps ultimately wind all the way down to zero.  I think there’s probably a risk that there would still be a few institutions that would like to continue to borrow, and we’ll just have to take away the punch bowl when the time comes.  But, like Nathan, I’m encouraged that, as rates come down, and in particular, as we basically get underbid by the market, the facility usage drops off pretty quickly.  So as long as that trend continues, I think we’re fine.  Whether, in the end, we have to take it away is a possibility—we’ve had those discussions with the other central banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their observations and opinions on the LIBOR rates, facility usage, and the possibility of ultimately winding down swaps. There is no disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Speaking of facility usage—[laughter]—why don’t we take a coffee break for about 15 minutes, and then we will recommence around 4:30.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests taking a break and expresses gratitude.


Passage number 156.
 MR. PLOSSER. I have just a clarifying question.  When you say this stuff merges into the TALF, I’m just not quite sure I understood how this would work.  Could you explain that again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser is simply seeking clarification and asking for further explanation.


Passage number 157.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Basically, what happens now is that an investor buys a security and leaves that security with the Fed and gets 90 percent financing—or 10 to 1 leverage—against that security.  There’s a put option, because it’s nonrecourse lending.  So it would be the same thing.  In this case, the public–private hedge fund—80 percent Treasury, 20 percent private sector—would purchase some RMBS, and it would finance that RMBS—get leverage on that RMBS—by depositing it at the TALF in the same way that an investor does currently.  The main difference is that the haircuts would have to adjust according to the risk characteristics of the assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining the process of an investor buying a security and using it as collateral for financing. They also explain how this process would be similar in the case of a public-private hedge fund purchasing RMBS. The statement about the haircuts adjusting according to the risk characteristics of the assets is also presented as a fact without any disagreement.


Passage number 158.
 MR. PLOSSER. Okay. So we would have to set a new schedule of haircuts for these securities, because presumably they would be the much riskier and perhaps toxic assets of the banking system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that a new schedule of haircuts would need to be set for these securities, as they would be considered riskier and potentially toxic assets of the banking system.


Passage number 159.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. And we’d have to make sure we had sufficient capital from the Treasury.  I think that what might be going on is that these might happen in one-off deals where portfolios are being presented, and that would require us to hire investment banks or asset analysts to do the work for us and give us their assessments of the risk characteristics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

While there is mention of potential actions and considerations, there is no explicit disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 160.
 MR. PLOSSER. Back to the accord issue for the moment—you talked about Maiden Lane going back to the Treasury at some point or under certain conditions.  Would these assets in the TALF be candidates for that same sort of transfer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is seeking clarification on whether the assets in the TALF would be potential candidates for transfer, based on the previous mention of Maiden Lane going back to the Treasury.


Passage number 161.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In one indirect sense—if we find that we can no longer finance them because of monetary policy considerations, then, under the SFP model, Treasury financing would replace Fed financing.  But the difference between this and Maiden Lane is that Maiden Lane involves very long-term assets, and the TALF program is a three-year program, and presumably it would be winding down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 162.
  MR. PLOSSER. Okay. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply acknowledging gratitude towards someone. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 163.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A two-hander from President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only states that President Evans is involved in a two-hander, without any indication of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 164.
 MR. EVANS. Just to clarify—the legacy-asset aspect of this would be within the currently envisioned $1 trillion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Evans to clarify a point. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 165.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Within the current limits, yes.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply provides a response to a question about the topic within certain limits.


Passage number 166.
 MR. LACKER. You said something that confused me.  You said we would be protected against risk because we would be senior to the Treasury.  Then you said “and the haircuts”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification about the statement made by the other person.


Passage number 167.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I was talking about the possibility of getting private debt as a substitute for Fed financing in the TALF.  So that’s a hypothetical possibility.  But, in general, the way the TALF works is that we have a haircut to protect us, and, if there are any further losses, then the Treasury is the first to take them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the possibility of using private debt as a substitute for Fed financing in the TALF and the way the TALF works in general.


Passage number 168.
 MR. LACKER. But the haircut and the Treasury capital aren’t two separate things, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
The passage does not imply any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement where Mr. Lacker seeks clarification on whether the haircut and the Treasury capital are two separate entities or not.


Passage number 169.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, they are two separate things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage states that there are two separate things, implying that there is no contention or disagreement between them.


Passage number 170.
 MR. PLOSSER. But the Treasury capital is the same.  The ratio hasn’t gone up for these assets relative to the TALF assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 171.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’ve got to figure out two parameters.  Probably the simplest thing would be to pick a single ratio of Treasury capital to leverage, because we don’t want to do that asset by asset. So the haircuts will have to vary, and the combination of the haircut and the Treasury capital will protect the Fed against loss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is discussing a decision that needs to be made about two parameters. There is no indication of contention or disagreement between the speaker or any other parties involved. They are simply discussing the need for a specific approach to address the issue at hand.


Passage number 172.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Or we could take the Treasury capital and apply it against all of the assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely suggesting a possible action or alternative course of action.


Passage number 173.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That’s what I’m saying, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply confirming their agreement with a previous statement.


Passage number 174.
MR. LACKER. So that’s separate from the Treasury capital invested alongside the private sector in the partnerships.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 175.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That’s separate from it, yes.  Treasury capital comes in in two places—one to give leverage and the other to protect the Fed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing information about the separate roles of Treasury capital in two different contexts.


Passage number 176.
 MR. LACKER. Back to Maiden Lane—would that include the two ring-fence guarantees.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the topic of discussion, which is Maiden Lane and the potential inclusion of two ring-fence guarantees.


Passage number 177.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Again, this is aspirational.  It’s not going to happen in the next six weeks. It’s not going to happen in the current political atmosphere.  But it would be a stated intention of the Treasury that, at some point, they would be looking to take these things off our hands, and that would, in my mind, include those things as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion about the Treasury's intention to take certain things off their hands in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 178.
  MR. LACKER. I may be pressing you for things that haven’t been put on the table, but do you envision a public statement with all of these elements in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I may be pressing you for things that haven't been put on the table" suggests that there is disagreement or potential conflict between the speaker (Mr. Lacker) and the person being addressed.


Passage number 179.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, within a week or two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any specific context or information about the content of the passage.


Passage number 180.
 MR. LACKER. And would it lay out a timetable on any of this, or the transfer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply mentions Mr. Lacker and asks about the presence of a timetable for certain actions.


Passage number 181.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It will state that we are actively engaged on the Fed bills-SFP front. It will state the principle that the Fed is not to take credit risk, which we will enforce. It will state our intention, which is a strong intention on both sides, to undertake the negotiation on a resolution regime that will define what role the Fed might have in those kinds of contexts. And it will state the aspirational goal of the Treasury taking Maiden Lane off our balance sheet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement lists various points and intentions without any conflicting ideas.


Passage number 182.
 MR. LACKER. Help me understand the statement about the Fed not taking credit risk, because we do, and it’s just a matter of degree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Lacker is seeking clarification on a statement made regarding the Federal Reserve's stance on credit risk. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 183.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, de minimis. Obviously, we take credit risk—even the CDS spreads on Treasuries are not zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about taking credit risk, mentioning that even the CDS spreads on Treasuries are not zero.


Passage number 184.
 MR. LACKER. Would we have an understanding with the Treasury about what “de minimis” means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there is an understanding with the Treasury about the definition of "de minimis."


Passage number 185.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Bill talked about it.  In the case of the TALF, we have worked out criteria where very extreme—very extreme—loss outcomes do not touch the Fed, and probably don’t even touch the Treasury; but they don’t touch the Fed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Bill, is simply providing information about the TALF and explaining the criteria that have been established to prevent extreme loss outcomes from affecting the Fed or Treasury.


Passage number 186.
 MR. LACKER. Have we quantified that.  What is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The statement is a question about quantification, it is not expressing disagreement or contention with a previous statement or argument.


Passage number 187.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Bill, do you want to talk about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 188.
 MR. NELSON. In the risk analysis for TALF 2.1, we looked at a scenario which we considered to have a 1 percent probability. And even in those scenarios, all of the credit costs were covered by the risk spread itself, so not only the Fed but also the Treasury did not take any losses. Our objective is basically to follow that principle with the legacy TALF, I think the principle would be that under our stress scenario neither the Treasury nor the Fed would be expected to take losses. So losses, in order to come to the Fed, would first have to eat through the Treasury protection, which we don’t expect to happen at all in the stress scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their objective and explaining that they do not expect the Treasury or the Fed to take losses in a stress scenario.


Passage number 189.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 190.
 MR. HOENIG. I’m trying to understand this.  The  TALF is for three years, and the way I see it, we’re taking the assets they put into this organization, which you expect to liquidate and recover at least enough to the point where we’re protected.  But how confident are you that we can roll this stuff off our balance sheet in three years.  These are distressed assets.  So we might have to turn them over later, or the market would have to change so much that you could sellthem, and whoever has the 20 percent risk would take any write-off.  I see us as taking the “bad bank” position in a “good bank–bad bank” scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, expresses skepticism and uncertainty about the ability to sell the distressed assets and recover enough to protect the organization. They raise concerns about the need to turn the assets over later or rely on significant market changes to be able to sell them, which would result in potential write-offs. This disagreement relates to the feasibility and success of the plan.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’re financing the bad banks.  We aren’t the capital in the bad bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states two facts - the first being that "we" are financing the bad banks, and the second being that "we" are not the capital in the bad bank. There is no disagreement or conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 192.
 MR. HOENIG. As long as in the liquidation we don’t go past the capital that’s placed into it, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement about staying within the limits of the capital placed in the liquidation and there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That’s right. But in terms of your other question, we’ll have to be very careful about maturities, and so on.  For a three-year loan, when the three years are up, if the value of the asset has fallen by more than the haircut, they will put the asset to the bad bank, and the asset managers of the bad bank will sell it or dispose of it.  If the value of the asset has not fallen as much as the haircut, then there will be a strong incentive for the public– private partners—and, of course, for the government, because the Treasury will be the dominant partner—to find other financing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an explanation about the potential outcomes for assets in a three-year loan scenario. It does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements.


Passage number 194.
 MR. HOENIG. In your exploration of this, have you thought about the Congress setting up a good bank–bad bank facility.  Are they resistant to that.  Or do we just think that’s not a good option.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage doesn't indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question and asks for clarification or information.


Passage number 195.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think the Administration is weighing the possibility of legislation to get additional authorities, for example, considering whether it would be possible to change the scoring on the TARP, which is very unfavorable.  If they can get appropriate authorities, I think they would do that. But the politics is just unbelievably bad, and it’s very difficult to get anything done. I think it’s their intention to try.  I think they believe that they may not have enough resources to do all they need to do, in which case they will pursue other resources, and we can see what happens. My own guess is that, one way or another, we’re probably not going to end up taking very much stuff, either because there won’t be that much interest, or because there will be other facilities, or because some other arrangement will develop. This is in order to have something that’s part of the bigger program in the short term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is expressing their thoughts and speculations about the administration's possible actions, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 196.
 MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Mr. Fisher. Mr. Chairman." It is merely addressing the individuals present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 197.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: Without the passage provided, it is not possible to determine the presence of contention or disagreement within it.


Passage number 198.
 MR. FISHER. I didn’t understand you there for a second.  When you say “would not take much stuff,” are you saying the bad bank would not take some of these assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply seeking clarification and understanding from the person he is speaking to.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I was just conjecturing that, in the end, this legacy TALF would probably not do very much business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating a personal opinion or speculation rather than presenting a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 200.
 MR. EVANS. Is that because of the pricing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the pricing without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 201.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Because of the pricing and the difficulty of finding private sector participants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the pricing and difficulty of finding private sector participants.


Passage number 202.
 MR. EVANS. It’s only a bad asset at a high price.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker simply states that the asset is only considered bad when it is purchased at a high price. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 203.
  If the third-party assessment comes out at a reasonable price— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right. So we have to mark it down to a market price which we’d lend against, and then there’s a haircut on top of that, of course.  So, the question is: Is that attractive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply discusses the process of determining the attractiveness of a third-party assessment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 204.
 MR. FISHER. Can I come back to the Treasury’s quid pro quo, particularly the third key element, the public–private partnership.  You mentioned that there was discussion within the Board—what are the concerns as the Board views it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests contention or disagreement as it mentions that there was discussion and concerns within the Board about the Treasury's quid pro quo and the public-private partnership. This indicates differing perspectives or opposing viewpoints within the Board.


Passage number 205.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The complexity is one issue:  Would we be able to figure out how to do haircuts in a way that would be meaningful—that is, so that, on the one hand, the haircuts would be not so conservative as to imply no business, and, on the other hand, they’d be conservative enough to provide enough safety. Another issue that we and the FOMC are considering more broadly is: What are the implications for our balance sheet, and management of our balance sheet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply discussing two issues related to haircuts and the implications for the balance sheet.


Passage number 206.
 MR. FISHER. This may be for later discussion.  Maybe I’m a little confused.  If I go back to our previous discussion and a comment that I think Mr. Nelson made—did you say that we were looking at this, the legacy assets into the TALF, as a way to take some bad assets off the balance sheets of banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Fisher expressing confusion and seeking clarification.


Passage number 207.
 MR. NELSON. Is the legacy TALF a means to try to take the bad assets off bank balance sheets.  Yes, that’s one of the objectives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Nelson is presented as a confirmation of the objective of the legacy TALF, without any conflicting viewpoints or opposition.


Passage number 208.
 MR. FISHER. I’m a little confused.  Could you clarify that please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion and asking for further clarification.


Passage number 209.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The way it is now conceived, the FDIC would be responsible for taking portfolios directly from banks and probably bank holding companies.  So the answer to that question I guess is, “no.”  The intent would be to try to create more liquidity and pricing discovery, and so on, in these markets generally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply provides information about the current conception of the FDIC's responsibility and the intent behind it.


Passage number 210.
 MR. FISHER. So we would use the public–private hedge fund, as you described it, as a way to end up with some kind of pricing mechanism for legacy assets that trade on the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply describes a proposal to use a public-private hedge fund as a pricing mechanism for legacy assets.


Passage number 211.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Correct. And I suppose if they wanted to buy from a bank, I don’t think there would be any restriction on that.  But that’s not the point of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their agreement with a previous statement and expressing their understanding of a situation.


Passage number 212.
 MR. FISHER. It just seems to me we are going through—this is a comment, and it, again, may be based on ignorance—a lot of jujitsu here to get around the issue of creating a good bank–bad bank, taking the toxic assets in the bad bank and clearing it in that way.  The TALF is becoming inordinately complicated.  And I guess, if you’ll forgive a horrible pun, I’m worriedTALF is getting too clever by HALF. [Laughter]  We’re adding one segment on top of another, just as we’re beginning to figure out how this thing is going to work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and concerns about the complexity of the TALF program, but there is no direct disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 213.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. As I said, I’m sure this will not be operational for months.  So that’s one reason that I think that we can’t wait for it in terms of our broader policy objectives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely presents a statement and reasoning for not waiting for something.


Passage number 214.
 MR. FISHER. But you are talking about moving very quickly on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Fisher's perspective on the matter at hand.


Passage number 215.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It’s still going to be months, I am sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that it will still be months, and the speaker is sure of it.


Passage number 216.
 MR. PLOSSER. Mr. Chairman, just a two-hander.  I was going to ask a question about the difference between the FDIC program and the TALF-related program.  How would I think about what type of assets would go to the FDIC program and which ones would come in to us through the hedge funds.  Based on the relative pricing of those two mechanisms and how they would work, which vehicle would attract what types of assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 217.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. As I said, economically they’re very similar.  The FDIC, though, would deal directly with banks and could take a whole portfolio—it could be a completely heterogeneous portfolio—and there would be a bid on that portfolio, just the same way as when you wind down a failed bank. I would imagine that the remit for these hedge funds would be “buy RMBS on the market.”  I think it would be less heterogeneous than the portfolios that the FDIC would be taking.  The FDIC would be a much more classic bad bank type of structure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and comparing the FDIC and hedge funds in terms of the portfolios they deal with.


Passage number 218.
 MR. LOCKHART. Would the design of the heterogeneous portfolios be up to the seller or up to the FDIC.  There’s a sort of RTC analogue here:  In the RTC period, assets were put together to make the package attractive enough to bid on, knowing there was some terrible stuff, but also some not-so-bad stuff in it.  Who is going to design those portfolios.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the design of the portfolios and mentioning a previous example (RTC period) for reference.


Passage number 219.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. If I’m incorrect on anything, please, staff members, don’t hesitate to correct me, but my understanding is that the supervisors and the bank together would determine the portfolio.  So in many cases there would presumably be a mixture of accrual and marked-to-market assets, a mixture of different kinds of assets, derivatives, and other things that are hard to break off but can be part of a portfolio.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is written in a way that implies agreement and open invitation for correction. The author is seeking input from the staff members to ensure accuracy and clarity in their understanding.


Passage number 220.
 MR. BULLARD. I just wanted to ask a few questions about the accord.  What kind of legal standing does an accord have.  Is this a gentleman’s agreement, or what is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and asking for information about the legal standing of the accord.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, we’re one step ahead of the 1951 accord, which wasn’t even written down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact about the 1951 accord by comparing it to the current situation. There is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 222.
 [Laughter] MR. BULLARD. Except in textbooks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The laughter seems to indicate a light or humorous atmosphere.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. To my knowledge, there is no document representing the 1951 accord.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact, indicating that there is no document representing the 1951 accord.


Passage number 224.
 MR. BULLARD. Okay. So it’s a genuine agreement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. It states that there is a genuine agreement, implying that there is harmony or consensus between the parties involved.


Passage number 225.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This would be an agreement signed by me and by the Treasury Secretary and approved also by the President and the Administration.  We would share it with congressional leaders as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. It simply states the process of an agreement being signed by the speaker, the Treasury Secretary, and approved by the President and the Administration. Additionally, it mentions the intention to share it with congressional leaders, which indicates a collaborative approach.


Passage number 226.
 MR. BULLARD. The ’51 case held for a long time because there were no attempts to change it subsequently, and that’s the hope here as well, I guess.  But it’s really just an agreement between the Administration and the Fed for now.  Two of the provisions are really “asks” from the Congress.  Do I have that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the current situation regarding a case and mentions that two provisions are requests from Congress.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right. They are asks from the Congress.  The Treasury and the Fed agree they are needed and will cooperate in trying to get those things passed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It highlights agreement and cooperation between the Congress, Treasury, and the Fed in regards to the need for certain things to be passed.


Passage number 228.
 MR. BULLARD. The Congress may or may not agree to them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the possibility that the Congress might or might not agree to something.


Passage number 229.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, that’s always, of course, a risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is expressing a general truth, without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 230.
 MR. BULLARD. So the accord in ’51 was about how the Fed and the Treasury were actually going to interact. It did not involve this part about what we’re going to get the Congress to do or not do. I’m just trying to understand what the object is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and understanding about a specific topic.


Passage number 231.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. For example, it will formalize the understanding that the Fed will take no credit risk in the TALF.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a clear understanding that the Fed will take no credit risk in the TALF.


Passage number 232.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states "Mr. Bullard" followed by a statement.


Passage number 233.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m happy to answer as many questions as people want to ask, but, again, I also hope to hear something about asset purchases before we close today.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing a willingness to answer questions but also expressing a hope to hear about asset purchases.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 234.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. On asset purchases, [laughter] I think there are lots of good reasons to escalate:  The economy is weaker; financial conditions are tighter; in addition, the TALF is off to a slow start because of all of the stuff that’s swirling around on AIG and TARP. The broader TALF, I think, is going to come much later.  While there might be an announcement on legacy TALF relatively soon, the actual operationalization of that, I think, is going to take many months—just given that the TALF 1.0, which we’re enacting today, took four months.  And the PPIF—it’s not even clear whether banks are going to be willing to sell assets to the PPIF. Are they going to get a high enough price to engage in those transactions.  So it seems to me that right now it’s on us.  And it’s more on us than it was even a few weeks ago, because I think the political climate has deteriorated significantly, so the ability of the Administration to go back to the Congress and get more TARP money is significantly less than it was even a few weeks ago.   Then the question is: What should we escalate to.  The lines in David’s graph suggest that $2 trillion would put us roughly on top of the unconstrained line.  And, conveniently, the numbers I was going to advocate total $2 trillion, by coincidence rather than by design.  We did not talk beforehand, as David can attest.  [Laughter] I think that I’d want to escalate the agency MBS program to more than $1 trillion, because escalating to $1 trillion through year-end is basically keeping the run rate exactly the same as the program is doing right now, which is essentially $500 billion every six months.  So I think we should escalate the program, and I would suggest $1½ trillion. The market will not give us much credit for just extending the program another six months at the same purchase rate.  I think the market generally expects us to extend the program, so I don’t think that’s really going to have a lot of benefit. I would increase the agency debt from $100 billion to $200 billion, so I’m at $2.2 trillion, to be honest. But I’m not counting that.  I don’t think the agency debt is really very important or that effective, but I think leaving it out raises more questions than it’s worth raising at this juncture. And I would engage in a Treasury purchase program.  The last time I was here, I argued mostly against it.  But I think the stakes are pretty high right now.  We don’t know exactly how much a Treasury purchase program would do, but, if we start one, we’ll be able to answer that question. There’s a lot of information that we really just don’t have right now.  So I would suggest engaging in a Treasury purchase program, starting immediately, up to $500 billion, concentrating in 2-year to 10-year maturities and buying both nominals and TIPS.  We can also purchase things outside of those maturities to avoid distortions to the shape of the yield curve. But that’s what I would do. One other thing before I give up the floor—I just want to stress what the point of the reverse swaps is.  The point is to prevent some bad piece of news that creates a liquidity run insome foreign market from putting us in a very difficult position in which a foreign central bank is unwilling to lend to a U.S.-owned company because it doesn’t have enough collateral, and we don’t have the ability to get them the money quickly enough to prevent a default.  I think that we want to do this. I’m not sure whether we want to delegate it to the Subcommittee or actually enact it in the FOMC; but it would be really unfortunate if we didn’t do this, and then something happened that caused the exact problem that this reverse swap will address, and then we’d say, “Why didn’t we do what we could have done to avert it.”  So it’s a belt-and-suspenders approach, but I think we’re in an environment where we need both a belt and suspenders.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is advocating for an escalation in asset purchases, specifically the agency MBS program, agency debt, and a Treasury purchase program. They argue that the current program is not effective and that the market expects an extension with increased purchases. However, they also acknowledge that the agency debt may not be effective and that there are questions about its worth. This suggests a lack of agreement on the importance and effectiveness of certain actions.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 236.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On the asset purchases, my view is that the hole in aggregate demand is really quite large, and as I look at the figure on the gap between the optimal policy and the zero bound, I think it’s really stunning, so I’m open to proposals for substantial purchases. In fact, I’m not totally confident in any particular program that we have proposed, so I favor diversifying: Both MBS and Treasuries sounds like a pretty attractive option from my standpoint.  I’m not quite sure how to evaluate the numbers that the Vice Chair just laid out. I know I can’t disagree with him, but I don’t quite know how to calibrate these other policy measures like in the Greenbook and Bluebook figure.  So I’d like to hear more about that tomorrow, but I’m open-minded. On the accord, it sounds good. The way we’ve talked about it is that it’s a long-term accord. Right now we have a lot of assets on our balance sheet that we would like to be able to get rid of. If issuing Fed bills is the way to go, that would be fine.  You mentioned that some might favor a sunset provision.  Would that be on the order of three or four years, or 20 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 237.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Five years, probably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a time frame of "five years" without any conflicting opinions or contradictory statements.


Passage number 238.
MR. EVANS. It sounds like it’s aimed at getting us out of the current situation, and I think that’s a good idea. But over the next 30 years, our ability to have that authority might be a problem.  In reading your testimony on the 13(3) authority and the grilling that you got, I don’t recall anybody who thought it was a great idea that the Fed had the authority to undertake this on their own, and they wouldn’t admit that they knew that this was possible, at least according to what I had read. So I just wonder, would a future accord be a 13(3)-type of activity that causes us to acquire these assets, and then we’d need to issue bills.  I guess I’m just wondering under what circumstances we would issue bills. I think the lasting lesson from all of this is that we don’t want to get here again, that we ought to conduct policy in a way to avoid this. Future regulatory changes that might help out are obviously one way, market discipline is another, and responding to large changes in asset prices that we don’t understand very well might be another.  But keeping the average level of the fed funds rate at a place where we don’t expect to hit the zero bound again might be much more attractive now, having gone through this, so that might be something we should talk about at some point.  If along the way you could get an explicit numerical price objective out of this, that would be quite good. And then, lastly, let me ask another question.  If the likely take-up on our TALF for the legacy assets is low, and given the prudent central bank lending that we are doing (at least according to the people I talk to in the marketplace; they don’t find this very attractive), is the Treasury going to be satisfied with that.  How are we going to respond to them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Instead, it includes the speaker's thoughts and questions about various topics related to the Federal Reserve's authority and future actions.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, my assumption is that they would move on to other strategies, which would involve perhaps the Congress, not us.  Which would be fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It suggests a personal assumption and expresses no opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 240.
 MR. EVANS. That would be more desirable from a public policy standpoint.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 241.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit information about President Rosengren in the passage.


Passage number 242.
   MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On the swap lines, I do think that we could put in the minutes that it’s basically procedural—it’s symmetric with what other foreign central banks have done with us. I would argue for being transparent.  We need to be prepared for foreign funding problems, and I think it just makes sense to be clear on it. In terms of the resolution of holding companies, which ties into the foreign swap lines, I think that’s as important an issue as the Fed bills, and I think trying to find a way to push resolution makes sense.  If you could argue that, if we had the resolution powers now we could be doing much more effective things with AIG, there may be a hook to actually move things along more quickly.  I don’t know where our thinking is, but I see this as a chance to try to push that, particularly if it would give us an opportunity to abrogate contracts in the event that we or somebody else had resolution power.  But I think we should try to move that just as quickly as the Fed bills. In terms of the removal of problem assets, I agree that’s a critical component.  I strongly agree that we shouldn’t be doing ring-fencing institution by institution, so I’m glad we’re moving away from that strategy.  I think the first-best solution would be more aggressive write-downs of assets, creating a bad bank for the most troubled banks.  I think it’s a much more straightforward solution, and I realize that it does mean much more capital for some banks because we will be taking aggressive action.  But I think that, just as we shouldn’t have banks deferring losses, we, as the central bank and the Treasury, shouldn’t defer losses if they’re really on the balance sheet. The first-best solution, I think, is to try to work with the bad bank solution. The TALF for problem legacy assets—I think we shouldn’t make these programs particularly voluntary. If we’re going in and forcing write-downs, and the write-downs are fairly significant, the banks are going to want to participate in the program, because they will have   already taken the losses. So, instead of trying to make it voluntary, I think we should have the write-downs be severe enough that they’re going to want to get the assets off their balance sheets because they’ve already taken the losses and they’re not trying to defer additional losses.  Thinking about how we can have a supervisory strategy that guarantees that outcome might make it much easier than hoping that people volunteer their portfolios.  To the extent that we can do that, that would be my preferred option. In terms of the policy, I think this is the time to be very aggressive.  I strongly prefer option A in the Bluebook, or possibly even a little bit larger, as Vice Chairman Dudley has suggested—I’d be open to that as well.  We’re far from reaching either element of the dual mandate over the forecast horizon.  This is the time to push rates down.  We have a new program from Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae that’s going to include refinancing.  The refinancing involves paying closing costs. Now is the time to push the rates down, so that the people who are refinancing and participate in that program only have to pay the closing costs one time.  It will also square us with some of the other issues in terms of encouraging servicers to come up with solutions. It’s also spring—the right time for the housing sector, and we do need the housing sector to start bottoming out, getting people back into the market.  If we push rates down significantly right now, I think many people will start coming off the sidelines, because even if they don’t think prices have hit bottom, they will probably think interest rates are at an all-time low and they may want to take advantage of that.  So I think it’s a very good time to be doing that. I do have concerns that the TALF is off to a slow start.  When I talk to hedge funds, they’re quite skeptical about how successful that program is going to be.  We’ve been kind of relying on that as possibly being a successful policy tool.  Because I’m a little more skeptical  about either the TALF or the public–private fund working, it calls all the more for more aggressive policy, which is embedded in option A.  So I think option A, which has both the Treasuries and the mortgage-backed securities, is the way to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses their opinion on various issues, but there is no clear contention or disagreement present in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 243.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. On the resolution authority, Board staff has been working on legislative language, and Governor Tarullo and others are reviewing it.  I think, frankly, that the Congress will be looking to the Fed and the Treasury to come up with the language, because it’s a very complex set of issues.  And we are working on it.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, President Bullard, suggests that the Congress will expect the Fed and the Treasury to develop the legislative language for the resolution authority. This implies that the Congress may have a different perspective or expectation on who should be responsible for formulating the language.


Passage number 244.
 MR. BULLARD. I was just going to talk about asset purchases a little bit.  What I’m concerned about is these one-off moves, and I’ve been concerned about round numbers— $1 trillion, $500 billion, and so on. I think all of the things that we do in interest rate targeting should also come in when we’re doing our asset-purchase program.  In interest rate targeting, as it has developed over the last 20 years, it’s all about the whole path of interest rates over a long horizon in the future. That’s all part of the policy:  How credible you are about letting the private sector know how you’re going to behave and how you’re going to react to things in the future. When we hit the zero bound, that all went out the window.  Now we’re taking one-time actions, with the private sector very uncertain about how we’re going to frame that in the future.  And we know that, no matter what model you have, that’s not the right way to do policy.  So I think we want to get back to something like policy paths for asset purchases.  Even if we don’t say it in our statements, the private sector is already imputing what they think that’s going to be.  They just have bigger confidence bands around it than they would otherwise have.  So what I was going to talk about during the policy go-round is somehow to get to where you can announce continuations of purchases at some rate, or something like that.  My intuition is thatthat’s the right way to do these policies, instead of saying, “I’m going to come in with $500 billion to this particular market on this particular day, and I may or may not do any of this in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of one individual's concern and suggestion regarding the implementation of asset purchases in monetary policy.


Passage number 245.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is why I wanted to hear some of this today.  If you have a specific suggestion, you could bring it tomorrow.  But I would comment that we have been pretty clear about what the timeframe is.  We’ve said $500 billion by midyear, and the proposal would be a trillion by the end of the year.  So we are effectively giving monthly rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 246.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. But then, what happens after that is the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any opposing views or arguments. It simply states that there is a problem after a certain event occurs, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 247.
 MR. BULLARD. Yes, what happens after that.  And, I think, on the Treasury purchases, we have vacillated a little. I think as a Committee that we want the whole path out there for the policy tools. Also it might be good to indicate a little bit of contingency about buying at a certain pace; for example, “we’re looking at the data as they come in—if they come in a little stronger in the fall than we think, maybe we’ll tamp down a little bit,” that kind of thing.  That’s what I’d also have in mind.  Otherwise, you commit all the way to the next year, or beyond next year, and it turns out something else happens that you didn’t expect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is offering a suggestion and expressing his thoughts on the matter, but there is no indication of conflict or disagreement among the parties involved.


Passage number 248.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The Taylor rule, and so on, emerged essentially from historical experience. It wasn’t ever stated in advance.  So that’s a problem:  We don’t really have a reaction function out there, we’re sort of just starting the rational expectations process.  We need a way to think about that, and suggestions are welcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging the lack of a predetermined reaction function and is open to suggestions on how to approach the rational expectations process.


Passage number 249.
 MR. BULLARD. We should feed back the conditions.  We don’t know what the rule looks like, I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, agrees with the statement that they don't know what the rule looks like.


Passage number 250.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We could say something like, “We will continue as long as,” or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any differing opinions or conflicting ideas. It simply offers a suggestion or possibility.


Passage number 251.
 MR. BULLARD. “We’re going to monitor conditions.”  “We’re going to buy at this pace.” “We give ourselves the option of buying at a slower pace if things come out better than expected,” or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 252.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. I appreciate that, and suggestions are welcome.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 253.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me confine my remarks to the large-scale asset purchases. I must admit, I am quite uncomfortable with the idea of purchasing long-term Treasuries in size. As the papers described to us, the benefits could well be quite small.  My sense is the costs might not be.  This is an idea that we’ve been discussing for a few months, and as I think about the need that we all feel to escalate, my sense is it has gotten more attractive now because we have run out of some very good alternatives. Let me highlight some of these concerns.  First, I think the nature of the Treasury market is, frankly, quite different from the nature of the GSE markets that we’ve already entertained— and I think I’d be comfortable entertaining those more.  The long-term Treasury markets are functioning reasonably well; they’re highly liquid and the desire for risk-free assets is still quite high. My sense is, notwithstanding those facts, at this particular moment in time, Mr. Chairman, there are serious questions being raised by market participants and market commentators about the government’s ability to fund new higher expected levels of Treasury issuance—that is, they may or may not, in the market’s view, be able to find buyers at market-clearing prices.  Then if the Fed is perceived to be monetizing debt and serving as a buyer of last resort in the name of lowering risk-free rates, we could end up with higher rates and less credibility as a central bank.  My own sense is this could be self-defeating.Very recent discussions that Nathan Sheets and I had with certain large non-U.S. buyers of Treasury securities confirmed these suspicions.  They note that at times like this we are one government, and if the Treasury and the Federal Reserve have to collude to somehow solve the issuance problem, it could be signaling greater problems about our ability to fund ourselves.  So I would say my concerns are particularly pronounced at a time like this. Now, of course, all central banks are struggling with arrangements between the fiscal authorities and the monetary authorities, as we are.  There’s no easy way around it.  I think the accord is certainly a step in the right direction.  But I fear that if we are perceived to be colluding with the Treasury around this idea, in the name of saving 25 or 30 or 40 basis points in the short term, we’re running serious risks.  Even if our actions lowered long-term risk-free rates for a time, and we got a pop—and I suspect we would get a pop—it does strike me the spillover benefits to lower rates on a broader range of securities are likely to be small, probably smaller than the models would suggest.  The availability of financing is unlikely to change by virtue of our actions. Our actions don’t appear to me to change the universe of institutions or the universe of assets that are financeable, and credit markets would not open to anyone or anything new.  The best that could be said is that we are lowering rates on riskier securities by a very small fraction, and that amount is likely to be overwhelmed by daily moves in risk premiums, as has been evidenced in the last few days, with costs that, as I mentioned, could be quite large. With respect to the U.K. example, which has gotten quite a bit of attention overseas, I think there’s a little less there than meets the eye.  My own sense is, this is more a story of liquidity, by virtue of the government entering markets that are considerably less liquid than Treasuries, and it’s also a bit of a story of a much more activist central bank in the U.K. than the markets had become accustomed to.  So I think that’s probably playing some role as well.   In light of the choices we have, I think it would be preferable at this point to increase our emphasis on mortgage-backed securities, as has been described.  I think we could continue to argue that that is solving a very serious problem, which is that market functioning is still more impaired in that market than we think is ideal.  They are wards of the state, yet they are trading as very poor, imperfect substitutes for the Treasuries.  I think that would be a better option to take at this time.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The speaker in the passage, Mr. Warsh, expresses disagreement and contention with the idea of purchasing long-term Treasuries in size. He raises concerns about the costs of such purchases and questions the effectiveness and potential negative consequences of the Federal Reserve acting as a buyer of last resort. He also argues for increasing emphasis on mortgage-backed securities instead.


Passage number 254.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement expressing gratitude to President Lacker.


Passage number 255.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage only contains one phrase "President Hoenig", without any additional information or context to analyze. Therefore, it cannot be determined whether there is contention or disagreement within this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
 MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, let me give my comments on expanding our balance sheet by first saying that I agree with those who have said, and I think you have said, that we cannot get the economy going until we get the banking and intermediation process fixed.  And I think that’s an important premise for going forward.  That means we need to focus on resolution, and I think this proposal that’s being worked on using the TALF and using us to help finance a bad bank is actually going to delay dealing with this very serious problem.  Given the comments that President Rosengren and others have made, I think we have an opportunity to get this done with some legislation that would create the ability to put some of these holding companies in receivership and move forward, so that we can get the banking system fixed on a sustained basis. I think that’s important, because I am very concerned about the TALF and growing our balance sheet, even at this meeting.  I think we should pause, because we have the TAF, we have other means to provide liquidity, should it be needed, and we have excess reserves that are sizable. I think we should focus on fixing the banking system and conserve our balance sheet carefully. I wouldn’t want it necessarily to decline dramatically, but I don’t think it would with the TAF, and so forth; we have the mechanisms to provide liquidity. But if the majority decides to go forward with it, then I do prefer mortgage-backeds to Treasuries. I disagree in a sense with President Lacker because I think it would just open us up to charges of monetizing Treasury debt.  And my experience is that it doesn’t matter if you’re   holding mortgage-backeds or Treasuries; when you try to sell them off your balance sheet, interest rates go up—it doesn’t matter; people are going to be upset.  So we’re better off with mortgage-backeds because it makes a cleaner line for us to say we are not in that business. I also want to talk about excess reserves and Fed bills.  I think that, as the banking industry itself has learned about excess reserves and the payment of interest, it is learning to arbitrage. From a governance point of view and from a simplicity point of view going forward, if the FOMC were made the party responsible for setting the interest rate on excess reserves, we would set the floor and control the fed funds rate.  You don’t need Fed bills if, in fact, the banking industry has learned how to arbitrage it.  I agree with President Plosser—getting us into issuing bills or in a so-called cooperative relationship with the Treasury, where we’re taking Treasury bills, is a very tenuous path for us to go down, and I’d stay away from it.  I think paying interest on excess reserves would go a long ways to managing our balance sheet, or, I should say, our ability to control the fed funds rate. On the swaps, I understand where they’re coming from on that, and I take that pretty much as a given, but hopefully it will be carefully managed and not easily accessed by the institution that needs it. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the proposal to use the TALF and the Federal Reserve to finance a bad bank, stating that it would delay dealing with the serious problem of fixing the banking system. The speaker also disagrees with President Lacker's preference for Treasuries over mortgage-backeds, citing concerns about charges of monetizing Treasury debt and the impact on interest rates. Additionally, the speaker disagrees with the idea of issuing Fed bills or entering a cooperative relationship with the Treasury, suggesting that paying interest on excess reserves would be a better approach to managing the ability to control the fed funds rate.


Passage number 257.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. On the interest rate on excess reserves, I think it’s coming to play the same role as the discount rate.  If the FOMC set a target for the federal funds rate, that would essentially determine where the interest rate on excess reserves would be, analogous to the discount rate. I think that analogy will hold up pretty well in the future.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. The speaker simply expresses their opinion on the interest rate on excess reserves and how it relates to the discount rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 258.
 MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I want to comment on the additional asset purchases, principally. I fully agree with Governor Warsh—in fact, I think he understated the case, and that is that I don’t think it’s advisable to purchase Treasuries here. I’ve sent a note around about that.  For the record, I just want to repeat some of the arguments in there.  To my knowledge, there is no liquidity problem in the Treasury market.  There are no obvious signs of a breakdown in arbitrage across maturities, unless Trish tells us differently.  The spreads between high-grade private issues and Treasuries do indicate that the markets are not functioning normally—I take that for granted, and you can see it every day—but that doesn’t mean that lowering long-term Treasury rates will affect private sector rates.  I do worry about the perception—and it’s palpable—that we will be succumbing to political pressure to monetize the exploding borrowing needs of the Treasury. Trish, you gave us some numbers today—if I add them correctly for the fiscal year 2009, it’s around $2 trillion.  It’s an inordinately large number.  I’m preparing for a trip I am about to make to Asia, and I do think that there’s a lot of sensitivity about this there.  (I’m not sure if that is whom you were referring to in your reference, Governor Warsh.)  If we are viewed as the handmaiden of the Treasury here, I believe you might have a negative reaction, not a positive reaction. If the majority decides in favor of increased purchases, I support respecting President Hoenig’s view.  I would prefer that we purchase GSE securities—the number is somewhat arbitrary, Bill, as you pointed out.  I would do it by size, or at least announce that we could go up to a size. The one thing I would caution against is giving a specific date, unless we are absolutely certain we can meet that date. I want to make a general point here.  There is a lack of confidence in the marketplace.  There was reference to that before; we see it with everybody we talk to.  Confidence is a function of competence, and I think we should exercise our muscle where we have proven ourselves quite competent.  We have proven ourselves quite competent, for example, in the commercial paper market, and we are proving ourselves quite competent in the mortgage-backed securities market.  There’s a question mark out there on the TALF—we’re not quite sure.  And it’s not because thestaff isn’t making a great effort—we’re just going through this new process, and it has become enormously complicated.  I want to play to our comparative advantage.  No question we could buy Treasuries—I don’t think that’s the issue—but I disagree with that for other reasons.  But I would support an expanded program on mortgage-backed securities, because we are competent in performing in that area. On the issue of the swap lines, I agree with the comment that this is procedural.  I think we have to be very clear in expressing this. I do worry that it may become quite evident to some that we’re doing this for one particular institution, and I think you could have retribution in terms of price reaction vis-à-vis that institution and the rumors about others.  But as long as we keep that in mind and express it clearly, then, were I a voter, I would vote to proceed. On the issue of Fed bills and special Treasury issuance, initially I indicated that I would be against the issuance of Fed bills.  I’m somewhat more enlightened now that the maturity that you described is in terms of one year or less.  I have been worried that a CDS market would develop around the Fed, which would be a negative development, particularly if there was a long maturity.  I still have doubts about the concept.  I’m not as clear in my own mind, as President Hoenig just expressed, as to the alternative, but I do worry about the eventual assumption that we might grow that program rather than rein it back in.  Therefore, if we were to proceed with issuing Fed bills or an alternative, I would want to have a clear sense of provision.  Otherwise, I think the expectation would be that we would continue to expand the program, and, therefore, give rise to these doubts about the further purchase of Treasuries.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, disagrees with the idea of purchasing Treasuries and expresses concerns about the perception that the Fed is monetizing the Treasury's borrowing needs. He suggests purchasing GSE securities instead. Additionally, he expresses doubt about the concept of issuing Fed bills and worries about the potential for the program to be expanded in the future.


Passage number 259.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no mention of any disagreement or contention in the given passage. Without any indication of opposing views or conflicting opinions, it is safe to conclude that there is no contention in the passage.


Passage number 260.
 MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me just comment on three or maybe four issues. First, with regard to asset purchases, I don’t have a conviction about the magnitudes, butI would diversify the purchases by adding Treasuries.  I suspect that the preponderance of our purchases would still be mortgage-backed securities, but both because it puts us in a better position when it comes time to unwind and because it may turn out to be effective, I would certainly start to purchase long-term Treasuries.  I’m not worried—I could be dead wrong about this—about great concerns about collusion or funding exploding federal debt.  These are unusual and exigent circumstances.  People would understand what the intent of the program is, in my judgment. With regard to the TALF—as initially described, I thought, and I think, it has some promise.  The way I saw it, you have some markets that are not working—there are no prices.  One of the things we learned from the Japanese experience, the Depression of the ’30s, and some other episodes is that you need to have resource reallocation occur.  We’ve got to move resources from places where they’re no longer needed to where they are needed, and you can’t have that happen without prices. So we need to get those markets restarted, and I’m in favor of the TALF as described. I would stay away from legacy TALF; funding the bad bank is a close cousin to being the bad bank. That’s the job of the Congress and the Administration, and of course, they’re not going to be quick to pick that up if we’re willing to do it.  But it seems to me we’ve got to make a stand somewhere with regard to this, and this seems to me to be a very clear and direct place where we ought to do that. Finally, with regard to Fed bills or SFP, what troubles me about that is that from one perspective it could be viewed as circumventing the debt ceiling, and I don’t think we want to put ourselves in that position. If we say to the Congress, “Understand that this is one of the effects of passing this legislation,” so that everything is on the table, then I’m not troubled by it.  But if we’re not that transparent, then I would also stay away from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 261.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The legislation explicitly says it.  It makes no sense to have the SFP, in particular, if it’s subject to the debt ceiling, because then we would not be able to use it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states a logical point about the potential lack of purpose in having the SFP (subject to the debt ceiling) if it cannot be used.


Passage number 262.
 MR. STERN. Okay. So long as that’s understood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making sure that everyone understands what has been said or agreed upon.


Passage number 263.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions President Yellen without elaborating on any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 264.
 MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a few brief comments on the various issues. Starting with the swaps, I support the staff recommendation.  I think it’s a prudent step.  There were two possible draft resolutions.  I think I would favor the greater transparency of A, but I don’t feel strongly about it and could support either. Then just a brief comment on the banking system.  I think it’s essential to fix the banking system for exactly the reason that President Hoenig and others emphasized.  I think we will not get recovery until we have a strong, healthy banking system with good banks that can attract capital. I would really love to see this done in the most transparent and straightforward way, namely, creating a good bank–bad bank type of framework.  I agree fully with President Rosengren’s comments—I would not make this a matter of optional sales of some portfolios of assets by banks that wanted to do it into a facility.  I would go in and much more aggressively, as he suggested, force write-downs on the value of these assets.  We have a great opportunity to do it after the stress test is over, and I would push these institutions into spinning off their operations, in the cases where it is needed, into a good bank–bad bank structure.  If we had legislation that allowed for the resolution of systemically important financial firms that aren’t banks, that would be much easier—to give us the power to push firms without necessarily having to put them into a conservatorship, but to take those steps.  So that’s what I think would be ideal, and I think it’s important for economic recovery.  I understand it’s expensive, and I understand  it’s hard to go to the Congress to get the amount of capital that’s needed.  I think the FDIC facility is a move in the right direction.  I prefer it to what we’re doing now.  It’s not ideal, but I think it’s a step in the right direction. On the legacy TALF, I have issues similar to those that President Stern enunciated.  I’m not dead set against it, but I do have qualms about our becoming involved in that business. On the purchase options, I certainly see the benefits of additional purchases of MBS, especially given that there’s going to be a step-up in issuance over the next couple of months in connection with refinancing of mortgages.  The spreads are still high, although they’ve come down, and it seems to me that the expansion of that program could have a beneficial effect on the housing market and the economy and on bringing long-term yields down more generally, since other long-term assets are substitutes for mortgage-backed securities.  I worry a little bit that they’re harder to unwind than Treasuries, but, still, it’s something that I would be very supportive of going ahead with now.  Bill mentioned a number much higher than I had envisioned. I don’t know what the right number is, so I’m quite open on that.  I would be supportive of going ahead with purchases of Treasuries at this point, as well, on various grounds.  One is that the economy is just a disaster area.  The economic outlook is utterly dreadful, and we have said we stand ready to do absolutely everything that’s needed to support the economy.  We have let some time pass without doing anything, and in light of the outlook I would want to do everything we can. I thought the staff memos made a good case for the idea that the Treasuries and MBS purchases would have favorable macro effects, and I understand the concern about “what are we doing monetizing the debt.”  That’s quite a legitimate concern, but, on balance, I come out in the same place as President Stern—I don’t think we’ve lost our independence, I think people realize these are unusual and exigent circumstances, and taking a step like that now   is a favorable thing for the economy.  So I am supportive of A and am very open-minded about magnitudes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. MS. Yellen expresses her support for various recommendations and ideas, and while she may have some qualms or uncertainties about certain aspects, she does not express disagreement with any specific points made.


Passage number 265.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement expressing gratitude to Governor Kohn.


Passage number 266.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks. Vice Chairman, did you have a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 267.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I just had a question about the liquidity of the Treasury market.  People have said a couple of times that the Treasury market is really liquid.  I don’t really think it’s all that liquid.  Trish, did you have a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses doubt about the liquidity of the Treasury market, which contradicts the previous statements made by others who claim it is highly liquid.


Passage number 268.
 MS. MOSSER. It’s more liquid than anything else.  [Laughter] But that’s a pretty sad statement at this stage.  There are, in fact, huge price gaps between the different pieces of the Treasury curve. One of the things we do by going in is actually to improve liquidity, particularly at the long end, and hopefully help to bring down yields that way as well. It is interesting—and this is a point I made in my presentation—that our presence in the mortgage-backed securities market, particularly the large presence in the TBA market, which is the forward liquid part of the  market, has improved liquidity tremendously, according to the asset managers we’ve been using.  I think our buying Treasuries would hopefully have some effect there, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the liquidity and price gaps in the Treasury curve, and discusses the potential impact of the Federal Reserve's presence in the mortgage-backed securities and Treasury markets on liquidity and yields.


Passage number 269.
 MR. FISHER. Can I ask a question about that, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It simply mentions someone asking a question.


Passage number 270.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without additional context. The phrase "President Fisher" does not provide enough information to make a judgment on contention or disagreement.


Passage number 271.
 MR. FISHER. The 10-year rate has sort of altered between 2.70 and 3.00 percent.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 272.
 MS. MOSSER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The use of "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement, as the response implies that there is disagreement or conflicting views being expressed in the passage.


Passage number 273.
 MR. FISHER. And when we talk about buying Treasuries to bring rates down, give me an order of magnitude.  Are we talking about going back to 2.70.  Are we talking about 2.50. Let’s say we did something in size.  What would your expectations be, just so we have a reference point for this discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a request for information to establish a reference point for further discussion.


Passage number 274.
 MS. MOSSER. It partly depends on where we would buy.  I don’t want to get too technical here, but I think we’d probably start not with the rates you see every day—the on-the­runs—we’d probably start with the off-the-runs where we can improve liquidity.  Normally as the off-the-runs come down, part of that would be the spread to the on-the-runs that would come down as well—hopefully it’s low. We would move across the curve. I think the strategy—which we’re in the process of working out, because we weren’t so sure that we were going to be doing this—would be to start there, but to go to recently issued securities, where there’s a little bit of liquidity but not a lot.  In terms of the size of the effect, honestly, I don’t think we have any better estimates than the ones that Joe gave you. We’re guessing there would be a very large announcement effect, of the order of magnitude that Joe said.  Once we got going—let’s say it’s $500 billion, and people figure out how much per week approximately we were going to do—we’d move back and forth across thecurve. We would announce in advance approximately over a course of weeks what tenors of the curve we would be buying—not exact days and exact amounts, because we don’t want to get front-run that badly, but we’d want to give folks a sense of where we were going.  If we thought there were particular distortions in one part of the curve, we would focus more there.  So we’re doing something somewhat analogous to the way we are managing the MBS program:  We don’t have an explicit target, but when both retail rates get high and mortgage spreads get high, the investment managers know to buy more, and we would take the same approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is discussing a potential strategy for buying securities, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement among the speakers. They are simply discussing different factors to consider and outlining their approach.


Passage number 275.
 MR. FISHER. But we would expect we’d still have a positive-shaped yield curve, obviously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker simply states an expectation without any conflicting opinions or perspectives being presented.


Passage number 276.
 MS. MOSSER. Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states that "Absolutely" in response to an unclear question or statement from someone named Ms. Mosser. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 277.
 MR. FISHER. It would still be fairly steep.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "It would still be fairly steep" is a straightforward statement of fact without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 278.
 MS. MOSSER. Absolutely. It would still be steep, but not as steep as it is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker simply agrees with the statement made before.


Passage number 279.
 MR. FISHER. If my memory is correct, it does help bankers to have a positive relationship. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses a statement based on their memory and acknowledges the helpfulness of having a positive relationship for bankers.


Passage number 280.
 MS. MOSSER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but there is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 281.
 Yes, and it’s typical CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide any specific information about contention or disagreement. It only mentions President Lacker without stating any disagreements or conflicts. Therefore, the answer is no.


Passage number 282.
 MR. LACKER. I’d like to ask what you mean by “improved liquidity” in this context because we use that term a lot. There’s a market, there are some sales, there’s a bid and there’s an asked, there’s a certain flow. We come in and we buy a lot.  That increases the volume.  Then afterwards, the price is presumably higher.  When you say “liquidity is improved,” do you mean there’s increased the volume because we added volume by purchasing a bunch, or do you mean the bid-asked spreads are lower.  Or do you mean the price is higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Lacker, seeking clarification on the meaning of "improved liquidity."


Passage number 283.
   MS. MOSSER. Bid-asked spreads, trade depth, how much size of a trade you could put through, how easy it is to hedge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting a list of factors related to trading and liquidity. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 284.
 MR. LACKER. So even apart from our volume, other people’s volume is higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact that other people's volume is higher.


Passage number 285.
 MS. MOSSER. Correct. We want other people to follow us in.  Our volume alone is not going to do it. That’s clear. If others don’t follow us in, it won’t work.  What’s interesting about the MBS market is that volumes were low, bid-askeds were very wide, and daily price volatility bounced all over the place. So if you actually wanted to sell any mortgages, it was very hard to figure out where they were going to price. What has happened since we have come in is that others have come in after us, because our managers add a little stability—if the price gets too high, they buy a little more that day; they buy less if it’s a little low.  So they temper their purchases on a day-to-day basis.  I don’t know if we’d do it literally day to day for Treasuries, but we would do it over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of the impact of their actions in the MBS market and suggesting that their approach has led others to follow suit for added stability.


Passage number 286.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Think about it as:  Volatility comes down, therefore the risk premiums will come down as a function of lower volatility.  And that’s what brings rates down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply explains that when volatility decreases, risk premiums and rates also decrease.


Passage number 287.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the title or position of President Pianalto.


Passage number 288.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the deterioration in the outlook, I do believe that aggressive policy action is needed.  I came to the meeting prepared to support alternative B, primarily because the simulations that the staff provided indicated that purchasing mortgage-backed securities gave us a bigger bang for our buck than the purchase of Treasury securities. However, I am willing to consider the purchase of Treasury securities.  I listened to Vice Chairman Dudley’s comments about the fact that the TALF is slow to get up and running and that we don’t have experience in the purchase of long-term Treasury securities.  So I dosupport the expansion of the purchase of mortgage-backed securities and the increase in agency debt purchases, but I am also willing to be open-minded about the purchase of Treasury securities. Regarding the extension of the TALF, I am concerned that we are not being clear about our objectives. Some of the questions we had around the table today indicate that.  So I don’t want our periodic announcement of additional classes of securities to be interpreted as if we are just being reactive.  I think that if we do move ahead with the expansion of the program, then making our objectives clearer will help the public understanding and help build confidence around the program.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 289.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Thank you. President Plosser" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Plosser.


Passage number 290.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’re not funding the bad bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply states that they are not providing funds to a specific entity, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 291.
 MR. PLOSSER. But we’re taking on the assets in support and providing the liquidity through the TALF to do that. I’d rather let the FDIC program work than have us augment it.But let me move on to the other two issues.  On the resolution mechanism, Mr. Chairman, I think you’ve been very clear about it; in fact, people in this room, myself included, have been talking about this for almost a year.  We need to get on with that, and it’s very critical.  I think that’s going to help us a lot, so I support that effort. As to the accord, I shared a memo about it with the Committee.  My views there are pretty clear. They really haven’t changed.  I do think that it’s important that the accord as I proposed it be about keeping our balance sheet much more pristine and about the exit.  It had its antecedents in Al Broaddus’s and Marvin Goodfriend’s work and even was a recommendation of the financial stability group of the G–30. But I do think that it’s a form of constrained discretion.  If we don’t want to be in the business of doing fiscal policy and we want to discourage the Congress from coming to us to engage in fiscal policy, then we want to make it easier for us to say “no” in those circumstances.  I think, Mr. Chairman, you’ve done a terrific job in this; in the example of the Congress talking about funding the automobile companies, you were very clear that that was not our business.  We want to discourage those kinds of requests, and my concern is raising the threshold for saying “yes.” What worries me about the Fed bills option, as opposed to the supplemental financing securities, is that the Fed bills option is going to make it easier for them to ask us to do things.  I think of it as giving us an almost incredibly unconstrained discretion to do fiscal policy or to be asked to do fiscal policy. And that may ultimately become a lack of independence, not a source of independence. That worries me, because, at some point down the road—maybe ten years, fifteen years, whatever—if the Federal Reserve became more politicized than it has been in the past, it might be much more susceptible or much more responsive to a claim that “we have to coordinate monetary and fiscal policies, and therefore, Federal Reserve, you should issue some   Treasury bills on our behalf and do some things to help coordinate policies.”  That probability may not be large, but it would be a very bad outcome for the institution, and I think we should do all we can to resist being in that spot.  The sunset provision, Mr. Chairman, as you suggested, may provide us some protection against that, but if the sunset provision comes along and we’ve issued Fed bills in the past, then it might be easy for them to want us to do it again.  So my current feeling is, if I cannot get a true accord, as I advocated in my memo, I’d prefer the supplemental financing program to be conducted as needed.  If we think we need that sterilization capability, I’d rather go that route.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily expressing the speaker's thoughts and opinions on various issues related to the Federal Reserve and fiscal policy.


Passage number 292.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 293.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The time is late, and in the interest of time and in response to the body language I see around the room, I’m going to limit myself to talking about the asset-purchase question.  I came here favoring growing the balance sheet with more asset purchases principally because of the deteriorating outlook.  A lot of good arguments have been made on both sides, whether it be Treasuries or an MBS program.  I, on balance, favor the MBS approach for reasons a number of you have articulated, particularly Governor Warsh.  But I would like to focus my remarks on a dimension that has been touched on, but perhaps not explicitly addressed, and that’s the communications challenges.  In lots of conversations over the last few weeks, particularly with directors and so forth, I get the increasing sense that we have big communication challenges, and they are part of the problem.  There’s a lot of confusion and uncertainty regarding how we’re making our decisions, what comes next, and how it all fits together as a total policy set. I think we need to consider favoring programs that are already in place.  Simplicity, I think, counts in these circumstances.  I would argue that it may be better to err on the side of “nonew stuff” if we can, to be as concrete as we can, to try to explain the decision framework that we are using, and to try to repeat a holistic explanation of policy going forward.  So I think a consideration in the decision is the question of communication.  President Fisher used the term “confidence.” President Bullard talked about “path.”  President Plosser used the word “uncertainty.” This all comes together to me as one more element to take into consideration, which is: How do we communicate it clearly, so the public, particularly the business public, understands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their perspective on the asset-purchase question and emphasizing the importance of clear communication. They mention that good arguments have been made on both sides of the issue, but there is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 294.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. For those who have talked about rates, would expressing purchases in terms of monthly rates be of any help.  I haven’t yet heard a specific suggestion about how to do that. Something like, say, “the Desk will aim to buy $80 billion a month of mortgage-backed securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a potential solution and seeking input or suggestions from others, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 295.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You’d want it conditional on the financial conditions.  In other words, if things got worse, you’d want to accelerate the rate, and similarly, if things got better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply explains a conditional approach to financial conditions, where the rate may be accelerated if conditions worsen and vice versa.


Passage number 296.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m looking for a concrete example.  I’d be more than happy to try to accommodate this kind of language if we can figure out how to do it.  Brian is already worried about missing dinner, I’m sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing willingness to accommodate a certain language and acknowledges Brian's concern about missing dinner.


Passage number 297.
  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. He’s worried about missing going to bed today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is laughing and expressing amusement, and then stating that someone is worried about missing going to bed today, which does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 298.
  [Laughter] MR. LOCKHART. Let me think about the question overnight, and I’ll come back with an answer tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. 


Passage number 299.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay, good. We’ll discuss that in the morning.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker responds positively, indicating agreement and a willingness to discuss the topic in the morning.


Passage number 300.
  MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mindful of the fact that I’m now the major impediment between the Federal Open Market Committee and dinner, I will follow President Lockhart’s lead and confine myself to comments on the large-scale asset-purchase issue.  But could I ask Trish a couple of quick questions beforehand.  One, Trish, you said earlier something about the equivalent of absorption capacity, or I guess it’s actually going in the other direction, the effective limit on MBS purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Tarullo before asking Trish a couple of questions.


Passage number 301.
 MS. MOSSER. And the number was—this is our best guess—an additional $2 trillion of mortgage-backed securities, that might strain it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 302.
 MR. TARULLO. Okay. Second, you were working with the half trillion figure for government securities, which had been put in the Bluebook.  Is there a minimum figure below which a palpable impact wouldn’t be felt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is simply asking if there is a minimum figure below which a palpable impact wouldn't be felt.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 303.
 MS. MOSSER. That’s a very hard question to answer.  I am concerned that a very small quantity would be seen as ineffective, and part of this is about the announcement effect, not to mention the liquidity effect.  Could it be less than $500 billion. Yes.  We calculated about how much we would have to buy every week, and we’d go in two or three times a week with several billion dollars every time.  So these would be sizable transactions from our perspective.  It could be scaled back a bit, but I wouldn’t want to put it at $100 billion or $200 billion, not over a nine-month period. I’m afraid it wouldn’t be effective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Mosser, expresses concern about a small quantity of something being seen as ineffective, while also suggesting that it could be scaled back. However, she states that she would not want to put it at a significantly lower amount like $100 billion or $200 billion. This indicates a potential disagreement about the appropriate level of the quantity being discussed.


Passage number 304.
 MR. TARULLO. Okay. Thanks. So, somewhat informed by those helpful answers, here are my views as they now stand.  First, it seems to me that under current circumstances, for the reasons many of you have stated, the risks for us are in doing too little, not in doing too much.  That leads me to the predisposition towards a large figure, at least as large as the Option A total that was included in the Bluebook, and, as Vice Chairman Dudley has suggested, perhaps larger   than that as well. Second, it seems to me with respect to the issue of the proper number—how do we know where we are going, how do we know how much is enough—you all have for some time been, and now I’m joining you, navigating in waters in which there’s not a particularly good map to follow, so it’s necessarily a matter of making judgments based upon what appear to be still seriously dysfunctional credit markets and a serious absence of liquidity and a seriously underperforming real economy.  In those circumstances, I feel pushed towards the larger end of the ranges that have been identified as appropriate.  Third, for the reason that President Evans stated earlier in the afternoon, my inclination is towards multiple instruments.  I’ve been struck just in my first six weeks here how many times people have commented that correlations or predictions that people might have expected in normal times are now breaking down a bit.  We’re not entirely sure of the effects of the application of a particular policy instrument, and it seems to me that, under those circumstances, it would be wise to mix instruments that are essentially directed towards the same end.  Having said that, my instinct, if it is possible—and this is why I asked Trish the question about minimum purchases of government securities—is for an asymmetric number and an asymmetric emphasis upon the MBS rather than the Treasury securities. Here I’d echo—or steal—some of the points that Vice Chairman Dudley made a moment ago. Finally, on communications, I have a slightly different, but I think complementary, point to the one that President Lockhart made:  If we go this route of including both MBS and Treasuries, I hope we could at least consider giving some explanation in the Committee’s statement about why we’re pursuing both rather than simply stating “here is the amount of each which we’ve instructed the Desk to purchase.”  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not contain any disagreements or contentious statements. It is primarily the speaker expressing their views and preferences on various issues related to monetary policy.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks. Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 306.
   MS. DUKE.  Now I’m the one standing in the way of dinner.  I just want to talk a bit about expansion of the TALF and then also about asset purchases.  In terms of expanding the TALF, my concern is about some of the asset classes, for instance, commercial-mortgage-backed securities. I don’t know a lot about how those are put together, but I do know a lot about commercial mortgages, and they’re much closer to business loans than they are to real estate loans. They’re entirely dependent on cash flows of different types of businesses.  So if we get into those kinds of purchases and we start to determine the haircuts, we’re going to be looking at credit allocation, because we’re going to be looking at differences in conditions in different industries and the real estate that supports those industries. The second thing is that I don’t think you can make a bad asset into a good one by taking a larger haircut. If we’re going to be taking assets not from banks, but from anybody who wants to disgorge them, then what would keep us from simply moving assets from one hedge fund to another. And I really get concerned that the Fed ends up getting stuck trying to digest every hairball that’s out there in the marketplace.  [Laughter]  That’s a technical term, “hairball.” I also worry that when we originally talked about expanding the TALF up to $1 trillion, it was with the understanding that that was conditional upon our getting the ability to issue either Fed bills or the supplemental Treasury securities.  That has gotten lost in the discussion of it, and I worry that with a quick announcement on this other facility, the notion would again get lost, namely, that it’s dependent upon other things happening. Finally, I don’t see this as a good bank–bad bank situation, and I worry whether we’d have enough left to deal with emergencies if they came up.  I’ll talk more about this tomorrow, but the more I keep going around and around considering all the things we’re trying to do to fix the banking system—while I think it’s important—I’m not nearly as confident as everyone else  that it’s something that we can do. So I keep coming back to thinking that the only thing we can do is to put a floor under house prices.  If we could put a floor under house prices, that would also put a floor under bank losses, and I think it’s our best chance to get moving in the right direction. Before I move to asset purchases, I’d like to start with the story of an elderly wealthy gentleman who had taken a young bride and begun to spend money like crazy.  His friends got very concerned that he was going to go through his entire fortune, and they elected one of their number to go and talk to him about it.  He said, “Sam, we’re really concerned.  We want to make sure that you know that you can’t buy love.” Sam said, “I know you can’t buy love, but if you spend enough money, you can buy something that looks so close you can hardly tell the difference.” [Laughter] So I think if we spent enough money, got enough of a hit right now, it would look like a floor on house prices, and we might have something every bit as good as a floor on house prices. It seems like the best time, when we have the synergies with the housing program, which should reduce foreclosures and should increase the ability to refinance.  Both borrowers and purchasers are so incredibly hair-trigger sensitive to what goes on with mortgage interest rates. Mortgage interest rates went down when we made the announcement before, but that was in November, and that was not the season when people buy houses.  If we do this in the spring, when there are other programs that would support it and when it’s pretty obvious that there’s not going to be any fiscal stimulus coming along that would also further support house purchases, then maybe we’ve got a window of opportunity where we can go in there and put a floor under house prices, and that will start to move some of these other things.  And with that, Mr. Chairman, I believe I’m the last one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns and worries, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 307.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I’m certainly glad we avoided a go-round.  [Laughter] Before we leave, we have a little bit of business.  We have to ratify domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there was relief for avoiding a certain situation and then states that there is some business that needs to be attended to.


Passage number 308.
 MR. KOHN. So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or expressions of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 309.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection. Thank you. We do have to vote on the temporary liquidity swap lines.  I heard most people proposing A, which was the more transparent alternative, understanding that there were perhaps some risks to that.  Governor Kohn, are you okay with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses gratitude for the lack of objection and acknowledges that there is a need to vote on an issue. They mention that most people are in favor of one alternative and ask for confirmation from Governor Kohn.


Passage number 310.
 MR. KOHN. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 311.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Would anyone else like to speak on that  question. (No response.) If not, do you want to take the roll on the swap lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for input or further discussion on a specific question, and when nobody responds, they move on to another topic.


Passage number 312.
 MS. DANKER. Okay. On resolution A from the memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement mentioned in the given passage. It is just a statement acknowledging the topic of discussion.


Passage number 313.
 Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes  Governor Duke  Yes  President Evans  Yes  Governor Kohn  Yes  President Lacker  Yes  President Lockhart  Yes  Governor Tarullo  Yes  Governor Warsh  Yes  President Yellen   Yes  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you very much.  At dinner tonight we’ll celebrate Governor Kroszner’s return, and we’ll begin tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply mentions the agreement or consensus among various individuals.


Passage number 314.
 [Meeting recessed] March 18, 2009—Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody.  I guess we’re ready now, finally, for the economic review.  Let me turn it over to Dave Stockton.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the meeting is about to begin and the speaker is handing over the floor to Dave Stockton.


Passage number 315.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Questions for our colleagues.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply expresses gratitude and states that there are questions for colleagues.


Passage number 316.
 MR. LACKER. Mr. Stockton, what did you say about auto prices.  I didn’t quite catch what made you believe they were going to reverse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is seeking clarification from Mr. Stockton about his statement regarding auto prices.


Passage number 317.
   MR. STOCKTON. New vehicles prices were up nearly a percentage point, 0.8 percent, for February. I guess it was just more a hunch, given the incredible weakness in demand currently, and the fact that there still is a very high days’ supply.  It seems unlikely to me that we are on the verge of a turnaround in motor vehicle prices.  So we had actually been expecting a decline. We got an increase.  I am skeptical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Stockton simply expresses his skepticism and doubts about the possibility of a turnaround in motor vehicle prices. There is no opposing viewpoint presented or debated.


Passage number 318.
 MR. LACKER. Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not showcase any contention or disagreement. It simply shows an individual expressing gratitude or thanks.


Passage number 319.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to answer this question without the actual passage or context in which President Stern appears.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
 MR. STERN. Yes. Dave, the Administration has asserted that the fiscal policy package will preserve and/or increase jobs by 3 to 4 million in the next couple of years.  I was trying to figure out from your fiscal policy analysis what the comparable number was.  I couldn’t quite get there, although my rough calculation was maybe 2 or 2½ million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Stern is questioning the accuracy and validity of the Administration's claim about job preservation and increase. He is requesting clarification and expressing doubt about the numbers provided.


Passage number 321.
 MR. STOCKTON. It centers on about 2 million, somewhere between 1¾ to 2¼ million jobs implicit in our package over the course of the next two years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the number of jobs included in the package.


Passage number 322.
 MR. STERN. Okay. Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Okay. Thanks" indicates agreement or acknowledgement.


Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without further context.


Passage number 324.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On the international side, you talked about and our focus seems to be on Eastern Europe and the European banks.  But I’m hearing a lot of concern about Mexico, both political meltdown—really serious civil disorder problems— and, obviously, some economic implications.  Do you have any comments on the Mexican economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a request for the speaker's comments on the Mexican economy.


Passage number 325.
 MR. KAMIN. From an overall economic standpoint, the situation in Mexico is quite serious. First of all, for the past three or four years, Mexican growth has probably been less than we might have expected, given its proximity to the United States and our markets and given how much potential there was for the economy to grow if the right structural reforms were implemented.  In fact, a lot of those reforms have not been implemented.  Mexican growth has been sort of moribund. It has depended on the United States as a source of both external demand and jobs for its people. Now that the U.S. economy is going down, the Mexican economy is suffering pretty badly, as evidenced by the 10 percent annual rate of decline in GDP in the fourth quarter.  Let me just add that obviously it is facing very serious political problems as well.  There have been a lot of reports in the paper about drug problems and the violence associated with that.  So, clearly, on a wide range of issues, Mexico has got problems. Balance of payments and banking sector issues were of course front and center in Mexico’s crisis of ’94 and ’95, and we would be hesitant to discount that possibility entirely now, but, interestingly, the banking system in Mexico seems to pose less risk than it might— certainly less than the banking system in Eastern Europe and probably less than those in other emerging market economies.  First of all, a large share of its banks are foreign-owned, and that represents some source of stability.  On top of that, the banks that are operating there appear to be less dependent on short-term wholesale sources of financing.  So their situation is a little better. Obviously, the situation could take a turn for the worse in the coming year if the decline in output is sufficiently large that nonperforming loans go up a lot.  But for right now, as I say, while Mexico has got a lot of problems on the balance of payments and on the banking fronts, the issues don’t seem as pronounced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the current economic situation in Mexico and providing some analysis.


Passage number 326.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Others.  No other questions.  [No response.] Okay. Then, we’re ready to begin our economic go-round.  I’m going to start with President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement indicating that there are no further questions and that they are ready to start the economic go-round.


Passage number 327.
 MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy is in recession. It’s possibly somewhat less severe than in some parts of the country, but still a very sharp recession. All of the problems that we see nationally are certainly apparent in the Eighth District, including credit market problems, deeply depressed auto sales, declining house prices, and so on. The national economy appears to have weakened further relative to January expectations. I think there’s further downside risk, and I agree with many here that the main risk is some kind of failure to get the financial sector on track toward recovery.  The global aspect of  the downturn continues unabated. I think this is a very worrisome factor.  It’s largely outside our historical experience in the modern era.  It may be that we’re not fully comprehending the meaning of global events because they haven’t really been part of our experience.  And I’m worried about that. I think expectations remain very fluid, both for the course of the real economy and for inflation. We know that expectations have a huge influence on macroeconomic outcomes.  That influence is partially masked in normal times:  In normal times, expectations are very stable; in normal times, for output, the private sector would expect something close to the balanced growth path; in normal times, for inflation, the private sector would expect something close to the implicit inflation target pursued by the central bank.  So, in normal times, it appears that expectations don’t move that much, and, perhaps, therefore, are not so important to how the economy is going to function. But these are not normal times.  As a result, expectations are very fluid and can be significantly influenced by just a few events.  It’s as if the private sector is throwing out all of the old data, because the old data come from a different regime that doesn’t apply anymore, and they’re looking at the most recent developments, just a few things that are happening, and deciding which direction the economy is likely to go and which direction inflation is likely to go. This is what makes me especially worried about the economy and the inflation path during 2009.  In particular, I think further disinflation and possible deflation is a clear near-term risk. Deflationary expectations could become entrenched during 2009, especially given the downside risks to the forecast, including the global nature of the very sharp downturn and the possibility that the financial sector problems won’t be addressed in an appropriate way or quickly enough.  Deflation would exacerbate problems in the housing sector and credit markets generally because  of the prevalence of nominal contracting in the economy.  So I think a near-term goal for monetary policy is to avoid this outcome.  In the medium term, we actually face inflation risk, because the expansion of the balance sheet would suggest lots of inflation possibilities out there.  I call this a two-headed dragon. But if we get stuck in a deflationary trap, you’re never going to see that materialize.  And, again, a deflationary trap is, to my thinking, a steady state:  You get stuck there, and you cannot get out. Is a deflationary trap a real possibility.  We have the clear example of Japan.  We have foreign central banks sending their policy rates to zero globally.  Our own model and our own baseline forecast have core PCE inflation at 1 percent in 2009, and below 1 percent for 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. With an economy in that kind of state for that long, suppose you get another negative shock at some point; then, you do go down to the deflation trap equilibrium and get stuck there.  So I really think it’s a problem for the near term—that we could get stuck in that trap. Policy should attempt to avoid letting deflationary expectations take hold.  How should we do this.  I really liked the Bank of England’s announcement during the intermeeting period.  They said that they were planning to expand the balance sheet to increase the monetary base.  They said that they expected that to feed through to the broader money stock measures and that the growth in the money stock would help them to maintain their medium-term inflation target.  I thought that was a crystal-clear piece of communication, and the markets understand exactly what it means and what the intent of policy is.  So I thought that that was a good example to follow. Those are my comments on the economy.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns and opinions about the state of the economy and the potential risks of deflation, but there is no indication of any disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 328.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statements or context that imply contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude to President Fisher.


Passage number 329.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Lockhart without presenting any opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 330.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by congratulating you on having a highway interchange named after you.  I’m sure we all envy you having your own off-ramp.  [Laughter] Conditions in the Sixth District remain very weak, and our contacts expect worsening conditions in the near term.  Businesses have made significant workforce reductions and tell us they are prepared to make additional cuts if economic conditions worsen. The end of the first quarter was seen by some as being a key milestone.  If business conditions have not improved by then, they will move further to put their businesses in survival mode, so more layoffs could be forthcoming in April.  All sectors of commercial real estate are under pressure from growing vacancy rates and upward adjustment of cap rates.  I’m concerned that growing problems in commercial real estate are likely to further complicate efforts to stabilize the banking system and credit markets. There’s anecdotal evidence of alarm being expressed about and by the local government sector. Some jurisdictions and authorities are pinched not only by falling revenues but also by borrowing conditions in the municipal finance market.  One large city mayor estimated several thousand private sector job losses from projects not helped by the stimulus package that will shut down in the near term due to financing difficulties. Our directors and their contacts, as well as financial market contacts, are becoming increasingly vocal over the lack of specificity regarding economic policy and their inability to understand what we would call our decision rules.  A major source of confusion is uncertainty about what policy actions will come next and under what circumstances expansions of current policy will be decided. Turning to the national economic conditions in the outlook, the numbers indicate we remain in serious recession, with most data coming in worse than Atlanta’s already downbeat expectations. If we were to submit a formal forecast for this meeting, we would adjust our trajectory for the economy downward and push the timing of the beginning of a recovery further out. As mentioned earlier by Dave Stockton, one positive in the recent data is retail sales numbers.  However, the CFO of the country’s second largest retailer advised a cautious interpretation of sales numbers. Consumer purchases are occurring in an environment of deep price discounts and may not be a very solid indicator of improving economic health.  Also, retailers are consolidating their inventories as they prepare for store closures. We believe the risks remain to the downside for both economic growth and inflation.  In my conversations this time with a few financial market participants and bankers, there was acknowledgement of improved conditions in a number of markets, particularly where the Fed continues to intervene. Also, progress of investment-grade corporate funding markets was noted.  At the same time, there was sentiment that the Fed’s credit programs may have to stay in place for quite some time, well into 2010.   On the subject of the housing and home mortgage market, I heard the view that the magic rate threshold for qualifying mortgage applications volume is 5 percent.  When rates drop below 5 percent, refinancing volume especially has picked up markedly. To repeat what I said yesterday, most of the sharpest comments dealt with the perceived policy ambiguity and the effect of this on markets.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker providing information and analysis about economic conditions and expressing concerns and observations.


Passage number 331.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage is a simple statement of gratitude from someone named President Rosengren. There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 332.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We are more than a year into this recession, and yet the decline in GDP and deterioration in labor markets continue unabated and, indeed, continue to surprise on the downside. While I’m hopeful that our actions and the fiscal stimulus package will help to stabilize the economy in the second half of the year, the downside risks to our forecast remain my primary concern.  Like the Greenbook, the Boston Fed forecast expects that the unemployment rate will remain well above full employment, and inflation will remain well below my target throughout the forecast horizon.  Indeed, the Boston Fed forecast implies a high probability of a deflationary period if aggressive action is not taken. Concerns with credit availability continue to be a dominant theme when I talk to businesses of all sizes. Lenders are looking for opportunities to tighten terms of lending agreements, and rollover of financing agreements remains problematic.  In anticipation of continuing financing difficulties, firms report that they are restricting operations.  Even organizations that normally would build through a downturn, such as hospitals and major universities, have halted projects, leaving holes and half-finished buildings at many construction sites in Boston. I see several worrisome near-term concerns that are likely to impede more-normal financial market functioning.  First, once we have reworked the initial submissions of the stress tests, the results for several major banks are unlikely to be consistent with public pronouncements by some major banks that additional capital is not necessary.  As our baseline forecast is quickly converging to the stress scenario used in the exercise, there is a real risk of loss of public credibility as it becomes apparent that some large banks will need substantially more capital, which in the current environment can only be supplied by the government.  I am concerned that stock prices and credit markets may suffer additional setbacks and make some of our forecasts for the stock market going forward a little more problematic. Second, the delays in removing problem assets will continue to cast a shadow on many asset prices. We may need to move to simpler, more straightforward solutions for removal of problem assets, possibly in conjunction with the additional equity infusions at the end of the stress tests. Third, like President Lockhart, I’m very worried about the commercial real estate sector, which is rapidly deteriorating. Neither the CMBS market nor banks are likely to provide much support for the rollover of commercial real estate financing.  And I’m increasingly concerned about life insurance companies, which have traditionally been significant investors in commercial real estate, as share prices of the major publicly held life insurers are now for the most part selling at less than one-fifth of what they were six months ago, likely resulting in a limited financial capacity to provide commercial real estate financing.  In addition, the decline in commercial real estate prices is putting many commercial properties under water, adding to financing constraints. While we normally do not consider life insurers to be a source of systemic concerns that would have significant impacts on markets, that assumption may be tested over the course of this year.  Finally, stabilizing the housing sector is critically important.  While a small component of GDP, the impact of housing problems has been disproportionate to its weight in GDP.  Declines in housing prices continue to limit borrowing capacity for households, cause large losses in household wealth that slow future consumption, and contribute to the significant losses embedded in mortgage instruments and related derivative products for a variety of financial intermediaries.  While recently announced federal programs should help, those programs may not fully reflect the new reality that job losses are likely to be the primary reason that borrowers cannot make payments.  We held a mortgage foreclosure event in Hartford, Connecticut last month, attended by roughly 900 borrowers. Discussions with the borrowers at the event, and subsequent survey results, indicate that job losses among one or more family members were already a key driver in pushing borrowers to foreclosure.  Taking aggressive action to stabilize housing and employment may be particularly important at this juncture.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses concerns and worries about the current state of the economy, such as the decline in GDP, deterioration in labor markets, high unemployment rate, and potential deflationary period. They also highlight concerns with credit availability, financing difficulties, and delays in removing problem assets. Furthermore, they express worry about the commercial real estate sector and the impact of housing problems on borrowing capacity and household wealth. Overall, the speaker's tone is cautious and indicates disagreement with the current state of the economy and the effectiveness of certain programs and measures.


Passage number 333.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude to President Hoenig.


Passage number 334.
 MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I would say that the Tenth District is going to reflect very much what you have heard in the national briefing.  It was doing better than the nation as a whole but is now quickly deteriorating into the national average.  Our labor markets have continued to deteriorate.  Unemployment rates are going up in each of our states.  Our manufacturing activity has actually plummeted, importantly because of the weakening of the export market that was mentioned earlier.  Our agricultural sector is still holding its own, but it, too, is showing signs of weakening, as is our energy industry.  Commercial real estate is showing signs of weakening because of some of the refinancing that’s now required and because of the   increasing vacancies that are affecting the cash flows off these and, therefore, affecting some of the parties holding these notes. I would point out, too, that financing in the region has deteriorated, I’d say “badly” almost, and I’ll give you one anecdote.  I understand that it’s not hard data, but it gives you a sense of the situation. We have an insurance company that does premium financing, about $1 billion financed out of a major New York bank.  It went back to refinance a portion of the loan, and the bank wanted LIBOR plus 500. The CEO of this company said, “You know, I understand I have to help recapitalize that industry, but this is taking all my profit.”  So it is trying to get other types of financing.  And that kind of pressure is, of course, trickling down and affects how they do business as well. So it is a pretty daunting task for businesses in this type of environment, I realize. Finally, when we look across the District, we’re seeing increasing numbers of problem banks, as well as banks that we would put on a watch list because of the concentrations in, say, real estate or some sectors of agriculture.  So, overall, the District is reflecting the deteriorating conditions in the nation as a whole, and, that is, of course, a concern to us as well as to everyone else here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply provides an overview of the current economic conditions in the Tenth District, stating that it is reflecting the deteriorating conditions of the nation as a whole.


Passage number 335.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states "Thank you. President Plosser."


Passage number 336.
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Third District economy remains very weak, and there are few signs that this weakness will lessen any time soon.  The three-state region hit its employment peak in January 2008.  Since then, it has lost 1.8 percent of its jobs, and 60 percent of that loss has come just in the last three months.  You might step back and say, “Well, maybe this is the darkness before the dawn.”  I wish I had confidence in that, but I’m not sure that’s what’s going on.  It looks pretty bleak.  Our Business Outlook Survey is set to be released at 10:00 tomorrow morning, so it’s confidential until then. Last month’s reading was near a record of minus 41.  The reading that will be reported tomorrow morning is minus 35, so it’s some improvement.  We usually take about five points as being statistically significant, so this is just at that margin.  A few months ago, the index went up and just fell back down again.  So I don’t know that there’s a whole lot of comfort in the most recent number; I take it to mean things are about the same as they were.  Survey participants do expect the outlook to improve in the next six months.  But many of the forward-looking indicators suggest that before that comes about there will be further cutbacks in employment and further retrenchment in capital investment at our regional manufacturers. Although banks in the Third District are in somewhat better shape than the national average—they tend to be doing pretty well—they do report consumer loan volume is down.  And many of them also report that companies don’t want to invest and don’t want to borrow money at this point. So it’s demand retrenchment rather than just supply retrenchment, from their perspective. Bankers in general in our District are angry—they’re mad, they’re furious at the government.  I’m getting requests to give TARP money back at an increasing pace.  They’re not being allowed to do it, or nobody at the Treasury is helping them do that.  They are, as President Lockhart said, frustrated with the lack of clarity about where policy is going and what it’s going to be. They’re angry about the changes in the rules of the game, the ground shifting beneath their feet. And they’re frustrated that some of the programs aren’t doing what they’re supposed to be doing. I have one major player in the student loan industry saying that the TALF is not going to do anything for student loans, which, by and large, are 7- to 10-year loans in view of the time it takes to get through college.  So buying new issues of three-year loans won’t help them,  because they don’t offer many student loans for three years.  I can go down the list of many other industries who feel the same way.  Whom are we going to bail out, whom are we going to protect, and whom are we going to support going forward.  I think there’s a lot of angst, a lot of uncertainty, and a lot of frustration out there in the business community and the financial community in particular. So our District economy’s outlook looks largely in line with that of the national economy.  As President Bullard suggested, one of the things that has been most worrying in the recent episode is the dramatic decline in foreign countries and the impact that’s having.  That’s something we can’t do much about directly, but it is worrying, and, again, it’s causing more angst and more fear and more problems. Now, amidst this downpour of bad news and numbers, there is a possible ray of sunshine.  I note—as Dave Stockton did—that the consumption numbers seem to suggest that the free fall in consumption may have come to an end.  I hope that’s the case; that would be encouraging.  Both retail sales and disposable income numbers have held up in the last couple of months, and personal consumption expenditures have as well. The last two months of consumer price inflation data suggest to me that the risk of a sustained deflation, at least in the near term, is somewhat abated.  So I’m not as concerned as some are—President Bullard, for example—about the shift to sustained deflationary expectations. Although I think we have to worry about it, that’s not my number one concern at this point. Overall, my outlook for the national economy is pessimistic for the near term, although I continue to have a lot of belief that markets eventually will recover, so I may be a little more optimistic on a recovery than the Greenbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing a summary of the current economic situation and expressing their outlook and concerns.


Passage number 337.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards "President Yellen".


Passage number 338.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Pianalto.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 339.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The reports from my contacts have been very weak for months now.  In order to get a better sense of the outlook, I asked some of my contacts some questions focused on whether their responses thus far to the recession have been enough to prepare them for the weakness that they are anticipating in their markets.  Unfortunately, the vast majority of them said that they had not done enough and that they continue to curtail their activities and investments at a very quick pace.  And their confidence in a recovery later on this year is dwindling. I am concerned that this lack of confidence is translating into actions that will further dampen our prospects in coming months.  I was surprised that even some of the more successful manufacturers in my District, such as Eaton, Lincoln Electric, and Parker-Hannifin, are all implementing further cutbacks in investments, hiring, and production plans.  In several cases, these further cutbacks have been motivated by this deepening retrenchment that we are seeing with our foreign partners. But some of my contacts are losing confidence in the policy responses to the recession. Several of my directors noted last week at our meeting that public confidence is obviously critical to our recovery plans, yet the public is increasingly finding the government’s   response confusing and incomplete.  This lack of confidence is weighing on their expectations for growth this year and even next year. Now, my directors are certainly supportive of the actions that the Federal Reserve has taken, particularly the stress-testing that we are doing of banks and the long-term asset purchases.  However, they are concerned that the communications about some of the other government programs—some of the Treasury plans—have been unclear, and, therefore, are hampering the recovery.  Mr. Chairman, I think that your interview on 60 Minutes played a helpful role in clarifying some of these programs, and I did receive many calls from directors and business contacts saying that they thought the interview was well received. Like the staff, I revised down my projection for output and inflation based on the incoming data, and, obviously, the weakening global outlook.  My projection is very much in line with the Greenbook baseline, although in my projection the unemployment rate peaks at 10 percent, because I don’t anticipate as much of a cutback in the participation rate as the Greenbook does. Also, I do think that the outlook calls for a larger policy response.  In my baseline, I’ve incorporated the simulations on additional nontraditional policies.  I know the Greenbook hasn’t, because they are obviously difficult to include in a numeric projection.  But at this point, I have included some of that policy response in my outlook. In my view, the risks remain very much weighted to the downside for both output and inflation. Given the repeated markdowns that we’ve made to our projections, I think more downside misses are likely to make it more difficult to restore confidence that we are dealing with the economic crisis appropriately.  At this point, neither the projections nor any of the anecdotal reports that I have received are likely to make a difference in or shift our policy response. We are in the midst of an economic decline that doesn’t have concrete signs of a  developing recovery. I think we need to react to the current crisis thoroughly, but also with as much as clarity as possible. I know we’ve talked a lot about the focus on our communications of what we are doing. I do think that is critical at this point.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses concern about the lack of confidence in government policy responses to the recession, while also acknowledging support for the actions taken by the Federal Reserve. This indicates a difference in opinion or perspective on the effectiveness of the government's response to the economic crisis.


Passage number 340.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone addressed as President Stern.


Passage number 341.
 MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I fully agree we are certainly in the midst of a significant contraction.  Back in January when I submitted my forecast for the first half of the year, I had the economy declining at an annual rate of 4 percent, which is now quite close to the Greenbook number. The question I’ve been asking myself is:  Should I mark the forecast down further and push the recovery off further.  So far, I’m not fully convinced that that’s the right response, in part because, as Dave Stockton noted, the basic case for recovery is the same as it has been—stimulative monetary and fiscal policy, gradual further improvement in financial market conditions, and the internal dynamics associated with the corrections that occur during a recession; that is, production and employment decline, an inventory correction process occurs, ultimately aggregate supply falls below even diminished aggregate demand, and then you have set the stage for the expansion. Moreover, as a veteran of many, many forecasting exercises, I’ve seen some of this phenomenon before.  There’s a tendency in the midst of a serious recession, especially if you’re doing bottom-up forecasting and going through the various components of aggregate demand— consumer spending on durables, nondurables, services—to take a look at each component and say to yourself, “Well, that can’t get better any time soon.”  And by the time you’ve gone through that, you’ve eliminated all possibilities of any component getting better any time soon.  So you wind up with a forecast with a very extended recession.Finally, there’s only one other point I’d make.  It’s not meant to provide a lot of comfort but just to suggest that it wouldn’t take all that much for the recovery to get under way in the third quarter, albeit initially quite sluggishly.  I just did an arithmetic exercise—that’s all it is— and if consumer spending in the aggregate grew at 1½ to 2 percent rate in the third and fourth quarters, that would turn those negative GDP numbers in the Greenbook into slightly positive GDP numbers. The only reason I make that point is that it wouldn’t take all that much.  Consumer spending has shown some signs of leveling off, so it may be that there’s some silver lining there. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and analysis of the economic situation and expressing their uncertainty about whether to adjust their forecast for further contraction. They also mention some positive factors that could potentially lead to a recovery in the third quarter. Overall, there is no conflict or disagreement presented.


Passage number 342.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Lacker without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 343.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The clear deterioration in the real economic outlook since our last meeting is consistent with the information we had from the Fifth District.  All our survey indexes remained at very low levels.  The forward-looking components of most weakened as well.  The Carolinas have been particularly hard-hit in recent months.  Their economy is manufacturing-intensive and export-oriented, more so than the rest of the country, and their housing markets, which had lagged the national cycle, have weakened substantially in the last year. I was pleasantly surprised by the retail sales numbers and the Greenbook’s improved outlook for consumption expenditures, which suggest that diminishing marginal returns to cutbacks in discretionary spending may be setting in.  I’m a little wary about making too much of it. I think the weak labor market is going to weaken further, and the possibility of further declines in wealth could easily drive household spending down another step. I’d note though that in more normal times a significant deterioration in the forecast from one Greenbook to the next would bring with it a revision in the assumed policy path for the fed   funds rate. Now that we’re at zero, I’d expect a commensurate revision in the path for our balance sheet. If I’m reading the Greenbook correctly, the staff hasn’t made any change to their baseline policy assumptions, and I would have thought the Greenbook would have built in more expansion of credit programs or the monetary base or both. In this context, it’s striking that, as I mentioned yesterday, the monetary base has declined by $200 billion since the beginning of the year.  I’m looking at daily averages over the first two weeks of January versus the period ending, I think, March 11.  I understand some big MBS transactions settled on March 12, so there’s a tiny little spike in the figures.  But, still, that was striking. The base obviously remains at a very high level, consistent with our statements, but I wonder if that $200 billion decline means that we tightened policy since the beginning of the year. I don’t think we know one way or the other, but I’d think we would want to make sure we increase the base whenever the outlook deteriorates significantly.  This is why I think it would be useful for us to begin outright purchases of Treasuries, and moreover, I’d like to suggest that we explicitly direct the Desk to make sure that the monetary base expands by a significant amount during the policy period—maybe even put the number into the directive for the intermeeting period.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

In this passage, Mr. Lacker discusses the deterioration of the real economic outlook and expresses some concerns about the weak labor market and the possibility of further declines in wealth affecting household spending. He also mentions the decline in the monetary base and suggests that the Fed should consider increasing it through outright purchases of Treasuries. While there is some discussion of different factors and potential actions, there is no clear disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 344.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude to President Evans.


Passage number 345.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude to the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 346.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In general, I think the Greenbook baseline forecast is pretty sensible. The New York Fed view is not much different, but, echoing President Stern’s comments, I can also tell a credible story of why the rate of economic contraction first slows, then the economy reverses direction as we move into the second half of 2009: The inventory cycle turns from negative to positive, the decline in housing activity ends, mainly because there’s no room to fall further, and fiscal stimulus provides support to consumer spending and cushions the downward adjustment in state and local government outlays. Unfortunately that doesn’t tell us much about 2010 and beyond.  In my view, the longer-term outlook rests on the answers to two key questions.  First, what is the desired household saving rate.  Where is it headed, and how rapidly will we get there.  Or to put it somewhat differently, echoing President Yellen, where is the household sector in its deleveraging process.  And, second, will the financial system stabilize and credit availability steadily improve over the next couple of quarters.  Of course, these two interact. If we don’t get  an improvement in credit availability, asset prices will go down further, and that will feed back into the household saving rate. The fourth-quarter flow of funds data were, I think, as expected.  They’re going to show this 9 percent drop in household net worth, which brings the ratio of household net worth to income back to levels not seen since the mid-1990s.  That would seem to imply that the household saving rate, which is currently around 5 percent, will likely need to rise even further.  And the question is: To what level.  There has to be quite a bit of uncertainty about that both in terms of where we are going and how fast we are going to get there.  One possible benchmark would be the household saving rate of the early 1990s, which was slightly below 8 percent.  If that’s where we’re headed, I’d say that’s probably doable while still having an economic recovery, although it is considerably higher than the Greenbook forecast of 5¼ percent this year and next. An 8 percent rate does not seem too high a bar, given that we have a lot of fiscal stimulus coming.  The fact that most of the stimulus will be saved does not mean that the stimulus has been ineffective, since the counterfactual in this case might be that the households would have had to reduce their spending in order to achieve their new desired level of savings. However, one could argue that there’s a risk that an 8 percent household saving rate may be too low. Demographics may imply the need for a higher saving rate now, given that the working-age population is much older now than it was in the 1990s; in other words, if we adjust for the age mix of the population today, an 8 percent figure back then might map into a 9 percent or 10 percent figure today. If that’s the case, obviously the task is a bit more daunting.  But the bottom line is, we simply do not know how older households are going to react to the wealth losses that they’ve experienced in terms of how much they’re going to raise their saving rate, whether they’re going to delay their retirement, whether they’ll have the opportunity to delay  their retirement and keep their jobs, and whether they’ll accept lower standards of living in retirement.  It’s just a huge open question. Some commentators have set the bar much higher.  They argue that the ratio of household debt to income needs to fall back to levels of the mid-1980s.  That’s a very high bar, implying the ratio would have to decline by more than half.  It would suggest that the deleveraging process of households has only just begun and that we have many, many years of deleveraging ahead of us. I think that’s a bit too pessimistic a view for several reasons.  Over time, the cost of financial intermediation has fallen; that implies to me a higher debt-to-income ratio and a higher asset-to­income ratio, as well.  Second, some of the changes in tax policy do encourage you to hold more assets and more liabilities; for example, earlier, you might have paid off your mortgage, and now you refinance your mortgage and instead fund your 401(k) plan.  In that case your assets and liabilities are both higher now relative to your income, but you are not worse off.  I expect we’ll see some further decline in the household debt-to-income ratio, but because I think the longer-term secular trend has been upward, I don’t think we’re going to need to see decades-long household deleveraging. At least I hope not. Of course, the difficulty in deleveraging will depend on the inflation outlook.  I think that’s important.  If we do fall into a debt–deflation dynamic, then, as income drops, real debt burdens will increase, and it will become even more difficult for households to deleverage even if they want to. So that just underscores why we need to do everything we can to minimize the risk of a deflation outcome.  The second key issue is, of course, the stability of the financial system.  Without this, I don’t think we can have a sustainable recovery.  Yes, the economy could improve a little bit during the second half of 2009, but if we don’t fix the financial system and its ability to intermediate between savers and borrowers, I suspect 2010 will be very disappointing. This is why the downside risks to the forecast still are predominant in our views at the New York Fed. The FOMC and the Board should concentrate on taking whatever steps are needed to improve market functioning and the viability of the large banks, which lie at the core of the financial system.  This implies expansion of our liquidity programs, such as the TALF, and, at minimum, increased purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities.  It also implies support for the Treasury’s CAP, which is designed to get additional capital into the banking system, as well as a willingness to extend our suite of 13(3) activities and our foreign exchange swap programs.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The author is discussing their views on the Greenbook baseline forecast and the longer-term outlook, as well as expressing their hope for a sustainable recovery and the need to improve the financial system.


Passage number 347.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude to Governor Kohn.


Passage number 348.
 MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I agree with the general sentiments around the table. The economy is falling further and faster than we thought it would.  We see some signs of stability, as President Plosser pointed out, in consumption and even in housing, but these are very tentative and at a very low level; I think even if household spending were to level out and get a little boost from fiscal policy in coming quarters, the economy would continue to fall further, at least for a little while.  Business investment is very weak and will continue to decline in response to previous downshifts in sales through the multiplier-accelerator effects and in response to tight credit and very constrained credit availability.  I was surprised in looking at the investment chart in Greenbook Part 2 to see that the cost of credit has actually risen substantially for businesses at a time when that’s obviously counterproductive. Global demand shows no signs of stabilizing and will continue to depress exports, as Steve was telling us, especially in light of the stronger dollar, which just adds further downward pressure there. To me, perhaps the most troubling developments have been in the financial sector.  Maybe that’s because I’m spending my days and nights worrying about them.  There has been a  tightening of financial conditions over the intermeeting period, even as the economy has weakened: The dollar has increased, equity markets have fallen, and interest rates, including the risk-free rate, have risen in recent weeks.  I think there’s a growing lack of confidence in financial institutions.  This is not just a U.S. phenomenon, it’s a global phenomenal; Trish’s chart showed increases in CDS spreads everywhere—Europe, U.K., U.S., Asia—everywhere.  I think the recession is spreading more and more into the loan books of these banks globally, and that’s undermining confidence, despite government efforts everywhere to try to shore up confidence. We used to talk about resilience in the economy—that was part of President Stern’s discussion of why economies bounce back—but I think part of the natural equilibrating mechanisms involves expectations that things will get better, that is, people spend based on that expectation. As President Bullard pointed out, expectations about the future are very depressed, and I agree. Uncertainty is extremely high, and people don’t know what to expect, so they’re not taking risks, and that’s impeding the bounce-back in the economy.  Government’s responses to the difficulties are certainly contributing to this uncertainty.  Again, this is not a U.S. phenomenon.  I think governments everywhere are having trouble finding their footing about what to do here. These are very difficult issues without obviously correct answers and responses, and, therefore, you see changes in approaches in various jurisdictions, not just in the U.S. I think we’ve got a difficult witch’s brew here.  There’s populist anger constraining policy options. We need the smartest people in the country in our troubled financial institutions and in our government working on solutions, and we’re driving them away from both of those institutions every day. I think the set of circumstances implies that improvement in the financial sector is likely to be quite slow and halting, at a minimum.  Lenders and investors are becoming   more wary and less confident. We’ve got the risk of a further major deterioration in the financial sector, where the failure of several large institutions is a nontrivial risk and could be brought on by government policies. I think the projection of stabilization of demand in the second half and recovery next year is reasonable as fiscal policy kicks in and assuming financial stability, but the downside economic and financial risks are very, very large.  And even if the economy stabilizes in the second half of the year, we’re starting at a much lower level, with a very high output gap.  So I agree with others who have pointed to the risk of deflation and the interaction of that risk with the high levels of debt in the household sector as a very grave danger going forward.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, agrees with the general sentiments expressed by others in the discussion. He provides his own analysis of the current economic situation and expresses concern about the state of the financial sector and the potential risks and challenges ahead.


Passage number 349.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Thank you, Governor Warsh" simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Warsh and does not imply any disagreement or debate.


Passage number 350.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite thank you message.


Passage number 351.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a simple expression of thanks from an unnamed speaker to Governor Tarullo. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 352.
  MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Not surprisingly, my assessment of the economy and the financial sector converges with those that have already been expressed.  So let me just quickly make a few additional observations that support the hypothesis of an even longer period for stabilization and recovery than reflected in the Greenbook forecast and, thus, even greater vulnerability for the economy for some time to come. I begin with an admittedly speculative point about the domestic labor market, but one that complements some earlier comments by Presidents Yellen and Evans.  It appears to me that an unusual number of industries will be undergoing major structural adjustments during the course of this downturn and, as a result, may not rehire at the rate that might be expected in a cyclical rebound. These industries are two groups. One consists of industries like construction and financial services that were directly involved in the asset bubbles associated with the financial crisis. It seems likely that overcapacity in those industries so far exceeded sustainable demand that the post-recession employment profile will be substantially, rather than just moderately, below pre-crisis levels. A second group consists of industries that, even in the middle part of the decade, had seen significant pressure on their business models.  Companies and sectors as diverse as autos, media, legal services, and retail were already in the process of consolidation and/or downsizing. This process has clearly accelerated under the weight of the contraction in real GDP. There are good reasons—anecdotal, I admit, but good reasons, nonetheless—to believe that, to a greater or lesser degree, each of these industries will emerge from this recession permanently leaner than they were, and some may be fundamentally changed.  This observation is, as I noted, to date unsupported by even raw data, much less by systematic comparison with earlier severe recessions.  But if my intuition is buttressed by such an analysis, elevated unemployment levels may be stickier for a longer time than we now anticipate.  The emergence   of new firms and industries that might normally be expected to pick up some of the slack will, at the same time, be hindered by continuing dysfunction in financial markets. I have some very different observations about the international economy, but, I’m afraid, with similar implications for the shape of the GDP growth curve.  The downward revisions of economic performance abroad do not seem to have been met with a sense of policy urgency in many countries, particularly with respect to non-monetary policy measures in the advanced foreign economies.  Indeed, my conclusion from my week in Europe was not dissimilar to that of Governor Warsh. I observed, in addition, that there has been a kind of collective decision among policymakers to put on a relatively happy face publicly, while being unable privately to offer any grounds for optimism.  In formal comments and public utterances, a number of policymakers made reference to wholly adequate stimulus measures.  They discounted the significance of increased bank CDS spreads, or, in at least one case, commented on the wonderful bargains available to those who still had jobs.  This attitude is of particular concern because, as Steve Kamin mentioned, the effects of stimulus measures in many advanced foreign economies are substantially front-loaded into 2009. Whether because of policy paralysis in the face of daunting challenges or, in some cases, because of the weak political circumstances of incumbent governments, too many countries seem unable or unwilling to elevate their responses to rapidly deteriorating conditions.  I worry that a similar hesitancy to take forceful steps could lead to inadequate responses to contingencies, such as widespread banking problems in emerging markets.  An absence of confidence in the political strength of the government can also push officials towards more serious consideration of measures, such as shifts in foreign exchange policies, which may relieve a certain amount of domestic pain by shifting it elsewhere in a neutral or even negative-sum fashion.  My concerns about this issue have increased dramatically in the last week.  Many emerging markets have limited capacity to help themselves, given their own fiscal and monetary constraints. One major exception, of course, is China.  Yet even China seems to be relying in the medium term on a rebound in advanced foreign economies that would restore many of the exports lost in recent months.  While that approach worked well for countries coming out of the Asian financial crisis in 1999, it was built on the strength of largely unaffected American and European economies.  Obviously, demand in our economies will be weak for quite some time.  Moreover, the continued problems in our financial sectors imply that capital flows to emerging markets are unlikely to pick up, as they did following the Asian financial crisis. Despite these impediments to a reasonably fast-paced return to conditions promoting rapid emerging market growth, there’s little indication in China or elsewhere that policymakers have used the crisis to accelerate shifts in their own growth models away from a high level of export dependence. Coupled with what is, at least for the present, a somewhat passive policy instinct in some advanced economies, international developments may, like our domestic employment situation, suggest a more prolonged and shaky recovery period.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo's observations about industries undergoing major structural adjustments and potentially not rehiring at a rate expected in a cyclical rebound suggests a longer period for stabilization and recovery than reflected in the Greenbook forecast. Additionally, Mr. Tarullo's concerns about the international economy and the lack of policy urgency in many countries, as well as their hesitancy to take forceful steps, also suggests disagreement with the current approach to addressing deteriorating conditions.


Passage number 353.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I understand coffee is ready. Why don’t we take a 20-minute break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that the coffee is ready and suggesting a 20-minute break.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 354.
 MR. MADIGAN.5  As indicated by the Greenbook and by your discussion this morning, the economic outlook has deteriorated markedly over the intermeeting period. At the same time, the options for applying additional stimulus quickly appear limited.  It now seems likely that the TALF will lift off only slowly.  And prospects for the enactment of additional fiscal stimulus, at least in the near term, appear dim. In these circumstances, consideration of further monetary stimulus through large-scale asset purchases would seem to be warranted.  The Bluebook presented two policy alternatives, A and B, that involved additional asset purchases and one, alternative C, that would not involve further stimulative measures.  I will focus my remarks this morning on alternatives A and B.  This morning, we have proposed revisions to the draft statements; the revised statements are provided in the package that was distributed to you earlier labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.” I will begin with alternative A, on page 2.  Under this alternative, the rationale section—paragraphs 1 and 2—would note that the economy is undergoing a severe contraction and that the near-term economic outlook has worsened.  It would point to a number of indicators of the economic weakness.  Paragraph 1 would end on a note of some optimism by stating that the policy actions taken to stabilize financial markets and institutions, together with fiscal and monetary stimulus, will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth.  Paragraph 2 would note the Committee’s expectation that inflation will remain subdued, dropping the phrase “in coming quarters” that was used in the January statement, consistent with a view that inflation could be low for some time.  Indeed, it would again cite “some risk that inflation could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability in the longer term.”  As President Fisher noted, the rationale section provides a rather downbeat reading on the economy, but perhaps one that is realistic. In the policy paragraph, alternative A would again indicate the Committee’s intention to employ all available tools.  It says that the Committee will hold the federal funds rate range at 0 to ¼ percent and indicates an expectation that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate “for an extended period.” This phrase would suggest a longer interval than the phrase “for some time” used in January and suggested for alternative B.  To provide additional economic stimulus, the Committee would take three policy actions under alternative A: increasing the amount of its agency MBS purchases by $500 billion to a total of $1 trillion this year; increasing the amount of its purchases of agency debt securities by $100 billion to a total of $200 billion this year (the boost to agency debt purchases is an addition relative to the alternative presented in the Bluebook); and initiating purchases of longer-term Treasury securities that are to total $300 billion over the next six months. This paragraph would also note that the TALF has been launched.  The statement would conclude by indicating that the Committee will be carefully monitoring the System’s balance sheet and by suggesting some predilection toward stepping up its balance sheet expansion by noting that “it will be assessing whether a faster pace of asset purchases would be helpful in improving credit market conditions and supporting economic activity.”  A possible downside of including such language is that it suggests a possible course of action that the Committee may end up not pursuing. Alternative B, on the next page, begins with a rationale section, paragraphs 1 and 2, that is identical to that proposed for alternative A.  However, under alternative B, the Committee would not initiate purchases of Treasury securities.  Rather, it would more than double its purchases of agency MBS securities, to a total of $1.25 trillion this year, and double its purchases of agency debt securities to $200 billion.  This alternative would not include anything comparable with the final clause of alternative A indicating that the Committee was inclined to further step up its asset purchases. In summary, alternative A would constitute a somewhat more aggressive expansion of the FOMC’s asset purchases than alternative B.  The differences in terms of total asset purchases are small:  Alternative A would commit to an expansion of your asset purchases by a total of $900 billion, whereas the increase under alternative B would be just slightly less, at $850 billion.  However, as I noted, the language of alternative A would be more forward-leaning with respect to possible future increases in asset purchases.  And the initiation of Treasury purchases might suggest to market participants that the Committee’s operations could be expanded particularly in that direction in the future. The key difference between alternative A and alternative B really is whether or not to purchase Treasury securities.  To review the arguments for and against such purchases, you might be inclined to proceed with purchases of longer-term Treasury securities if you: believe that the economic situation had deteriorated so substantially that you did want to apply “all available tools” as indicated in your previous statement; feel that it might be helpful to diversify the tools that you are applying to the situation; believe that purchasing Treasury securities rather than private securities is preferable to minimize the Federal Reserve’s involvement in credit allocation; or think it might be easier to unwind in the future holdings of Treasury securities than   holdings of private securities such as MBS, which might be less liquid or might be seen in the future as tied particularly to primary mortgage market conditions. On the other hand, you might be inclined not to purchase longer-term Treasury securities if: you think that purchases of private securities such as MBS would more effectively improve conditions in private credit markets and thus provide better support to private spending; or you are concerned that market participants might believe that you are monetizing the federal debt, a perception that might lead to adverse effects on term premiums or, perhaps, on inflation expectations. Under alternative C, page 4, the Committee would make no adjustment to the policy tools that it is already implementing, and it would not reference any modification to the Federal Reserve’s liquidity programs other than those that have been previously announced.  Instead, the statement would indicate that the Committee decided to keep its target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and indicate that it continues to anticipate that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for some time.  The second paragraph would note that the near-term economic outlook is poor but indicate that the Committee anticipates that a gradual recovery in economic activity will begin later this year, subject to significant downside risks.  The final paragraph of the announcement would note the range of policy actions that are already in train. The Bluebook also presented an alternative structure for the FOMC statement, based on a suggestion provided by President Bullard.  Applying that structure to alternative A, and incorporating this morning’s suggested revisions to the policy actions, is shown on page 5 as alternative A′. A′ is substantively the same as A, but it reorders the statement such that the Committee’s actions are presented first.  In particular, the first sentence of the statement indicates that “The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to increase the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet further by purchasing $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months and by acquiring an additional $500 billion of agency MBS and $100 billion of agency debt securities this year.” Obviously, this approach gives greater prominence not only to the actions themselves but also to their effect on the Committee’s balance sheet.  Conversely, this approach gives less prominence to the very downbeat summary of the economic situation in paragraphs 2 and 3, a possible advantage of this approach. However, the flow of the statement may be seen as a bit less logical, in that it presents the Committee’s actions before discussing the economic conditions that motivated them. Alternatives B′ and C′, pages 6 and 7, apply the same structure to alternatives B and C. The final three sections of the package provide draft directives for the three basic alternatives and their primed variants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains contention or disagreement. The speaker presents two policy alternatives, A and B, that involve additional asset purchases, and one alternative, C, that does not involve further stimulative measures. The speaker provides arguments for and against purchasing Treasury securities, which is the key difference between alternatives A and B. This suggests that there is disagreement about whether or not to purchase Treasury securities as part of the asset purchases.


Passage number 355.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. Are there questions.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a polite statement followed by a question.


Passage number 356.
   MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, in the Bluebook and yesterday we saw a chart of how the unemployment rate and the inflation rate would play out under these different strategies. My question is about alternative A, the largest program that we’re considering.  Is it plausible/likely/possible that what we’re looking at here would be enough.  Would the markets look at this and think that the FOMC has taken actions that it believes, if the outlook doesn’t deteriorate further, would be enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification about a specific strategy.


Passage number 357.
 MR. MADIGAN. You’re asking about how the markets would interpret this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Madigan is simply being asked about how the markets would interpret something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 358.
 MR. EVANS. Is it likely that the Committee would be willing to see this as large enough to put us in a good position and we’d just wait for confirmation of the outlook.  Are we even close to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement in the passage. The first speaker (presumably Mr. Evans) is suggesting that the Committee may view a certain situation as favorable, while the second speaker is questioning the likelihood and expressing doubt by asking if they are even close to that position.


Passage number 359.
 MR. MADIGAN. Judging by the simulations that were presented in the Bluebook, I would say that this alternative A is roughly comparable to the green dash-dotted line on page 32, if you happen to have that in front of you.  It’s roughly the same size, with a slightly different composition.  So the effects on interest rates might be similar.  Of course, that would not get the Committee, on this analysis, to something comparable to the unconstrained policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  This passage is providing an explanation and making a comparison, but there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 360.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Thank you" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 361.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A two-handed intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The provided phrase "a two-handed intervention" does not contain any information or context that can indicate contention or disagreement. It simply describes an intervention or action that involves the use of both hands.


Passage number 362.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. A quick question: The directives have “up to,” and the statements do not have “up to.”  Is that important.  Is that intentional.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is simply asking for clarification about the presence or absence of the phrase "up to" in the directives and statements.


Passage number 363.
 MR. MADIGAN. No, that’s not intentional.  Thank you. We should correct it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Madigan acknowledges a mistake and suggests correcting it.


Passage number 364.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A question from President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage mentioned in the prompt is missing, so I cannot determine if there is any contention or disagreement present without it. Please provide the passage so I can assist you better.


Passage number 365.
 MR. FISHER. May I just ask, Mr. Chairman, a question of Ms. Mosser.  Every one of these statements says that we’ve launched the term asset-backed securities loan facility.  Could   you just give us a quick update of where we stand on that, because the wording here might be questioned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a request for an update on the status of the term asset-backed securities loan facility and does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 366.
 MS. MOSSER. Because the deadline is tomorrow, not surprisingly, we have no one who has signed on the dotted line. We have, however, three very serious issues—two of them auto-related, one of them credit card-related—that appear at this stage pretty likely to go through.  There do seem to be at least enough customer-to-dealer contracts signed, or in the process of being signed. My ballpark guesstimate, based on the numbers I’ve seen, is $5 billion—could be $8 billion—total. Quite frankly, before the machinations of the last week and a half, I don’t think we truly anticipated more than $5 to $10 billion in the first subscription.  There’s been no price discovery in this market for several months.  And just on those grounds alone, many issuers and investors might be somewhat reluctant to be first in the TALF.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and discussing the lack of customer contracts signed for the deadline.


Passage number 367.
 MR. FISHER. So we can’t say it has launched.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact without any opposing opinions or arguments.


Passage number 368.
 MS. MOSSER. Well, we’ve launched it in the sense that the subscription is open and that lending has happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the subscription is open and lending has happened, indicating agreement or progress in the launch.


Passage number 369.
 MR. FISHER. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It simply states that Mr. Fisher is agreeing with something or giving permission to proceed.


Passage number 370.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there other questions.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple inquiry about whether there are any other questions, and the response identifies the speaker as Governor Duke.


Passage number 371.
 MS. DUKE.  I just want to make sure my math is correct and my understanding is correct. When we do the additional $500 billion in mortgage-backed securities, does that increase the pace at which we buy them, or does it extend the time from June until the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Duke is seeking clarification and asking for confirmation regarding the details of a financial transaction.


Passage number 372.
 MS. MOSSER. The $500 billion would largely extend the buying through the end of the year. If the Committee has a preference that those be front-loaded, that would be possible for us to do from an operational standpoint.  As a matter of fact, if the Committee would be interested  in giving us direction on that, we’d be happy to take it.  Honestly, the additional $500 billion would not be a huge surprise to the market.  I think the expectation of most is that $500 billion at the same pace through the end of the year is a likely outcome of today’s meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating information about the potential impact of a $500 billion stimulus measure.


Passage number 373.
 MS. DUKE.  Under alternative A, by my count it’s $500 billion in MBS, $300 billion in Treasuries, and $100 billion in agencies, for a total of $900 billion.  Would we expect that to have a similar result as in the note on $1 trillion in a combination of mortgage-backed securities and Treasuries.  Is that the result we would be looking for from alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating facts and asking a question about the expected result of different options. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 374.
 MR. MADIGAN. I think we consider it to be roughly the same.  Our ability to discriminate between effects on one market or another is pretty limited.  There’s lots of uncertainty around these estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Madigan presents his opinion about the ability to discriminate between effects on different markets and acknowledges the uncertainty surrounding the estimates.


Passage number 375.
 MS. DUKE.  For alternative B—which is $750 billion plus $100 billion, I get $850 billion. Would we also expect that to have similar impact.  In other words, would the fact that there’s no Treasury component matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Duke is merely asking a question and seeking clarification regarding the potential impact of alternative B.


Passage number 376.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Given our ability to distinguish between them, we wouldn’t be able to say that that made a material difference from any other one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the ability to distinguish between certain things without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 377.
 MS. DUKE.  Okay. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a simple acknowledgment and gratitude for a response.


Passage number 378.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. There was a two-hander from President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that there was a two-hander from President Rosengren. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 379.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Yes, just a clarification.  It would seem that, if the goal is to push rates down and cause a wave of refinancing, then we’d want to be doing the bulk of the purchasing during the period where the refinancing would occur, which presumably would be over the next quarter. If everybody refinances over the next quarter or two, the ability to purchase new mortgages in the second half of the year would probably be pretty limited, if we’re actually successful in doing it. It does seem that the goal is not to have an even flow over thecourse of the year, but to enable rates to get low enough that we facilitate a wave of refinancings and new home purchases.  So I think it would be good if we can provide some clarification that the goal is not to spread it out, but to push the rates down and get the refinancings going, which would imply front-loading, assuming the program is successful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a request for clarification and an explanation of the writer's understanding of the goal.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 380.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Do you think the front-loading is more important than the announcement effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
Explanation: The passage presents two options - front-loading and the announcement effect - and asks the reader to choose which one they think is more important. This suggests that there is disagreement or contention between the two options.


Passage number 381.
 MR. ROSENGREN. I wouldn’t want to be constrained to do only a limited amount and have the refinancings cause rates not to go down very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's preference and concern about the potential impact of refinancings on interest rates.


Passage number 382.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You don’t necessarily want to save the $500 billion for the second half of the year is what you’re saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is a statement presenting a potential viewpoint or suggestion, but it does not indicate any opposing opinions or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 383.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Right. If it’s appropriate, I’d rather do it sooner than later.  I want to get as much bang for the buck in the next two quarters as we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a personal preference to prioritize something in the future.


Passage number 384.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Can we find a phrase that would be added that would say something like “with the greater portion to be done in the first—”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for a suggestion to add a phrase about completing the greater portion of a task first.


Passage number 385.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. “Over the next several months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints, arguments, or opposing perspectives. It simply states that something will happen in the future without any indications of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 386.
” MR. WARSH.  “Increasing the rate of purchases.”  I think that’s what you are trying to get the markets to gather.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker, Mr. Warsh, is simply stating his interpretation or understanding of the objective of trying to get the markets to gather.


Passage number 387.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Except it’s a little bit uncertain, because if we front-load it, then later there’s less.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 388.
 MR. TARULLO. Brian, I just want to make sure I understand the numbers as well, and it comes down to a difference in wording between A and B.  In B, you have “increase its purchases of agency debt this year by $100 billion to a total of $200 billion.”  In A, it just says, “boost its purchases” and “now anticipates purchasing $200 billion.”  I guess that makes the headline   number in alternative A $1 trillion.  But, if I understand correctly, it’s really an additional $900 billion of authorized purchases. Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a clarification of the numbers and wording used in options A and B. The speaker is seeking clarification and confirmation of their understanding.


Passage number 389.
 MR. MADIGAN. That’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 390.
 MR. TARULLO. Okay. I’m just curious.  Why is the alternative A today $100 billion less than the alternative A in the Bluebook, which was $500 billion additional MBS and $500 billion Treasuries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by a person seeking clarification.


Passage number 391.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Could I interject something here for just a moment.  As I asked yesterday, everyone gave their views, and I listened very carefully to what the options were. What was suggested here today was two approaches.  One expanded on the MBS front, going from $1 trillion for this year to $1¼ trillion, with a concomitant small increase in agency debt, but no Treasuries. The other approach was to maintain the same pace of MBS purchases through the second half of the year—subject to a bit of language about timing, in response to the point that was raised—and to open a new front on the Treasuries side; there I was responding to concerns that a number of people raised about monetization and the independence perception, and so on, trying to make it seem more like a step into this arena rather than a big-scale, new intervention. So that was the thinking on those two approaches. Let me now add, having heard the discussion around the table today, I think I would like to raise a third option, which is the union of the two, which would be the $750 billion of MBS, plus the $300 billion of Treasuries.  I’d be open to that as well. I’m trying to avoid the proliferation of too many alternatives, but what I heard today suggests that some people at least might be interested in yet a more aggressive approach, while still attentive to the costs and benefits of expanding our balance sheet faster and further.  Do I have clarity on sort of what the options are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply summarizing different options and expressing openness to a new option that combines two of the previous options.


Passage number 392.
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement of gratitude, so there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 393.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Any other questions for Brian.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement asking if there are any further questions for Brian.


Passage number 394.
 MR. LACKER. My question is actually for Ms. Mosser.  If we adopted either B′ or the schedule that the Chairman suggested, and you were to pace it the way you would, what are the chances that the monetary base will shrink in the next intermeeting period.  You’ve got the TAF, CPFF, AMLF, and foreign exchange swap lines. Is there a significant chance that you won’t make enough purchases in the intermeeting period to offset other declines in our assets and leave the monetary base shrunken rather than expanded over the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is purely a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 395.
 MS. MOSSER. If we accelerate, particularly on the mortgage side, and front-load those, I would view it as very unlikely. Spence probably has a better feel on the liquidity programs.  A little shrinkage there might occur, but, particularly if we add Treasuries and we are more aggressive on the mortgage side, I would view it as very unlikely that the base would shrink.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is sharing their opinion that it is unlikely for the base to shrink if they accelerate and front-load the mortgage side and are more aggressive with adding Treasuries. They also mention that Spence might have a better understanding of the liquidity programs.


Passage number 396.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. You have this one question of the settlement of mortgage securities, though, which might not actually occur by then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating that there is a question or uncertainty regarding the settlement of mortgage securities. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 397.
  MR. HILTON. You really have to look at what the settlement date is almost.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 398.
 MS. MOSSER. Yes, that’s right.  In thinking about the base, because the settlements are so lumpy we probably have to switch a week forward and note that even though the base might shrink one week, it will jump up a lot the next when all of the MBS settle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact about the base and settlements without any conflicting statements or opposing views.


Passage number 399.
 MR. LACKER. Do you think the base is likely to increase.  Would that be your expectation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is simply asking for the opinion or expectation of the other person.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 400.
 MS. MOSSER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The use of the word "Yes" suggests that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the full context of the passage, it is difficult to determine the specific nature or details of the disagreement.


Passage number 401.
 MR. LACKER. A couple hundred billion, would you guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a direct quotation where Mr. Lacker is being asked a question about a specific amount of money. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 402.
  MR. HILTON. It’s not a long intermeeting period, so a couple hundred billion might be a little bit larger than is realistic.  It is hard to anticipate where the liquidity facilities are going, but the fact that they have been relatively stable on balance for a couple of months—since late January—makes me think that, without some fundamental change in liquidity conditions, they’re probably not going to break in a substantial way one direction or another.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and acknowledging that it is difficult to predict the future of liquidity facilities. There is no clear contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 403.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I’m sorry, if I could just add a point.  With the CPFF, you had this big refinancing wave that happened late January.  You’re not going to have another one until late April, and there’s going to be less coming due at that time. So that’s probably not going to change dramatically.  The big question is on the foreign exchange swap side.  But that has already come down a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is stating some facts and discussing the potential changes in the future. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 404.
 MR. LACKER. The current size is around 400 or 500 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that the current size is around 400 or 500 billion.


Passage number 405.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 450.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as no passage was provided.


Passage number 406.
 MS. MOSSER. I think I can say with some confidence that, if we buy a lot of mortgages, by the middle of May it’s very unlikely that the monetary base will be shrinking, and it will grow fairly aggressively, because the big settlements in mortgage-backed securities tend to happen in the middle of the month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a belief or assertion about the potential growth of the monetary base based on the purchase of mortgages.


Passage number 407.
 MR. LACKER. Just to pursue this a little more, what’s sketched out here is $1¼ trillion of increases in our assets above what they otherwise would be.  If we were interested in assuring that a certain portion of that passed through to the base, that might call for even more offsetting increases. Let me ask something operational.  If we wanted to be sure that the base expanded, or that it expanded by a certain amount, could you vary Treasury purchases within the intermeeting  period in a way that would react to incoming information on the foreign exchange swap usage, and the like, to achieve that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is just a hypothetical question being asked for clarification.


Passage number 408.
 MS. MOSSER. Yes. I think there might be better tools for doing that, though.  Honestly, if that were the guidance given, we would probably go back to doing repos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Mosser agrees with the statement but suggests that there might be more effective tools for achieving the same goal.


Passage number 409.
 MR. HILTON. We can do repos.  The other element is our involvement in the dollar roll market as well, which we probably could scale up at a relatively fast pace, if we wanted to.  Again, though, we would have to look at the calendar, because those also settle on a discrete date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing different options and possibilities, but there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 410.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply thanking the chairman.


Passage number 411.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So, President Lacker, just to reiterate the options quickly:  The “all MBS” option would be $850 billion—that’s $750 billion plus $100 billion.  What I will call the “Treasury” option is $900 billion—that’s $500 billion MBS plus $100 billion agency debt plus $300 billion Treasuries. The “combined” option is $1.15 trillion—that’s $750 billion MBS, $100 billion debt, and $300 billion Treasuries.  My reaction to your question is that, particularly if we front-load the MBS, even though there might be some weekly variation in the base, the very strong trend of the base will be clearly up for the rest of the year. This will certainly make it very clear to everybody that that’s the intention, and that will be the result.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any disagreement or contention. It is describing different options and discussing the potential impact of those options.


Passage number 412.
 MR. LACKER. Well, you understand my concern.  There is $1 trillion on our balance sheet that is demand-driven and could roll off in very uncertain circumstances.  I’m not quite sure whether that will happen or not.  So you can understand why this leaves a fair amount of uncertainty about where the base is going to be at the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates that there is a concern and uncertainty about the $1 trillion on the balance sheet and its potential roll off in uncertain circumstances. There is no clear expression of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 413.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It would all have to roll off.  It certainly would be very unlikely, but okay. Anyone else have a question for Brian.  [No response.] Just in terms of parameters, we have the three substantive options.  I want to remind you that there are also two statement options.  One is more similar to what we’ve had before, which states the economic situation first, and then goes through the paragraph on policy actions.  We also have proposed an alternative suggested by some comments that President Bullard made that in some ways would be analogous to our old structure in that it would put the policy actions first.  For the sake of convenience, let’s call that the “inverted” structure—without any derogation implied.  So let me now go to President Plosser, if you’re ready.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different options and structures for presenting information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 414.
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I raised some issues yesterday about asset purchases and policy. I think some of the things that remain questions for our policies going forward include, for example: How do we evaluate the merits of the various programs we have. What are the tradeoffs.  Which ones work best.  Which ones don’t.  How do we equate the programs at the margin to get the most bang for the buck as we use our balance sheet. I think a lot of the discussion yesterday about Treasuries versus MBS had a mixed tone to it, in the sense that part of it was a desire to use monetary expansion to support the economy at large, while some people wanted to use the asset purchases for liquidity purposes or to bring mortgage rates down or to target credit market interventions in certain markets.  Certainly, part of the debate about whether to use Treasuries or MBS depended on which side of that fence you were on. So I think we still have some work to do about deciding the policy mix. But I’m going to throw a monkey wrench in the works.  Yesterday the Chairman asked for alternative ways of saying some of this.  One of the issues we discussed, and it came out, I think, loud and clear, was that there’s a lot of concern about the path of policy.  When we  announce policy actions—whether they be the TALF, MBS, or what have you—we tend to announce them as quantities.  As a result, it’s not very clear what happens when that quantity is reached. What happens after that.  What will be the next market.  What will happen going forward.  I think there’s an argument that conducting policy in that manner creates a lot of uncertainty in the marketplace about what’s going to come next.  Are they going to do it again. And, if so, how big would that be.  Another issue when we target specific volumes is that the conditionality of those interventions doesn’t come through very clearly.  It may seem that we are going to do the $500 billion no matter what else happens. So President Bullard and I—I’m going to implicate him as well—wondered, “Well, is there another way to do this that might be helpful.”  We put together a new version of the statement, with the idea that we want to get beyond just announcing one-off programs that we may or may not do again and move toward thinking about saying that we’re going to have a plan to increase the size of the balance sheet or increase the size of certain components of the balance sheet over a period of time, and that we’ll adjust those growth rates, if you will, as needed, as the economy either worsens or improves. The proposed wording was passed around—we’ve called it alternative B′′.6  The idea here was to address the question, “Okay, how else could we communicate to the markets about what our plan is.”  Paragraph 1 basically becomes, “The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to continue to increase the Federal Reserve balance sheet through the purchase of agency MBS and Treasury securities.  The Committee expects the growth rate of the MBS and Treasury components of the balance sheet combined to average about 10 percent a month.  The Committee will carefully monitor macroeconomic and financial conditions and adjust this rate of expansion as warranted.” 6 The statement distributed by Mr. Plosser is appended to this document (appendix 6).Now, we came up with 10 percent a month.  Basically, that would get us to the $1 trillion over the course of the year, which we were talking about yesterday.  It’s ambiguous about whether it ends up being Treasuries or MBS.  It then says we will carefully monitor this expansion at each meeting and adjust it as we deem appropriate—if we need to ramp it up, we can do that, and if we want to bring it down, we can bring it down.  The rest of the statement is pretty much the same as the original.  We took the rest of what was paragraph 1 and made it paragraph 2, which is basically a discussion of the TALF and the other programs that we’ve initiated. So it is the same there, and the rest of the statement basically follows B.  Again, our view is that we were looking for a way to get us out of thinking about one-off programs or volumes of purchases that we’re going to make, and instead we were trying to set a target or objective for a growth rate of some set of quantities.  I think there can be debate about whether it should be Treasuries plus MBS. I think President Lacker would probably prefer it to be targeting the base to get the same outcome. But we wanted to put this on a table as kind of a straw man to get the Committee thinking a little bit about different ways to help us manage expectations better.  It’s also contingent on economic conditions, which we think is important. So, Mr. Chairman, I know we surprised you with this, but you asked us this question, so we thought we’d try to come up with an alternative that’s worth discussing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some disagreement in this passage. One example is when Mr. Plosser mentions that there is debate about whether to target Treasuries or MBS. This indicates that there is disagreement among the Committee members about which assets to prioritize in their asset purchases. Another example is when he mentions that President Lacker would prefer to target the base to get the same outcome. This suggests that there is disagreement about the best approach to achieve the desired outcome.


Passage number 415.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I appreciate it. Thank you. It’s interesting, and some may view the lack of specificity between MBS and Treasury as a plus, and some might view it as a minus.  But it’s an interesting alternative, so I appreciate your doing that.  Did you want to talk at all about the choice of the substantive alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 416.
  MR. PLOSSER. I have a preference for Treasuries in general, as I discussed yesterday.  My preference for Treasuries is not particularly driven by a desire to push down long-term interest rates so much as it is by a desire to help manage the composition of our balance sheet.  I’m not as worried about the effect on inflation expectations of buying Treasuries, in part because, if there is a concern about expectations of inflation, it’s that I really don’t want them to fall. So I am not too worried about that aspect of it, and I do prefer Treasuries.  In terms of the magnitudes, I’m sympathetic to expanding, but I don’t have strong opinions about how much we should expand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a preference for Treasuries and discussing the reasons behind that preference.


Passage number 417.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude to President Fisher for something, but it is not clear from the given excerpt what that is.


Passage number 418.
 MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, to state the obvious:  We’re at the zero bound, we’re resorting to extraordinary tools to offset the deflationary and other consequences of overly tight monetary policy, and we have to deploy that extraordinary tool kit effectively, deliberately, and with clarity. President Lockhart injected a little humor by congratulating you on your having an interchange named after you and pointing out there is an off-ramp.  There is no off-ramp right now, unfortunately.  And President Pianalto pointed to your 60 Minutes performance, which I also wanted to applaud, except to point out there was one weakness:  You were opposite George Clooney in that time slot.  [Laughter] I mention these things because I’m sympathetic to what President Plosser mentioned, in that, (a) there is no off-ramp, and (b) we have to think way ahead.  I talked two years ago about decision trees. We at least have to think of where this highway is possibly going to take us.  The ad hocery of what we are doing is a bit of a concern to all of us at the table; but let’s acknowledge the fact that we are in extraordinary circumstances, and we have to play ball according to what’s on the field. I do have a preference, as I stated yesterday, to focus on where we have demonstrated extraordinarily well our capacity to play, which is in the mortgage-backed securities market.  I’m very sympathetic to President Rosengren’s argument, particularly as to timing. Although I don’t have a vote in this matter in this cycle, I would support alternative B.  I still have concerns about being viewed as monetizing deficits.  I think there’s a possibility that the political class—that is, the legislature—will ask for still more.  But it’s not clear to me whether buying Treasuries might be interpreted as our accommodating fiscal profligacy, although I understand the circumstances of the moment, which are certainly trying.  I think Governor Tarullo offered a very sophisticated approach to this yesterday, which is to do things in proportion; and I could live with the alternative that that has the lesser weighting on Treasuries.  I do think it is important to exercise our muscle in the mortgage-backed securities market.  My contacts tell me that when you get to the 4½ percent level, you do have some effectiveness, and I think that’s clearly an area where we want to have extraordinary effectiveness. As to the statement itself, Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure why we’re emphasizing the job losses and all of the things that, as I said in my note, you’re aware of even if you live on Mars.  I do worry about that, given the fact that we are the institution that everybody’s looking to—in part because we did get out ahead of the rest of the world.  We’re viewed as a precious institution with, I think, superior credibility compared to all of the other institutions of government at present. I’m not sure it’s helpful to keep pounding on the negative.  The economy is contracting, and it continues to contract. We needn’t say more.  The important thing is that we say what we’re going to do about it, and we do so with clarity.   Let me add parenthetically that I appreciate your moving the fed funds decision down to where it should be, which I believe both of us asked for last time—that is, moving it down in terms of order of priority. I want to conclude with one last statement.  My greatest concern is the TALF.  I think I made that obvious.  I would caution you to be very careful on this public–private partnership.  I made my living doing extraordinarily complex transactions—taking distressed companies, restructuring them, and taking the equity out—and I was confused yesterday by what was described.  But I’m more worried about the politics of it.  I think we have to be very careful with our precious franchise in dealing with an embattled opposite, particularly on the Administration side, so that we don’t jeopardize our special standing in the community by appearing to accommodate political necessity and exigency.  I would urge you, and this Committee, to stay away from the legacy assets for now.  And I would urge you to be very careful about any commitment to the public–private partnership concept.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker seems to be expressing agreement and support for various points made by other individuals.


Passage number 419.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the given passage. The statement "Thank you. President Plosser" is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Plosser.


Passage number 420.
 MR. PLOSSER. Pardon me.  I missed one point I wanted to make in my comments.  President Fisher reminded me of it.  In our B′′, one of the things we changed was the description of the economy, which, Jim and I both agreed with President Fisher, sounded panicky.  We changed what I think was in paragraph 2 to take out a lot of the detailed description and wrote, “The decision reflects the Committee’s view that the economy is undergoing a severe contraction,” which it is. And we said “the near-term outlook is weak.”  The other change in the same spirit is in the rest of that sentence:  “the Committee anticipates that market forces and policy actions will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth.”  I think in the original it says that policy actions alone will stabilize the world.  And, frankly, I thinkcreating an impression that the only game in town is policy actions and that market economies have no contribution to make in this stabilization is setting us up for failure and a credibility problem. So we added the reference to market forces.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, mentions that he and President Fisher both agreed on making changes to the description of the economy in the document. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflict between the two.


Passage number 421.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 422.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you again for constructive suggestions.  I have a couple of questions. I do want to point out we did try in alternative A to create a reaction function element in the very last sentence, where we say, “We will be assessing whether a faster pace would be helpful.” Essentially, the pace will be varying as conditions change—it’s hard to be more specific than that.  I guess I have one question for you and one for Trish.  For Trish, maybe you can help me.  What do you think would be the effect of not specifying the breakdown between Treasuries and MBS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply expressing gratitude for suggestions and asking questions.


Passage number 423.
 MS. MOSSER. We’d immediately get the question:  What’s the breakdown between Treasuries and MBS.  And what are you going to do about agencies.  But the agency debt market is the simple part to answer, because that’s a much smaller market.  I think we’d end up having to give a hint, or they would take away from our first two operations what your preferences were, whether that was correct or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing potential questions they would receive and the challenges they might face in providing answers about the breakdown between Treasuries and MBS (Mortgage Backed Securities) as well as the agency debt market. The speaker mentions the possibility of giving hints or the audience making assumptions about their preferences, but there is no explicit disagreement or clash of ideas.


Passage number 424.
 MR. BULLARD. I took it from the discussion that people would like to front-load MBS to the extent that’s feasible.  But this formulation would let you still have growth later on, if you want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply clarifies the understanding that people want to front-load MBS and states that the mentioned formulation allows for growth later on if desired.


Passage number 425.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have a question for Presidents Plosser and Bullard about the flexibility you get by saying just “per month” without any specification of timeframe.  I  imagine you would, therefore, have less of an announcement effect, and it would be more difficult to do a persuasive front-load in that case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is just expressing their question and speculating about the potential effects of using a vague timeframe.


Passage number 426.
 MR. BULLARD. I don’t know why the announcement effect would be any different.  It adds up to the same amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and stating that they do not see any difference in the outcome.


Passage number 427.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. For example, one thing you could say—I’m just trying to be helpful—would be “a combined average of about 10 percent per month in the next few quarters,” or something like that, to give a bit of a horizon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement as it simply provides an example or suggestion to be helpful without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 428.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes, sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Yes, sure" indicates agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 429.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This also relies on people being able to do geometric calculations. [Laughter] I’ll put that aside for now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "I'll put that aside for now" suggests that the speaker acknowledges the potential difficulty or controversy of relying on people being able to do geometric calculations but decides to set it aside temporarily for the sake of the discussion. However, there is no explicit disagreement or contention expressed in the passage.


Passage number 430.
 MR. PLOSSER. Well, actually, Mr. Chairman, we did debate whether or not there ought to be horizon on it. But I think you could give a horizon if you wanted to, as long as you kept the conditionality that we will monitor this going forward and that it’s subject to economic and financial conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is acknowledging that there was a debate about whether or not there should be a horizon, but he ultimately agrees that a horizon can be given as long as certain conditions are met.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 431.
 MR. LACKER. I am not sure I understand one point about this.  Presidents Bullard and Plosser propose a geometric path.  But why not pick an endpoint and go linearly to that.  That is what we are doing with the MBS so far. Doesn’t that make more sense.  We could still call that 10 percent per month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage presents a disagreement between Mr. Lacker and Presidents Bullard and Plosser regarding the approach to be taken. Mr. Lacker suggests a linear path while Bullard and Plosser propose a geometric path. There is a disagreement about the best method to achieve a desired outcome.


Passage number 432.
 MS. MOSSER. I would say in fact, to President Rosengren’s point, one might actually want it to be front-loaded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges and supports President Rosengren's point about wanting something to be front-loaded.


Passage number 433.
 MR. PLOSSER. I think we say an “average” of 10 percent a month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement about an average of 10 percent per month, without any contradictory or opposing views presented.


Passage number 434.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Let’s go on, if I might.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 435.
  MR. ROSENGREN. This was the most depressing go-round in a year and a half, and this was a really bad year and a half, so it highlights that we’re far away from where we want to be, both in inflation and in unemployment.  And in terms of communicating with the public, I think that’s what we’re communicating to the public:  We’re not where we want to be, and we want to get there as quickly as we can. I don’t think simple rules on the balance sheet or the monetary base are appropriate.  These are different programs for different problems.  If the interbank market is disrupted, I would expect swaps and TAF to go up. If we have a real problem in other areas, I’d want to do significant asset purchases.  These are not substitutes, and just having either a balance sheet or a monetary base rule is assuming that these programs are substitutes for each other.  They’re dealing with different problems. I think this is an opportune time to push down rates as significantly as we can.  I think we should be very aggressive. I think everybody’s discussion around the table indicated we should be aggressive. I like the idea of heavily weighting on MBS purchases; I think that will be the most effective. I also like the idea that, if we’re going to try to get the most bang for the buck, given that these are experimental programs, we ought to try at least to see what happens with the Treasuries as well. So my preference would be to do the combination of A and B, which is the $1.15 trillion total, to try to have as big an effect as possible.  And I would try to front-load it so we get as much impact in the spring as we can.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own views and preferences but does not mention any opposing viewpoints or engage in any argument or debate.


Passage number 436.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 437.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Obviously, sentiment is pretty gloomy around the table, and there’s a fair amount of consensus that we want to make monetary policy more aggressively stimulative with our actions at this meeting, and we’re grappling with how tostructure that shift.  I think it makes sense to embark on a fairly aggressive asset purchase program, but I think we ought to admit that we’re fairly uncertain about how our actions are going to go about affecting the economy.  This isn’t different in principle from four years ago— then we were unsure about how another quarter point one way or another was going to affect the economy.  But the magnitude of the uncertainty is quite significant here. We’ve talked around this table for a year and a half about different theories of how these programs and our actions are affecting the economy.  We’ve talked about credit market frictions, asymmetric information, and other frictions that might inhibit certain markets’ ability to respond adequately to disruptions. We’re not going to settle that debate here.  We’ve also talked about the effect of changes in the monetary base.  Banks appear to have absorbed a humongous amount of reserve holdings without a readily discernible effect on a lot of other aspects of their behavior.  It suggests banks are more or less indifferent between holding reserve balances and other assets that function as very liquid reserves.  And, if so, that rationalizes the view I’ve heard some express that increasing the supply of bank reserves is generally going to be ineffective at the margin.  And there are some readings of historical episodes of very low interest rates that are consistent with that as well. But this logic has its limits.  Commercial banks hold only about $1.3 trillion in Treasury and agency securities, so if there’s a flat spot in the demand curve by banks for bank reserves, it might not take that much more of an increase in our balance sheet to get past that flat spot.  And if we do that, I think there’s bound to be some effect; there just has to be a finite upper limit on this flat spot of the demand curve for reserves.  And even before that, I’d expect some rates of return to have to change. I have a bank in my District that held $136 billion in reserves a couple of days ago. Surely the configuration of repo rates and the other instruments they operate inmust have an effect on their willingness to hold that much in reserves.  It’s really hard to know where that upper bound is—where the end of the flat spot is—because we don’t have much data to draw on; but I think it must be there.  So, as I argued yesterday, I think we need to recognize some uncertainty about which theories are the right ones to rely on and how to think about what we do. I take the credit easing we’ve done—program by program, aimed market by market—as arguing that more of those programs in more of those markets is more stimulative than fewer in lower dollar amounts.  I think that the logic of this focus on the monetary base also suggests that more monetary base is more stimulative than less.  So, in the current setting, I think trying to ensure that we at least achieve a certain amount of growth in the base is consistent with both views and worth pursuing. That’s what has motivated my line of questioning for Patricia Mosser, and it motivates why I’d like to suggest that we put a clause in the directive, at the end of sentence four, that says, “but should ensure that the monetary base expands by at least X billion dollars during the intermeeting period.”  I don’t think we should conduct policy by slapping 47 constraints on the Desk at every meeting, but it strikes me as a small thing to ask in order to be sure that the stimulus that might be withdrawn as some of these programs roll off is offset as we go forward. I would favor the larger program that you outlined, Mr. Chairman, with the $300 billion, the $750 billion, and the $100 billion increases.  I like the idea behind the suggestion of Presidents Plosser and Bullard about putting a commitment to a pattern of purchases in the statement.  But for the reasons I just outlined, I’m not sure that gets us where we want to be.  It seems to me that if we did that, and yet the balance sheet went down by the end of the year because of a bunch of other stuff rolling off, I’m not sure we’d be persuaded that we had made  monetary policy more stimulative or eased credit.  So I’d like to see us focus on the overall size of our balance sheet and our programs and the base.  That would provide as well with an overarching framework, a kind of coherence to what we do, to convey the sense that we’re not just responding market by market, but that we have an overarching conception of how we’re providing stimulus and how we’re going to get through this.  And I share the view of Presidents Fisher, Plosser, and Bullard that toning down the language would be useful.  It has always been the case that there’s a mapping from words we use, like “somewhat adverse,” to people’s interpretations, which are much scarier than “somewhat adverse.” I think we’re stepping outside that mapping when we go as far as we did in the statement as it’s drafted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and suggestions, but there is no mention of any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 438.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. First, Trish and Spence, would you folks think about a sentence that could be added to one of the directives, to the effect that “The Desk will strive to ensure that the monetary base” or “the size of the portfolio,” or something like that, “has a positive monthly growth rate,” or whatever you think would be realistic or manageable.  We don’t want to put in something that, just for operational reasons, doesn’t work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention between Trish, Spence, and the speaker regarding the addition of a specific sentence to the directives. The phrase "or whatever you think would be realistic or manageable" indicates that there may be differing opinions on what should be added.


Passage number 439.
 MR. EVANS. I’ve been listening to this, and I’m sympathetic to the different ways we’d like to try to characterize a path.  I think it’s very difficult.  “Ensure” is a strong word.  I had been thinking about maybe something weaker like, “We would expect to see the base grow,” which is sort of an indicator of how we think things are going, but not the policy rule itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, acknowledges that he is sympathetic to the different ways of characterizing a path. He simply suggests using a weaker phrase like "We would expect to see the base grow" instead of "Ensure," to indicate their perspective without creating a strict policy rule.


Passage number 440.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. “It is the expectation of the Committee that the base will be growing over time,” or something like that.  Does that help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It suggests a shared expectation or understanding.


Passage number 441.
 MR. HILTON. Balance sheet or base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement about the type of financial statement being discussed.


Passage number 442.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Federal Reserve liabilities.  I’m just making this assignment, and they’ll come up with a suggestion.  We’ll discuss it at the end, okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply discusses the creation of an assignment and planning to discuss it later.


Passage number 443.
  MR. EVANS. Perhaps with a clause “conditional on stability in certain lending facilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a suggestion or proposing a condition for a certain course of action, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 444.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’ll make some kind of attempt.  It’s just a good faith effort, that’s all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their intention to make an attempt, describing it as a good faith effort.


Passage number 445.
 MR. LACKER. If I could suggest, because of the possibility of SFP or Fed bills, you might want to try both the base and the balance sheet, rather than choose one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is simply making a suggestion regarding the use of both the base and the balance sheet.


Passage number 446.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, we’ll worry about SFP when we get it.  [Laughter] Let me address this issue about pessimism.  I just want to point out that the January statement was isomorphic to what we’re proposing to say in this one.  It’s in your handout.  It’s not exactly the same, but it’s very similar.  The only difference is that the last sentence in January was that the “downside risks are significant,” and we leave that out of this one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily explaining the similarity between the January statement and the current proposal, with the only difference being the omission of a sentence about significant downside risks.


Passage number 447.
 MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. This is because the speaker, Mr. Fisher, is addressing the chairman in a respectful manner without expressing disagreement or engaging in argumentative language.


Passage number 448.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided in the question.


Passage number 449.
 MR. FISHER. We did state it before.  Therefore, why don’t we just say “continues to contract” or “contract severely.”  Again, we’re hammering this point, and I believe we are beginning to be scary. Just for a moment, I want to go back to your 60 Minutes show. I think that was a positive.  It was a lift, and we engendered some confidence.  Here we are just pulling the rug out again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is expressing concern about the repeated emphasis on the contraction of something and the negative tone it may create. He suggests using different phrases to avoid alarming or scaring others.


Passage number 450.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay.  I hear the point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is acknowledging that the person has heard a point being made, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 451.
 MR. LACKER. It’s the “severe contraction” phrase, I think, that gets attention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 452.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided does not contain any statements or information that can be evaluated for contention or disagreement. Therefore, the answer is "no."


Passage number 453.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage you provided contains a statement and does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 454.
 MR. LACKER. If I can respond very briefly to Governor Kohn, I agree with everything you said about uncertainty, about the mechanisms by which changes in the monetary base are transmitted to economic conditions, and about the difficulty of articulating how those mechanisms would work.  I wouldn’t advocate putting all of our marbles in that policy transmission mechanism.  I’d just note that it’s a viable contender, and we ought to act as if that might be how we’re affecting the economy.  Hitting a target for monetary base growth, plus or minus, isn’t what I was advocating.  I was just thinking about making sure it’s at least as stimulative as we think it ought to be.  I appreciate his comments.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker indicates agreement with Governor Kohn's statements and acknowledges the uncertainty and difficulty in understanding how changes in the monetary base affect the economy. He also mentions that he wouldn't advocate solely relying on that policy transmission mechanism, but rather suggests considering it as a possibility. Overall, there is an expression of agreement and appreciation for Governor Kohn's comments.


Passage number 455.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 456.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you. As we talk about this statement, I think it’s sadly ironic that, after we’ve doubled the size of our balance sheet, we’re having a conversation about being worried that it may shrink a little bit.  It’s incredible to me that we would have that.  And I agree with what Governor Kohn said in that I don’t think we should start talking 10 percent monthly growth or whatever it is. We’re trying to deal with a broken intermediation and banking system at the same time, and I don’t think we can turn it into a monetary policy instrument in terms of how much we expect the balance sheet to grow at this point. With that, I would say I am much more in favor of statement B as we had it.  I would admit that the banking system is broken.  That’s part of the reason we’re doing the TALF.  If we’re going to expand and we’re going to address the broken intermediation process, we should focus on mortgage-backeds.  That’s what the idea was to begin with.  Let’s stick with it. If we now introduce Treasuries into that (1) I think it’s only going to be confusing, and (2) I think we do have to look long term. Our introducing purchases of longer-term securities farther along the yield curve sets a precedent, and I don’t think it’s easy to back off from that once we get through this mess we’re in right now.  So that’s why I prefer B. I also want to take just a minute and talk about the legacy TALF.  There’s reference to populist reaction to this, and I actually think that this reaction is justified in important ways.  We ought to think about that, because people are now confused between TARP and TALF, and I think when we add the legacy TALF, it’s going to confuse things even more.  The reason that they’re reacting to it is TARP.  I agree that it was necessary to keep from having a meltdown, but the execution of it was so confusing and so inequitable across the system that it created great backlash. Some of the backlash was very justified—for example, when you have some banks being told, “You’re going to take it,” and a thousand other banks being told, “You can beg for  it,” and following that up with changing the rules, you’re not going to get anything but a backlash. I think that’s important to keep in mind. So as we think about going forward, I come back to President Fisher’s point about needing a decision tree on how we’re going to deal with these legacy assets.  Our getting involved in the legacy TALF, as I’ve heard it described to this point, is, I think, very risky—very dangerous, almost—in terms of what the outcomes might be, because there aren’t clear, defined decision trees indicating who’s really going to be accountable for what.  We need to get that clarified before we have another reaction like the one we had recently. Finally, I do want to come back to something Governor Kohn mentioned yesterday in reference to my comment about using excess reserves to help manage the balance sheet and set the rate floor.  I know that it got off to a rough start, but I think we are getting our sea legs and the industry is getting their sea legs.  If we start issuing Fed bills, I think we are introducing another tool that will start out with the best intentions, but expectations will be raised, how we use it will be brought into account, questions will arise about trying to get around debt ceilings and so forth. I think we should try to avoid that if we can and see if we can use our interest on excess reserves as a management tool.  So with those comments, I’ll again say I’d go with B.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of introducing Treasuries into the TALF program, stating that it would be confusing and set a precedent that would be difficult to back off from in the future. They also express concern about the execution and equity of the TARP program, stating that it created backlash and confusion among the public. Additionally, the speaker disagrees with the idea of using Fed bills as a tool and suggests using interest on excess reserves instead.


Passage number 457.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Yellen.


Passage number 458.
 MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I said, I think we’re in the midst of a very severe recession—it’s unlikely to end any time soon.  The optimal policy simulations would take the fed funds rate to negative 6 percent if it could, and because it can’t, I think we have to do everything we possibly can to use our other tools to compensate.  With respect to what we should   do today, my preference is for the combined alternative that would combine $750 billion of mortgage-backed securities, $100 billion of extra agency debt, and the $300 billion of Treasuries. I certainly support the MBS purchases.  I think they’re likely to have a very positive effect on the housing market, particularly now, and I certainly agree with President Rosengren’s suggestion that we should front-load the purchases for the reasons he gave.  I said yesterday that I would also support purchases of Treasuries. I think it would be useful to begin that now.  I favor diversification of what we do, given the uncertainties about the impacts of any of these programs.  There’s a principle elucidated by William Brainard 30 years ago that, when policy actions have uncertain effects, you should simultaneously use all of your instruments, and I think that’s a worthwhile principle for us now. A couple of things on language. One of the differences between A and B concerns the characterization of how long we plan to keep the fed funds rate low.  A states “for an extended period,” while B uses the phrase “for some time.”  The fed funds futures market at this point seems to expect rate hikes next year.  That’s not our own expectation, and to try to align market expectations better with ours, I would like to see the switch to “an extended period” as in A.  With respect to A or A′—that issue of what goes first—I could certainly accept either.  I was positively inclined toward A′ on the principle that it makes sense—and we’ve always done this— to state right away what the policy decisions are.  Now the focus is not on the fed funds rate, so it makes sense to state that we’ve decided to do such-and-such with respect to programs. But I think that Governor Kohn has made an excellent point, raising the question, “What will we do if we don’t have any action on a particular day.”  It may be difficult; we don’t want to keep shifting from one thing to another if we can’t envision how we’re going to write that on the day we don’t do anything new. I guess I would agree that it’s better to stick with the A formulation.   With respect to alternative B′′ that Presidents Bullard and Plosser proposed, I really thought it was a very worthwhile and constructive idea.  There are aspects of it that I liked and that I thought were quite sensible, such as suggesting some conditionality of what we might do relating to economic and financial conditions and having some flexibility in the composition of what we do. I thought that was very interesting and useful.  But I would emphasize that I don’t agree with the underlying theory that says that there is a relationship between the size of the monetary base and our impact on the economy, and I would associate myself with the comments of President Rosengren and Governor Kohn on this.  So I don’t like the language that suggests an emphasis on the size of our balance sheet and the size of the base.  I think we have a real theoretical disagreement among ourselves as to exactly how our policy works, and I just wouldn’t endorse going in that direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, expresses her views and preferences on various policy options, explains her reasoning, and discusses some language choices. However, she does not disagree with anyone else or argue against their views.


Passage number 459.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you, President Bullard" is simply expressing gratitude to President Bullard without any opposing viewpoint or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 460.
 MR. BULLARD. Just to respond a little bit, this doesn’t say anything about the monetary base. This says large-scale asset purchase done in a certain way, which, I guess, is what our model has said.  This is just a way to set the asset purchases—that’s my intent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply explaining his intention in setting the asset purchases in a certain way, which aligns with the model they have been using.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 461.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough context to determine the exact nature of the contention or disagreement, but there is a mention of President Evans which implies a potential conflict or difference of opinions.


Passage number 462.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I said yesterday, I think that it’s important that we do something big, so your combined proposal is closer to that for sure, and I definitely think that we should diversify our actions.  I’m a little concerned that we’re not going to have a lot of good evidence on how effective these programs are for a few quarters.  Maybe we’ll be able to interpret something from how the yields move around, but they also move around a lot anyway. We like to take credit when they move in the right direction.  And then other things happen. I don’t know—it’s very difficult. The delays are:  It takes time to implement, it takes  time to have an impact, and it takes time to assess.  So as President Yellen indicated, we don’t have enough confidence to bank on a single nontraditional channel, I prefer doing more of these. I am a little sympathetic both to the discussion about the usefulness of indicating something about the timing and to the way that Presidents Plosser and Bullard characterized this in terms of growth rates.  What did seem to come out in the discussion that I, at least, was not aware of, was how we intend to play these purchases out.  There are good market reasons for the way they’re done, and the markets understand that.  So finding some way to provide that information, I think, would be useful.  I can see why the growth rate is attractive, but indicating front-loading or something about the time element seems to be important. We do have an awful lot of programs in place that are intended to be stimulative.  There’s everything that we’ve done, with the TALF increasing, and there’s what the FDIC has done, with the TLGP. I don’t believe that we’ve seen anything in terms of the outlook for what the FDIC part of this new program, with the Treasury purchasing bad bank assets, would be either, but presumably that would be stimulative as well.  By the time we put all of this in place, we’ve got a lot that should be helping out.  So the question I have is how to quantify what is enough.  As Governor Kohn mentioned, we should be doing everything we can do, so I think the combined proposal is better. Frankly, I don’t understand why we couldn’t improve this to $500 billion in Treasuries, too. We’re a little arbitrary, it seems to me, in terms of the total magnitude. I would like to be able to point to something like our Bluebook analysis—an analysis where we think that this is as close as possible to our best model-based thinking, on what the optimal policy response would be to reach the best we can achieve for the unemployment rate, recognizing that there are outcomes we cannot achieve.  The reason for wanting something like this is, I would like it to be big enough now so that we can shift the hurdle for additional action at   the next meeting more toward “the outlook has now deteriorated further, and we need some type of action.” Because, at the next meeting, we’re still going to have calls for “What’s next.  What’s next.”  We know how to think about responding in terms of the fed funds rate and where the target is, but the target for asset purchases is less clear, so that’s why my preference is for more now so that we can shift that burden. I’d be willing to expand the Treasury purchases to $500 billion, but nobody else has indicated that. Finally, I think that we can spend an awful lot of time trying to get the wording exactly right so that we’re all happy with it.  I think it’s going to be incumbent upon all of us to make some public comment.  When we talk in public, some of these issues will come up, and I think some of it will naturally be fleshed out if there are residual uncertainties.  Obviously, when you speak, Mr. Chairman, you clarify things quite a bit, but there might be some things for the rest of us to say. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and preferences on the proposed actions, but there is no direct disagreement or argument with anyone else.


Passage number 463.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The rationale for a slightly smaller purchase of Treasuries is that we don’t know what the effect will be, and it’s kind of a “toe in the water” thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing caution and uncertainty about the potential effects of a smaller purchase of Treasuries, using the metaphor "toe in the water" to convey the idea of testing the waters before making a larger commitment.


Passage number 464.
 MR. EVANS. I guess I didn’t indicate that I do prefer alternative A the way it’s written.  In terms of the next meeting, the alternative A′ issue could be dealt with by saying something like “the Committee decided not to change its policies or its programs.” In order to shift the burden, I would like to consider whether there is some language such that “with today’s action we anticipate” this better outcome in the last sentence.  That would help a little bit there, but it’s just a suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It seems to be a discussion about potential revisions and suggestions for language, but there is no explicit disagreement stated.


Passage number 465.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I am informed, President Fisher, that you have to leave for a plane. I am also informed that today is your 60th birthday. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have been informed about President Fisher's plans to leave for a plane and about it being their 60th birthday.


Passage number 466.
  MR. FISHER. What a nice way to celebrate my birthday.  [Laughter] With people I greatly respect, and I just want to say I hope I live to be as old as Don Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a positive sentiment about celebrating their birthday with people they respect and expresses a wish to live as long as Don Kohn.


Passage number 467.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We do have to move along here.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The laughter indicates a light-hearted moment, and the statement "We do have to move along here" suggests a need to continue or progress with something, potentially implying a time constraint. However, without more context, it is difficult to determine the exact meaning of the passage.


Passage number 468.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think the case for increased asset purchases is pretty compelling.  It’s the sense of the Committee, and certainly I agree with that.  So I have to think through a series of other decisions.  The first one has to do with scale, and my thinking coming in was that the scale needed to be proportionate to the deterioration in the outlook. Speaking at least for myself and the Atlanta analysis, clearly, there has been deterioration since January, but it’s within the range that I would have assumed at that time was plausible.  So I’m a little concerned about overreacting.  When we first got the alternatives, alternative B was $500 billion, and that, of course, was entirely in mortgage-backed securities and agency notes. Yesterday we learned that the TALF is likely to roll out slowly.  That’s information that, I assume, is not going to be understood by the public.  It would probably undermine the program if we said that we expected that.  I had factored the TALF into my sense of proportional response. So I favor the alternatives that are below $1 trillion dollars.  I don’t want to overstate this, but I think we don’t have good guideposts for how to size the action, so I think it’s reasonable to ask: Will the public infer from our actions that we know something that they don’t, and is this response of over $1 trillion—which will probably get some headlines— really a signal that things are even worse than they actually are and in that sense could dig us a little bit deeper. Regarding timing:  if we go with the mortgage-backed securities alternative, I do favor the views of President Rosengren that there’s a chance of accelerating that and making it have high impact in the near term.  I can support the Treasury idea.  But I actually think the centralquestion is the choice between Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities.  I can support Treasuries, but my bias really is to favor the mortgage-backed securities option, so that would be one of the option Bs. I like that for its certainty, its impact on housing, and its clarity in communications. As I mentioned yesterday in my comments about communications, certainly what I’m hearing is that many of our constituencies would prefer simplicity and not a lot of new programs, so I’m leaning against the Treasury purchases because it adds complicating factors.  But if we are going to support the Treasury purchases, I endorse Governor Tarullo’s suggestion that we explain why we did it very clearly. For example, if we are doing it for liquidity reasons, then we should explain that; if we’re doing it for the purpose of scaling up the balance sheet, we should explain that; if we believe that there are spillover effects, we should be explicit about that in our rationale. Regarding statement content, I have some sympathy for the version offered by Presidents Plosser and Bullard, but I’m not sure we can avoid quantities.  I think the logical question that the press is going to ask, having been conditioned to hearing quantities, is:  “How much does this add up to.”  It’s very hard for us not to provide at least some estimate of that.  Conceivably there is some way of crafting language that would address both the pace of purchases as well as the ultimate quantity.  I don’t know how specific we have to be in the directive to make it a workable directive. So I’d leave that up to the Desk.  I’m also okay with toning down “severe contraction”—that was my original reaction when I read the alternatives a few days ago—to something that’s not quite as stark as that.  Regarding statement structure, I don’t have a strong feeling. I think we have two options.  You either have a structure that builds up to the action, which has been our traditional approach, or the action followed by the rationale.  I have a slight preference for building up to the action, based on Governor Kohn’s comment, namely, whathappens if we don’t, in fact, have an action.  We certainly want to be consistent going forward, as much as we can, on how these things are put together.  So given all of that, where I come out is in support of alternative B, but, when it comes down to the vote, I will support A, A′, or A plus or B [laughter], or B′. Yes, I’ll end with a reference to Charlie Brown:  You know, sometimes I’m wishy-washy and sometimes I’m not.  My definitive support is for alternative B.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's thoughts and preferences on various options, but there is no disagreement or debate mentioned.


Passage number 469.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart, on the issue of explaining the Treasury purchases in alternative A, if we do the combination, we’d want to import the sentence from alternative A that starts with, “Moreover, to help improve conditions in private credit markets, the Committee decided....”  So that follows up the previous language and explains that we’re not monetizing the debt and so on.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 470.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It is clear to me from our discussion of the outlook that more action is needed, but as I said earlier, I also think we need to focus on the clarity of our communications in order to build public confidence.  Looking over the options that were presented today, I do prefer alternative B. I am clearly in favor of aggressive action, and as I noted yesterday I am open to the purchase of longer-term Treasuries, but as President Lockhart just mentioned, in the interest of effective communications, I think we need to better explain why we decided to engage in the purchase of Treasury securities at this time.  Brian gave us four reasons why we might want to consider that, and as you know, Mr. Chairman, in our statement in January we did say that we would do that in order to improve conditions in private credit markets, but I still think that may be a little too vague. While the staff comments yesterday indicated a little less certainty that we get a larger bang for the buck if we purchase MBS versus Treasuries, I think we do have evidence that   purchases of MBS have generated significant interest rate reductions just through their announcement effects.  Also, the staff simulations highlighted yesterday the economic importance of stabilizing housing prices and the effects on household wealth.  So, with the larger purchase of MBS along with some of the Treasury initiatives working in tandem, I think alternative B is a preferred way to go. In terms of the statement language, the option of B′ or B, I slightly favor putting our actions in the front line or the first paragraph.  There is some premium, I think, on clear and easily verifiable actions in these difficult and confusing times, although, after listening to Governor Kohn’s comments about “what do we do when we don’t take actions,” I see that that might be a little confusing.  But overall, B′ is my preference at this meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Pianalto is expressing her preferences and thoughts, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict with anyone else.


Passage number 471.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards President Stern.


Passage number 472.
 MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, it seems like almost everything is fair game.  So let me just make a few comments.  I expressed my reservations about legacy TALF yesterday, so I won’t reiterate those. I hope I was clear.  With regard to purchasing assets, I do favor including purchases of Treasuries.  I did back in December, I think, when we first talked about it. I continue to. So I would certainly go down that path. That leads me to alternative A and the language, and I’m willing to go with the larger quantity that you proposed. All of the quantities are around $1 trillion—quite honestly, I’m not sure we’re going to get a big difference in terms of market or macroeconomic effects at the end of the day, but I can certainly go with that. I would start with the language in alternative A.  Just a couple of comments about that. I think I would be in favor of abbreviating the litany of the economic conditions.  I don’t know that it adds all that much at this point.  If we say “severe contraction,” I think that gets the message across.  With regard to A versus A′, you couldprobably take care of Governor Kohn’s concern at the next meeting by just saying, if we didn’t do anything new, that the Committee reiterated its intention, and I think that would probably take care of it. But I don’t see any great advantage, quite honestly, to reworking it, at least at this point. So I have a mild preference for A as written. Having said that, I do think the Plosser-Bullard approach has merit, if we can get over some of these questions that have arisen, such as, “What will people in the market make of it.” and “Will people still want quantities.” and “Is there a way of integrating that approach with some quantities, if that would help clarify things.”  I think those are all worth serious consideration. I don’t have the answers today, so I’m not proposing that we adopt that.  But I do think that perhaps there are at least the beginnings of a framework there that we ought to be thinking about at future meetings and that may serve to help our communication and help people in the markets understand better than they do right now where we intend to go.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and preferences, but there is no indication of disagreement with others.


Passage number 473.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Thank you, Governor Warsh" shows appreciation or gratitude towards Governor Warsh, but it does not indicate any sort of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 474.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just a few points first.  Given the policy uncertainty that we’ve all described that is out there in the world, it strikes me our preferences here in this room should be putting a greater emphasis on things that are clear and purposeful versus those that are big and bold and more.  Clear, purposeful, big, bold, and more—if you could pull it all together in one fell swoop, that would be fine, but absent that, I would put the preference on clear and purposeful. We’ve talked a lot about the makeup of our balance sheet.  I would just reiterate a truism which I think still has merit—our biggest asset here is our credibility, which is a function of a lot of things, including clarity, success, and trying to speak as much as we practicably can with one  voice; and that will obviously govern my vote in support of the consensus emerging from this discussion. Having said that, I continue to have a strong preference for avoiding Treasuries for reasons I described yesterday and given that, since December, markets seem to see us as alternately having some affection and disaffection for purchasing Treasuries for reasons that have been hard to understand. I think we need to be prepared to address that issue if, as I expect, we include Treasury purchases in our statement today. In terms of the size of these various elements, I think the only thing worse than buying Treasuries is to buy them in such a tepid way that we don’t have any effect.  I think if we’re in, we’re in. We’re crossing the Rubicon.  And I take very little comfort from the idea that we would be somehow testing this out just a bit.  So I think, in effect, what we’re really all saying, Mr. Chairman, is we are balance-sheet-constrained.  There is only so much of these new assets, whether they be mortgage-backed or Treasuries, that we are comfortable with, given the risks to our flexibility. So I am troubled that the $300 billion will be perceived to be relatively light.  But given people’s preferences around here, I won’t spend more time on that. In terms of some of the language, I concur with the emerging consensus that we should delete some of the carnage in describing the economy on the grounds that it is well understood.  I’ve got next to nothing to offer on style between prime and nonprime. And on the Plosser–Bullard proposals, I think that it’s a pretty interesting framework.  I don’t think it’s ready for prime time, so I’d associate myself with what President Stern said, that it would be a useful way in which we could start to think in anticipation of our next meeting.  But I don’t think at this moment we can easily capture that in a way which goes back to first principles of being clear and precise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own preferences and opinions, but there is no indication of disagreement with others in the room.


Passage number 475.
  Thank you   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude twice, indicating agreement or satisfaction.


Passage number 476.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am actually in favor of the largest amount that we can all agree on. My objective, as I stated yesterday, is to have the biggest effect on housing that we possibly can. In terms of how we explain that, I do like the prime version, because it puts the action first. Having spent more of my time reading the statements than issuing them, it seems to me the first paragraph was always the action paragraph.  And I think for a good time to come this will be our action.  In addition, I think the easier we can make this to report, the better off we are. If you get reporters, particularly third- and fourth-level reporters, on a deadline and all they read is the first part and skim through the rest, they may not necessarily pick up the size of this action. So I have a pretty strong preference for the prime version.  Also, while I find it interesting to put it on a percent-growth basis, we’ve already started down the path with the dollar amounts, and I think continuing with the way we’ve been communicating it already has some certainty and some simplicity.  To me it feels like announcing a stock repurchase in the private sector. In that case, you size your stock repurchase in relation to the amount of outstanding shares that you have, and it’s perceived that way and tends to impact your price that way. Finally, on measuring effectiveness, I think the questions at this point would be:  How big an effect does it have immediately on housing, on the stock market, and on things that create wealth, and how quickly do we see whether or not it has spillover effects. The last piece is this sentence that says we “will be assessing whether a faster pace of asset purchases would be helpful in improving credit market conditions.”  I originally liked that, because it implied that we were willing to do even more.  On thinking about it, though, there’s something to be said for creating a little bit of fear in the housing markets that this is a window  of opportunity to refinance or purchase. So if it doesn’t look like rates may go down further if you wait, then I think that’s got some real value.  So I suppose ultimately I come down in favor of A plus′.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal preference and rationale for their preference, but they do not engage in any argument or disagreement with others.


Passage number 477.
 [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I must find new nomenclature, I’m afraid.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The use of laughter and the phrase "I'm afraid" suggest a lighthearted tone rather than any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 478.
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Of the options on the table right now, I favor the combined option. Like Governor Duke, I would have been receptive to a higher number, and I guess President Evans would have been as well.  The reason for that is twofold: (1) just because of my understanding of the magnitude of the challenge right now, and (2), as President Evans said, I think, it’s really very important for us to be able to project a strong but adaptable approach to monetary policy, not just until the next meeting, but over the course of the next year. It seems to me that by rolling out a bigger, more ambitious headline number, if you will, but then saying we’re going to implement that over an extended period of time, it gives us the opportunity at each of the next several Open Market Committee meetings to say “we are staying with an aggressive policy.”  In contrast to when you’re working with the fed funds rate and you either have to stay where you are or reduce it another 25 or 50 basis points, here one could say that the Desk is continuing in an aggressive fashion to make purchases. That leads into the issue of communication more generally, and like President Lockhart, I think the maximum amount of explanation of what we’re doing and why we’re doing it is important.  There is and has been over the last several days a near obsession among markets about whether or not we are going to engage in large-scale purchases of Treasuries.  I will predict that there’s going to be a lot of speculation about why we’re doing it.  I will also predict that the explanation that it’s “helping improve conditions in private credit markets” will not seem   to most commentators to be a complete explanation.  Thus, in an effort to respond to Governor Warsh’s concerns—which I don’t share to the extent of being unwilling to do securities purchases, but do think are important—I would hope that in the delicate but important arena of communications outside of the formal statement, we will be able to find a way quite quickly to clarify why we’re doing this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their preference for the combined option and explaining their reasoning. They also mention potential speculation and the importance of clear communication, but these points do not express disagreement with anyone else's views.


Passage number 479.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think one argument that’s been made here is that we want to diversify in different markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that one argument has been made for diversifying in different markets, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 480.
 MR. TARULLO. Right, exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging the correctness of the previous statement.


Passage number 481.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The term "Vice Chairman" is simply mentioned without any context or statement that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 482.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Obviously, there’s a need for more stimulus, and it looks like less support is going to be coming from other quarters, so a substantial escalation is appropriate.  Obviously, given what I said yesterday, I favor doing both.  I would favor scaling up the Treasuries’ size to $500 billion from $300 billion, per Governor Warsh’s comment that, if you’re going to do this, you might as well do it in size.  I don’t think the balance sheet constraint here is really meaningful, because we can sell or repo the Treasuries at a future date. So I just don’t think that’s a reason to make the distinction between $300 billion and $500 billion, and I think we’ll have a more definitive test of how the market perceives this if we do $500 billion rather than $300 billion. At $300 billion, if we don’t get much response, we’re not going to know if it was because the market thought the scale was small.  I think $500 billion is a more appropriate metric.  I favor A over A′ just because I think it’s simpler and it’s more consistent with what we’ve been doing. And I agree that we should not be quite so scary in reminding people of how badly the economy is doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 483.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Let’s try to put this all together.  Most importantly, I think there’s a pretty strong consensus for the combined package, the total of $1.15 trillion. I heard the point about doing even more in Treasuries.  I guess I think that just crossing the Rubicon will have a significant announcement effect, because it will signal our willingness to do more if necessary in the future.  I am a little concerned about misinterpretation of what we’re doing, so I guess I would like to propose to stay where we are for the moment.  We can always change it. I very much appreciate the contribution from Presidents Plosser and Bullard.  I don’t think we’re quite ready to go there, but I do think we can start communicating in that way and start trying to talk about percentages as we talk in speeches and other contexts.  I think, in particular, since we want to front-load, it’s hard to put it in percentage terms at the moment.  And I think that to get the maximum effect in the short run that Governor Duke talked about, it would be better to have a headline number.  But I think it’s actually a very constructive point, and we should think about ways to move in that direction if we can. So what I propose is to start from alternative B.  I think it’s reasonable to do either B or B′, but I didn’t hear a huge amount of demand to go to B′. I heard the concerns about the first paragraph. What if we say that “the economy continues to contract,” as some suggested. “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates the economy continues to contract,” period, and we’d drop “the outlook has worsened” as well.  Then, if you like, we could drop, say, the sentence that starts with “Weaker sales prospects,” but I think that is consistent with our previous style in trying to describe elements of the economy.  Then I would note that we have a somewhat optimistic ending in this paragraph.  So I don’t think   that it’s going to be a huge shocker to anybody, and we do have to motivate why we’re taking such a strong action. Comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own thoughts and ideas and considering different options, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 484.
 MR. PLOSSER. Just a quick remark.  I had suggested this notion of putting in market forces in terms of returning to stability.  I didn’t know whether you had forgotten that, but nobody ever commented on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is simply reminding someone about a suggestion he made and expressing that he hasn't received any feedback on it.


Passage number 485.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No. I was trying to keep life as simple as I can, but let’s see here. Where is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not depict any form of contention or disagreement. It seems to be a reflection or personal thought process of the speaker.


Passage number 486.
 MR. PLOSSER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Plosser without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 487.
 “The Committee anticipates that market forces and policy actions will contribute to …” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are people okay with substituting that sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the sentence. It simply states that the Committee expects market forces and policy actions to have a positive impact.


Passage number 488.
 MR. TARULLO. To what market forces are you referring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 489.
 MR. KOHN. I think what I heard around the table, Mr. Chairman, was not much confidence that market forces are moving in that direction and might even be moving in the other direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is disagreement or contention. The statement suggests that there is a lack of confidence in the belief that market forces are moving in the desired direction, and there is a possibility that they are moving in the opposite direction. This implies a disagreement or contradiction regarding the effect of market forces.


Passage number 490.
 MR. PLOSSER. There’s not much confidence that government forces are going to fix it either. So I’m not sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any specific claims or arguments that can be agreed or disagreed upon. It is a statement that expresses uncertainty about the government's ability to address an issue, but does not elicit any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 491.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 492.
 MR. LACKER. Surely, if the economy recovers, it’s going to be a combination of policy actions and market forces.  Surely that’s the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a belief that the economy's recovery will depend on both policy actions and market forces, stating "surely, that's the case."


Passage number 493.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, all we’re saying here is that these things will contribute. We’re not saying that they’re the only reason. Let me go on.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying a point and indicating that there is more information to be shared.


Passage number 494.
   MR. BULLARD. I just want to press on that a bit.  It gives the impression that we’re hanging on a thread as to what the Congress does or what we do or something like that.  I don’t think you want to leave that impression.  Despite what the government does, you might recover faster or you might recover slower, and I think you should leave that thought in the minds of private citizens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Bullard expressing his thoughts and opinions.


Passage number 495.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Again, I think what we’re saying here is that we anticipate that these things will contribute to an overall dynamic. In B, in the third paragraph, we have the sentence about the “additional $750 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities, bringing its total purchases of these securities to $1.25 trillion this year, and to increase its purchases of agency debt this year by $100 billion to a total of $200 billion.” So that’s exactly as in B.  Can we say something like, “the Desk has been instructed to…”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 496.
 MR. MADIGAN. I have a possible sentence, Mr. Chairman.  “The timing of these purchases will be determined, in part, by conditions in primary and secondary mortgage markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a possible sentence without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 497.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I don’t think that’s what people wanted to say, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion or interpretation without challenging or disagreeing with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 498.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think it’s fine for the Desk just to accelerate its purchases, and the market is going to see it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their opinion that it is acceptable for the Desk to accelerate its purchases and suggests that the market will perceive it.


Passage number 499.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is it okay to do it that way and not put it in the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The passage simply asks for clarification about whether it is acceptable to perform a task in a certain manner without including it in the statement.


Passage number 500.
 MS. MOSSER. That’s all right. I had something very similar to Brian’s.  I actually stole the last sentence from alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging that their own response is similar to Brian's and even admits to taking the last sentence from alternative A.


Passage number 501.
 MR. MADIGAN. Part of the issue, Mr. Chairman, is that we don’t know exactly when the bulge in issuance is going to happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is uncertainty about the timing of a bulge in issuance.


Passage number 502.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. I’ll come to that one.  Thank you. Let’s back up a second. There is the question of “federal funds rate for some time.”  President Yellen suggested going to “for an extended period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 503.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think that’s more accurate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion without contradicting or challenging any other viewpoint.


Passage number 504.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are we okay with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement "Are we okay with that" is a question, not a statement that presents disagreement or contention. It is simply asking for confirmation or agreement from the reader.


Passage number 505.
 MR. PLOSSER. Can somebody explain to me how I am supposed to interpret that change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears that Mr. Plosser is simply requesting clarification or further explanation.


Passage number 506.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Because conditions have worsened, our expected liftoff time is probably longer than it was. Then we have the sentence on the agency debt—that’s okay.  Then the next sentence about “prepared to purchase long-term Treasuries” is to be replaced by the sentence in alternative A: “Moreover, to help improve conditions in private credit markets, the Committee decided to purchase $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It presents a series of statements or pieces of information without any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 507.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Are we putting “up to’s” in front of all of these numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a question asking if "up to's" are being used before all the numbers mentioned.


Passage number 508.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. Do we have “up to’s” in the original announcements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 509.
 MR. MADIGAN. Yes, I believe so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Madigan simply expresses his belief or opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 510.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think they are always “up to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is some contention in this passage because the speaker uses quotation marks around the phrase "up to." This implies that the speaker does not completely believe or trust the actions or motives of the subjects.


Passage number 511.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  So let’s make sure we have consistency with that.  As Governor Duke and some others noted, there were questions about the last part.  We should end the last sentence, “The Committee will continue to monitor carefully the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in light of evolving financial market   developments,” period.  Why don’t we say “in light of evolving financial and economic developments” instead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a change in wording for clarity and consistency, but there is no opposition or argument being presented.


Passage number 512.
   MR. PLOSSER. You just added “economic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is quoted directly without any opposition or conflicting perspective mentioned.


Passage number 513.
”  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But I’m dropping all the stuff about assessing our lending programs.  At this point we’re in an assessment mode.  I think the only question remaining, Brian, is the “up to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that they are going to stop discussing the assessment of lending programs and that they are currently in an assessment mode. The mention of "the only question remaining" suggests a shift in focus rather than contention.


Passage number 514.
” MR. MADIGAN. I think that may be actually difficult to work in here quickly in some cases just as a grammatical issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Madigan is simply expressing his perspective on the potential difficulty of incorporating certain elements quickly, specifically referring to a grammatical issue.


Passage number 515.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think the one issue, though, is to make sure it’s not quite so definitive that you are committing to purchase exactly that number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there is one issue to consider.


Passage number 516.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Why don’t we put “up to” in front of each.  So it’s “up to an additional $750 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is a question proposing the idea of using "up to" before each instance of the phrase "an additional $750 billion."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 517.
” MR. KOHN. “…agency debt this year by up to $100 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that Mr. Kohn is suggesting increasing agency debt by up to $100 billion, which could potentially generate disagreement or controversy among other individuals or groups involved in the decision-making process.


Passage number 518.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. And then on Treasuries, “purchase up to $300 billion.”  Brian, are you ready to try to read.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking someone named Brian if they are ready to attempt to read something.


Passage number 519.
 MR. MADIGAN. I can try. [Laughter] From the top, “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates that the economy continues to contract.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a personal willingness to attempt something, followed by a factual assertion.


Passage number 520.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The rest is the same, and the second paragraph is the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 521.
 MR. MADIGAN. So the third paragraph: “In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote economic recovery and to preserve price stability.  The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal   funds rate for an extended period. To provide greater support to mortgage lending and the housing markets, the Committee decided today to increase the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet further by purchasing up to an additional $750 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities, bringing its total purchases of these securities to up to $1.25 trillion this year, and to increase its purchases of agency debt this year by up to $100 billion to a total of up to $200 billion. Moreover, to help improve conditions in private credit markets, the Committee decided to purchase up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months”  Then there is the TALF sentence.  Then, “The Committee will continue to monitor carefully the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in light of evolving financial and economic developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It describes the actions taken by the Federal Reserve to promote economic recovery and stabilize prices.


Passage number 522.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. We’re ready then.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 523.
 MR. LACKER. The directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions someone named Mr. Lacker and refers to a directive. There is no indication of conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 524.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The directive, you’re right.  Do we have something, Trish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is confirming that the directive mentioned is correct and asking if there is something else to discuss with Trish.


Passage number 525.
 MS. MOSSER. About either the pace of purchases or the size of the balance sheet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or question about the pace of purchases or the size of the balance sheet.


Passage number 526.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states the title or position of Chairman Bernanke without giving any details or information that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 527.
 The directive is to be made consistent, and we said something along the lines that—  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We have to put the Treasury sentence in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the need for consistency in the directive and the inclusion of a sentence related to the Treasury.


Passage number 528.
 MR. LACKER. Can we use Directive A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the use of Directive A.


Passage number 529.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We don’t issue the directive at 2:15, do we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation about the directive being issued at 2:15.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 530.
 MS. DANKER. But we vote on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But we vote on it" suggests a conflicting opinion or differing perspectives among the individuals involved.


Passage number 531.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’ll put in the Treasury part. Then, can you include a sentence like, “The Desk will endeavor to ensure that the size of the portfolio rose”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The first sentence simply states a request to include the Treasury part. The second sentence is a clarification or suggestion, indicating a desire to include a sentence about the portfolio size.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 532.
   MS. MOSSER. Yes. We could say, “The Committee anticipates that the combination of outright purchases and various liquidity facilities outstanding will cause the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to expand in the coming months.”  We’re a little hesitant to pick the next intermeeting period because of the lumpiness of mortgages, honestly.  But if that would suffice, we think that would work best from our perspective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses hesitation and uncertainty about picking the next intermeeting period because of the "lumpiness of mortgages." This suggests that there is disagreement or contention within the committee about how to proceed.


Passage number 533.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. “Expand significantly” even.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The given sentence does not present any form of contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement that simply suggests the possibility or action of expanding significantly.


Passage number 534.
  MR. LACKER. That works.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 535.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is that okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence "Is that okay" is a simple question seeking validation or agreement.


Passage number 536.
  MR. LACKER. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 537.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Are we ready for a vote now.  Debbie, would you  call the roll, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if everyone is ready for a vote and requesting Debbie to call the roll.


Passage number 538.
  MS. DANKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


