Passage number 1.
 Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on  August 11-12, 2009  August 11—Afternoon Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon, everybody.  Today is the last meeting for our colleague Gary Stern. Gary first attended the FOMC meeting as a staffer in 1982 and then was appointed President in March 1985. To provide some cultural context, in 1982 the top grossing movie was “An Officer and a Gentleman,” followed closely by “Tootsie.”  [Laughter.]  The leading hit song was “Physical” by Olivia Newton-John.  [Laughter.] We are in a different world, I think. Gary, you have attended 218 regular FOMC meetings, so you are the most senior member of this Committee by a small margin of six years.  That is a remarkable record, and you have provided a great deal of collegiality, insight, and wisdom over that period, and we want to thank you for that. But we will thank you in more substantial way at the September meeting.  So thank you. [Applause] As has been our custom, this is a joint Board–FOMC meeting.  So I need a motion to close the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing the retirement of a colleague and thanking him for his contributions to the committee, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 2.
  MR. KOHN. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement suggests agreement or consensus. "So moved" is a common phrase used in a meeting or discussion when someone supports a motion that has been proposed. It indicates that the speaker agrees with the motion and supports its adoption.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. We’ll begin with staff presentations—first, with open market operations by Brian Sack, followed by Q&A, and then some additional presentations. Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply outlines the order of staff presentations and the first speaker, Brian Sack, who will be discussing open market operations.


Passage number 4.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. Questions for Brian.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The first sentence expresses gratitude towards Brian, and the second sentence simply states that there are questions for Brian.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 5.
 MR. BULLARD. I am looking at exhibit 4, figure 24, on mortgage spreads.  I just want to understand your interpretation of this chart.  I see toward the end here that conforming spreads come down dramatically and the ARMs come down dramatically, but you said that you thought  the purchase program did not have an effect on the ARMs.  That means just that the level is high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Bullard is challenging the speaker's claim that the purchase program did not have an effect on the ARMs, as he believes the chart shows a significant decrease in ARMs spreads towards the end.


Passage number 6.
 MR. SACK. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement from Mr. Sack without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 7.
 MR. BULLARD. What about the sharp downturn that followed the other line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is simply a question posed by Mr. Bullard.


Passage number 8.
 MR. SACK. So that’s right. I was focusing on the level.  The level of the conforming spread is not far from historical norms, but the level of the ARM spread is still extremely elevated compared with historical norms, although it has improved.  I would interpret the improvement as being driven not by Fed purchase programs but just by the broader recovery in markets.  You point out that it is not that different a magnitude from the improvement in conforming-mortgage spreads, but I think that probably has to do with the fact that it was starting from such a wider, more disrupted level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sack, is simply providing his interpretation and comparing the conforming spread with the ARM spread.


Passage number 9.
 MR. BULLARD. I expect ARMs to be unpopular in the stage of the business cycle when interest rates are low and people are talking about, well, when are you going to tighten, as opposed to being in the stage of the business cycle when rates are higher and might come down at some point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the expectation that adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs) will be unpopular during low interest rate periods when people are discussing the possibility of rates increasing, compared to higher interest rate periods when rates might possibly decrease.


Passage number 10.
 MR. SACK. Well, I think that would presume that households have a more efficient outlook on monetary policy than the bond market more broadly.  Obviously, the yield curve in Treasuries or in mortgages should reflect the expected path of short-term interest rates, so I would think that normally the market would be priced in a way to make households relatively indifferent, in terms of the risk, between ARMs and fixed-rate mortgages.  The point is that different households may have different preferences based on their different situations.  So if the purchase programs have had a very large effect on one product and absolutely no effect on the  other, it is creating a distortion that does not allow households to choose efficiently between the two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's thoughts and opinions without any opposing viewpoints being expressed.


Passage number 11.
 MR. BULLARD. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only contains a statement expressing gratitude by someone named Mr. Bullard, without any indication of a conflicting viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 12.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. This is because there is no contradictory statement or opposing viewpoint mentioned. Additionally, the statement "President Fisher" does not provide enough information to determine any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 13.
 MR. FISHER. I have a question and then a point to make.  The question is with regard to the size of the population of ARMs that are available.  You mentioned in your paper that we would eliminate interest-only ARMs.  Is it roughly $200 billion that are eligible here in terms of the total population.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question about the size of the population of ARMs.


Passage number 14.
 MR. SACK. Of interest only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement indicating that something is only of interest to Mr. Sack. There is no contention or disagreement presented in this sentence.


Passage number 15.
 MR. FISHER. No, of not interest-only ARMs.  We would not pursue interest-only ARMs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 16.
 MR. SACK. Sorry. Yes, that is correct. There is about $400 billion of ARMs in total.  About $200 billion is interest only. In the memo, we presented the arguments for and against interest-only ARMs. In the end, we made a recommendation, but I certainly think we viewed that as an open issue for the Committee to discuss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating facts and explaining their previous presentation on the topic of interest-only ARMs, without expressing any conflicting opinions or debates.


Passage number 17.
 MR. FISHER. The point is actually based on the question because, if you look at the Greenbook, Part 2, page III-12, there is a chart of delinquencies on prime mortgages, and the delinquency rate on variable-rate mortgages is four times that of fixed.  So here is the question: Do we want to be seen expanding our balance sheet and our asset purchases for poorly performing mortgages such as these or encourage households to take out this kind of mortgage now that they have a 12 percent past-due rate, or is there a chicken-and-egg issue here.  I’m curious as to what your opinion is because that is one of the cons you did not mention—that is,  that ARMs have a much higher delinquency rate.  Do we want to be perceived as assisting that weak market, or will our assistance lead to an improved market.  What’s your opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking the opinion of the other person and discussing different perspectives on the topic of expanding the balance sheet and asset purchases for poorly performing mortgages.


Passage number 18.
 MR. SACK. I guess I wasn’t thinking of the ARMs purchases as really affecting the risk profile of the outstanding securities.  Obviously, those delinquency rates are very high.  They are very high for a lot of reasons, not necessarily that those products are ARMs but rather that those ARMs are sold with very lax underwriting standards.  So I think a benefit of purchasing ARMs is not to bring back the kind of mortgage conditions that we saw previously but just to make these a viable product if used with responsible underwriting going forward. In terms of whether to hold assets that have those delinquencies, we are talking about buying only GSE-sponsored securities. So part of the answer is that we are getting credit protection from that and basically we are buying securities where any credit risks and issues like that are already priced in. So I do not really see it as a portfolio issue that the delinquencies are going up but more as a reputational issue about whether the Fed wants to be involved in products that are still very visibly associated with the housing bubble and the problems that ensued.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their perspective and analysis on the topic of purchasing ARMs and the potential risks associated with them.


Passage number 19.
 MR. FISHER. Just so I understand—again, out of, say, a population of $200 billion, what percentage of that is GSE and what is non-GSE.  Do we know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and asking for specific information.


Passage number 20.
 MR. SACK. The $200 billion is GSE-sponsored.  In total, there’s $400 billion of GSE-sponsored ARMs.  I believe that outside the GSEs, there is about $1trillion of ARMs outstanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a statement of facts without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 21.
 MR. FISHER. We’re talking only about GSE-sponsored ARMs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the topic of discussion as GSE-sponsored ARMs.


Passage number 22.
 MR. SACK. Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a simple statement that is not open to interpretation or disagreement.


Passage number 23.
 MR. FISHER. At least half are not interest only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact that at least half of something is not interest only.


Passage number 24.
 MR. SACK. Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting views or opinions. It consists of a statement or affirmation by Mr. Sack.


Passage number 25.
 MR. FISHER. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply shows that someone named Mr. Fisher is expressing gratitude or courtesy by saying "Thank you."


Passage number 26.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. One approach to addressing some of these issues would be to take only 5/1s or longer initial periods.  Then, you stay away from the 2/28s and 3/27s, and you don’t have the issue that you have an incentive not to raise rates because that will not have any effect on a five-year fixed rate.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 27.
 MR. STERN. There is a two-hander over there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the presence of a two-hander.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Oh, sorry. President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Oh, sorry" is an expression of apology, while mentioning "President Rosengren" does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 29.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Just in terms of the credit quality, if you look at the 5-, the 7-, and the 10-year, the credit scores for those are appreciably better than they are for the 30-year and the 15-year products actually. So following up on the Chairman’s comment, I think that, if you focused on the 5, 7, and 10 rather than the 1 and 3, you have a very different risk profile, and it actually does tend to match up with the duration that many people plan on staying in their house—5, 7, or 10 years—rather than 30 years, which also has that advantage.  So it would recommend potentially thinking about starting with the 5, 7, and 10 rather than focusing on the 3and the 1, which have a different historical experience with default rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their perspective and suggesting a different approach.


Passage number 30.
 MR. FISHER. Thank you. I think that is a very important point.  Thank you for addressing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing gratitude and acknowledging the importance of a point made by someone else.


Passage number 31.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage because it only states the position or title of someone (President Stern) without providing any conflicting viewpoints or contradictory information.


Passage number 32.
 MR. STERN. Yes. If we were to buy agency ARMs at the magnitude you are considering, what are your expectations for effects on rates and on volumes in that market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only presents a question about the expectations for effects on rates and volumes in the market. There is no statement or argument made, therefore there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 33.
 MR. SACK. We’re starting with the $25 billion proposal.  It is going to be useful to compare that magnitude with the purchase program in fixed-rate MBS proportionally to that market.  With $25 billion, we are essentially buying a smaller portion of the outstanding stock.   We would be buying about 15 percent of the eligible outstanding stock compared with 25 to 30 percent for the fixed-rate program.  But we would be buying a much larger share of the gross issuance—about double what we have seen for gross issuance so far this year—whereas on the fixed-rate side, we are buying something like 75 to 100 percent of gross issuance.  We have calibrated it that way to be somewhat comparable, but I think that the question about what market effects might ensue has to do with that gross issuance.  The possibility is that, once the ARM purchases begin, if the pricing improves, then of course you’ll see more ARM issuance, and that will give you some scope to raise the size of the program if that is seen as a good approach. In terms of what effect we might have on rates, I would not be surprised to see an effect in the 50 to 100 basis point range. The memo had some measures of the relative pricing of ARMs versus fixed-rate mortgages, and the deviations were 50 to 150 basis points of difference.  You can actually see in figure 24 that there’s a considerable difference in the size of the spreads.  So given that this market is disrupted and given that it is relatively small, it wouldn’t be surprising to have a very meaningful effect on the pricing.  With fixed-rate mortgages, we started from a very high spread in a market that was functioning poorly but not that poorly.  Here we’re talking about a market that’s not functioning well at all, so I think we could really have a substantial effect by participating in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and analysis about the potential impact of a $25 billion proposal on the market for adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs).


Passage number 34.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided. Please provide the passage for analysis.


Passage number 35.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a broad question that was stimulated by Brian’s discussion of the improvement in market functioning.  I wonder, Brian, if you could just offer more of a summary opinion on how much better things are in financial markets.  How far are we toward sustainable improvement.  You talked about the end of the government programs. The Greenbook, as near as I can tell, still has the special financial factor add-ons to that, and I’m just ultimately going to wonder where we are with that.  It’s a little awkward because the Governors have the responsibility for assessing 13(3) conditions, and yet things feel markedly different from March 2008 or September 2008. Here we are in August 2009.  We have moved from general market dysfunction to something now that is better, and there is actually some market differentiation, where some markets are doing substantially better than others.  They’re discriminating—whether or not it is appropriate is the question.  So any additional color you could offer on that would be helpful to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for more information and clarification on the state of financial markets.


Passage number 36.
 MR. SACK. In some of the bigger liquid markets—Treasuries, MBS—we’ve obviously seen considerable improvement from late last year and early this year, and I think enough improvement to where we are now perhaps just on a slower ongoing trajectory for improvement.  We are not back to where things were before the crisis.  Bid–asked spreads are still a bit wider than they were. One thing that’s very different is that trade sizes seem to be a lot smaller.  So even at the quoted bid–asked spreads, market depth is much more limited.  But it’s certainly not bad. It may take some time to get back to that.  We may never actually get back to that.  So I think you would have to say that those markets in general are functioning quite well.  The corporate bond market as well.  We have had a lot of corporate bond issuance, a lot of improvement in pricing.  So that looks quite decent.  The markets that are still very disrupted, as I mentioned in the briefing, are the securitized credit markets.  There market activity is very dependent on the TALF.  There was basically nothing going on in CMBS until the TALF and the PPIP came along, and what we have seen since the TALF and the PPIP is some pickup in trading—actually some encouraging signs—but no new issuance still.  So I think that those markets will take quite some time to come back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker describes different markets and acknowledges that some have improved, while others are still disrupted. There is no conflicting information or differing opinions presented.


Passage number 37.
  MR. MADIGAN. Two other points may be worth making.  One is that, of course, credit intermediation through the banking sector seemingly remains still quite impaired, judging by actual credit flows and by responses to things like the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.  Also, as Brian mentioned in his briefing, there’s still a tremendous range of support that’s being provided to financial markets and institutions.  It is difficult to know exactly how to factor that in, but surely that is still providing support.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating two points, one about the impaired credit intermediation through the banking sector and the other about the support provided to financial markets and institutions.


Passage number 38.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 39.
 MR. PLOSSER. I would like to go back to the point about the 3/1s, 5/1s, and 7/1s and whatever—how that affects the credit scores, a point that President Fisher raised.  If we were to go in and concentrate our purchases in some subset of these ARMs, hence driving their rates down, then we expect the market response to that would be that maybe those credit scores wouldn’t stay the same, that there would be a response where mortgage brokers and others would help direct people into those products for which we are trying to drive down the yields and make them more attractive.  I think there is going to be an endogenous response to that, and we have to be careful that we don’t put ourselves in a position by which we are creating even more distortions than we already are by picking products in individual securities and trying to affect their individual prices and not others.  I think that is a very dangerous position for us to be in, and we end up perhaps aggravating problems and actually preventing markets from doing the healing that they need to do rather than just helping them along. My point is that there will be a demand response to this price change and that we cannot necessarily assume that we won’t be, in effect, driving people to particular products and away from others, and I think that’s something we have to be very, very careful of.  So I just think we should be very dubious about our strategy here in terms of making this work.  Also it runs a risk politically—not economically, but politically—and I think this is probably what President Fisher was suggesting. Actually the staff memo raised this issue.  Politically it looks as though we’re going into something that everybody has been condemning as part of our problem, and I think we should be very, very careful about that. So I’m just wondering, Eric, do you really think there wouldn’t be a demand response to our driving. If Brian is right and we can drive down the yields on the 5/1s and 7/1s by 100 basis points, do you think that there wouldn’t be a demand response to that and, therefore, that credit scores might, in fact, decline as opposed to being high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

The passage shows contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser disagrees with the idea of the Federal Reserve driving down yields on specific mortgage products because he believes it may create more distortions in the market and prevent it from healing naturally. He also mentions the political risk of appearing to support something that has been condemned as part of the problem. Therefore, there is contention in this passage.


Passage number 40.
 MR. ROSENGREN. My observation on credit scores was based on the historical data that includes the last recession. As you can see from the charts, in the last recession, the rates were substantially lower than they are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 41.
 MR. PLOSSER. It wasn’t much of a recession though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, expresses his opinion that the recession mentioned was not significant.


Passage number 42.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Well, it was a different recession.  I’m just saying that the observation on credit scores was based on a period in which actually we weren’t intervening and that was a recession. I think it is an open question as to who would take advantage of the program, but right now it looks as if the spreads are outsized relative to what they have been historically. So you might argue that some people who would prefer a five-year or a seven-year product now don’t have a product that’s functioning in the way that it has historically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 43.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Vice Chairman" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is simply a title or position within an organization.


Passage number 44.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Just to amplify President Rosengren’s remarks, we were already distorting the market by just buying fixed-rate mortgages.  So you could argue that, if you were to purchase fives, sevens, and tens, actually you’d be reducing the amount of distortion because you’d be bringing those rates back into better alignment with where they have been  historically. So I’m not convinced that the distortion argument goes against the ARM purchases.  I think you could argue just as strongly that it gives a case for the ARM purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting an alternate viewpoint but does not portray any disagreement or conflict with the initial statement.


Passage number 45.
 MR. PLOSSER. So you create one distortion, and you fix it by creating other distortions to offset it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions. It simply states that one distortion is created and then another is created to offset it. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 46.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Right now you are pushing people into fixed-rate mortgages because those yields are so much lower than the ARM yields because you’re intervening in the one market and not the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any expressed disagreement or contention. It simply describes a current situation where individuals are being encouraged towards fixed-rate mortgages due to lower yields compared to ARM yields, while also pointing out that intervention is only occurring in one market and not the other.


Passage number 47.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. We are in the Q&A session for Brian.  [Laughter] We will have a chance to discuss these issues further, of course.  President Lacker, did you want to ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The conversation is proceeding in a friendly manner, with laughter and anticipation of further discussion.


Passage number 48.
 MR. LACKER. Brian Sack, I’m looking at chart 1 on page 7 of 8 of the memo that you distributed, which shows agency ARM issuance monthly beginning in 1994 and up through the present, and it looks as though in late 1998, early 1999, that there was a really strong dip.  Quantities got down exceptionally low, and then the same thing happened in 2001.  My memory is that those were occasions in which interest rates fell, and if I look at chart 1, it doesn’t seem that surprising that ARM volumes are low.  Now, in chart 3, you show us the results of some of the regressions. The way it is described in the text, you say that you address this ARM–fixed spread on the slope of the yield curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain a contention or disagreement.


Passage number 49.
 MR. SACK. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement by Mr. Sack.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 50.
 MR. LACKER. But did you include the level of the yield curve.  This goes back to President Bullard’s remark that it certainly seems as if you could look at the data and be forgiven for thinking that, when the overall yield curve is low, there is an effect depressing ARM rates because people think it’s going to be mean reverting rather than just a random walk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The disagreement arises from the different perspectives on the relationship between the level of the yield curve and the effect on Adjustable Rate Mortgage (ARM) rates. While President Bullard suggests that a low overall yield curve may depress ARM rates due to the expectation of mean reversion, Mr. Lacker questions whether this factor is included in the analysis.


Passage number 51.
  MR. SACK. To my knowledge, we did not try the level of yields, and of course, chart 3 shows the outcome of just one model.  But I think the argument that ARMs look expensive to households seems pretty compelling.  I mean, you do not need a regression to tell you that; you can pretty much see it in chart 24. Even if activity tends to fall off when rates are low, we have to at least entertain the idea that the apparent expense of ARMs—the wide spread that we see today—is contributing to that falloff.  So it’s possible that the purchase program would bring the ARM spread in and make it more comparable with the fixed-rate spread but still households would choose fixed-rate mortgages because those rates are very low.  I think that’s possible, and that’s fine. I think one would argue, well, let’s bring that spread down and then let households make that choice.  So in no way are we suggesting that you target some proportion of ARM issuance or push on this until you get ARM issuance back up.  We are just saying that, you could argue, Let’s bring down what looks to be a very wide yield spread, and let households make that choice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own viewpoint and suggesting a possible course of action, but there is no conflicting opinion being expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 52.
 MR. LACKER. If I could follow up, Mr. Chairman—you used the word “disrupted” about the agency ARM market.  I am assuming that this yield spread and the quantities are part of the evidence that you would use to bolster that case.  So here is the question: It could be the case that you have qualitative observations bolstering the characterization as “disrupted”—things like market makers who have left the market, wider bid–asked spreads, and the like.  But if it is just quantities and these spreads, I guess I find this less than compelling to qualify for the word “disrupted,” the way I usually think of that. More broadly, we did intervene in the fixed-rate securitization market.  We would have predicted that the intervention would increase the flow of credit to that sector and reduce the flow of credit to other sectors.  It is exactly what we would have expected. So there is going to be an endless supply of other sectors that, because of our intervention, now are seeing less credit than they otherwise would.  So are we on a treadmill here that we will do this and then we will find that interest-only ARMs really deserve some help, and we will do that.  What are the criteria here for drawing a boundary between where we are intervening and where we are not.  I am not sure I see it in the way you have laid out the pros and cons—it makes it seem as if we just assemble a pro and con list and see what wins each time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker questions the use of the word "disrupted" to describe the agency ARM market, stating that he finds the evidence presented (quantities and spreads) to be less compelling for that characterization. He also raises concerns about the intervention in the fixed-rate securitization market and questions the criteria for deciding where to intervene and where not to.


Passage number 53.
 MR. SACK. That last question is certainly a tougher one than we aim to answer in the memo.  How far to go is a question for policymakers.  However, let me say something about the liquidity issue and whether the ARMs market is disrupted.  In general, you know, the ARM market is less liquid than the fixed-rate mortgage market.  The fixed-rate mortgage market trades on a TBA basis. That means that a bunch of securities can be delivered into a contract, and that adds a lot of liquidity to that market.  It is traded over an electronic trading platform, Tradeweb.  The ARM market is different. It trades much more on a specified pool basis.  There is no TBA. It is not on Tradeweb. It is literally a deal-driven market in which, to execute an order, you need to pick up a phone and talk to some dealers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily providing information and explaining the differences between the ARM market and the fixed-rate mortgage market.


Passage number 54.
 MR. LACKER. It was this way before the crisis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or situation before the crisis without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 55.
 MR. SACK. This is the way it was before and the way it is now.  So just in general the ARM market is less liquid than the fixed-rate mortgage market.  Today I think that difference is greater than normal, and you can see that in terms of bid–asked spreads.  The bid–asked spreads for ARMs, for comparable-sized trades, are four to eight times what they are for fixed-rate mortgages. I think that difference has gotten greater, and one reason for that is that you have a market in which there is just no new issuance, so there is no flow that is creating liquidity in trading. So it is really a market that—I don’t want to say it is completely dried up in terms of trading, but it has suffered in terms of liquidity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's observations and opinions about the ARM market and its lack of liquidity.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 56.
 MR. LACKER. Well, I think the bid–asked spread in any market would go up if the volume went down.  I wonder what happened in ’98, ’99, and 2001 to the bid–asked spread.  Do you have a benchmark against which to compare those bid–asked spreads and view them as too high, or is it just a byproduct of the low issuance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is questioning what happened to the bid-asked spread during certain years and asking if there is a benchmark to evaluate whether they were too high. This suggests that there may be differing opinions or perspectives on the topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 57.
 MR. SACK. We don’t have a nice time series of bid–asked spreads.  In part because there is no electronic platform, we don’t have a nice data source to give us a long historical perspective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is stating that there is no nice time series of bid-asked spreads, indicating a lack of agreement or consensus on the availability of data sources.


Passage number 58.
 MR. LACKER. You don’t know if it is high relative to what it would be if it were efficiently undisrupted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It simply states that the speaker does not know the comparison of the current situation with a hypothetical efficient and undisrupted situation.


Passage number 59.
 MR. SACK. No. I am saying that, given the lack of liquidity by these measures, given the lack of issuance, and given the cheap pricing, I think the evidence in general supports the idea that, if the Fed were to purchase those securities and encourage new issuance, you would see a pickup in liquidity, and you would see these liquidity measures improve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion that if the Fed were to purchase those securities and encourage new issuance, it would lead to an improvement in liquidity measures.


Passage number 60.
 MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman, I have another question about the asset purchase programs, but I understand the discussion here has been about this, so I defer my question until later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the discussion has been focused on the asset purchase programs and decides to defer their question.


Passage number 61.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. President Yellen, a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the title of the President as "President Yellen" and referring to them as a "two-hander," which is a term that typically means a two-person performance or activity.


Passage number 62.
 MS. YELLEN. I just wanted to comment on President Lacker’s question and Brian’s response and say that our staff also undertook independent analysis of this issue and estimated an econometric model trying to assess how distorted the ARM and fixed-rate mortgage spreads are relative to their benchmarks.  That included more than the slope of the yield curve.  It was a  principal-component analysis that implicitly included levels and other things.  And it supports the conclusion that Brian drew based on the exercise that he undertook.  In fact, our staff concluded that the fixed-rate mortgage rate relative to its benchmark is now reasonably normal and the ARM rate is on the order of 150 basis points higher than you would expect, given the entire constellation of rates. Another thing that they did was to estimate an econometric model using individual data from the McDash data set to try to get a sense of how the existing differentials are affecting choice between conventional and adjustable-rate mortgages, and they found that the essentially no-issuance, no take-up on adjustable-rate mortgages is precisely what you would expect based on the current constellation of rates. Finally, they tried to estimate what the likely responsiveness would be if we were able to push the differential down about 150 basis points or other magnitudes to more-normal levels by entering this market.  They tried to look at those borrowers who were currently in the mortgage market because historically you have had subprime borrowers with very low FICO scores who aren’t in the mortgage market now.  So they controlled for a lot of borrower characteristics and tried to compute what the response would be of borrowers who were in the market as of early 2009, and they found a very high interest-elasticity.  In fact, they computed that, if we could drive that rate down 150 basis points, you should see the share of ARMs versus fixed-rate mortgages rise to about 35 percent. I offer that just as a clarifying comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing additional information and clarifying the previous statements made by President Lacker and Brian.


Passage number 63.
  MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Not enough context is provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 64.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No


Passage number 65.
 MR. LACKER. If I can just follow up:  First, let me say that that sounds like admirable research, and I enjoy benefiting from it, President Yellen.  This brings to mind another aspect of  the adjustable/fixed-rate margin.  My understanding of the empirics of mortgage losses over the last couple of years is that they have revealed that a substantial selection effect goes on in the choice between adjustable and fixed-rate mortgages.  And what we know of models with adverse selection suggests that the relative frequency of good types and bad types in the canonical model is going to influence equilibrium pricing in those models.  So you would expect that, if there is more in the general population of the riskier types, you might get higher risk premiums on the ARMs because they are selected by the riskier types of agents, and this could be a factor explaining the high spreads on adjustable-rate mortgages now.  Whether it would be picked up in an atheoretical principal component analysis or not, I don’t know.  I just mention that as something that has arisen out of the data recently.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing additional information and mentioning a factor that could explain the high spreads on adjustable-rate mortgages based on recent data.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 66.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let the record show that President Lacker’s reference to ARMs dealers had to do with mortgages and not with other things.  [Laughter] A short intervention, President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The laughter after the statement indicates disagreement or a humorous response.


Passage number 67.
 MR. PLOSSER. Yes, a short one. Brian, the way you have described the ARM market and how it is not functioning the way we think—or at least some estimates suggest that it might—I wonder if New York and the staff have on their agenda what the next market is.  If I listen to what you say, we ought to be in the jumbo market.  And I am wondering, with the very high spreads in the jumbo market, can we expect to see a proposal from the staff that we are going to buy jumbos now in order to get their spreads down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is asking a question and seeking clarification from Brian.


Passage number 68.
 MR. SACK. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating that Mr. Sack responded with a "No" without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 69.
 [Laughter] MS. MCLAUGHLIN. We are not allowed to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply mentions laughter without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 70.
 MR. PLOSSER. The argument is the same, though, isn’t it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is making a statement about an argument.


Passage number 71.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You can’t buy jumbos.  They are not GSE guaranteed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 72.
MR. SACK. Yes, they have to be GSE guaranteed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that something has to be GSE guaranteed.


Passage number 73.
   MR. PLOSSER. We could think of a way, couldn’t we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is not expressing any disagreement or argument, but rather asking a question or seeking agreement.


Passage number 74.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, no, no, no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, because there is no specific statement or argument in the passage that can be disagreed upon or lead to contention. The repetition of "no" does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 75.
 [Laughter] MR. SACK. There is another point, which is that the expansion of the conforming-mortgage limit has actually brought what would have been a lot of jumbo new issuance into the conforming-mortgage market.  Moreover, most fixed-rate MBS pools can have up to 10 percent of jumbo conforming mortgages in them.  So the asset-purchase programs already in place are already helping to support some high-balance mortgages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the expansion of the conforming-mortgage limit and how it has affected the market for jumbo mortgages.


Passage number 76.
 MR. PLOSSER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 77.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the title and name of a person, President Hoenig. There is no information provided that suggests any form of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 78.
 MR. HOENIG. In a sense this is going to carry the discussion where it has already been, but if I remember right, we had some discussion of this at the last FOMC meeting and went against going forward with it at the time.  And given my sense of things, although things remain fragile in the housing market and elsewhere, things have improved.  They are better than they were. It is not that I mind having it brought back, but I am wondering, Brian, what has happened between the last FOMC and this FOMC that makes this worth bringing back for discussion.  The market is not perfect yet.  We still have this distortion in the ARMs, but there is some improvement showing.  I think that the markets will straighten out with time, especially if the economy is on a healing path.  Is there enough need for this to accelerate the recovery or settle out the markets to bring this back and reconsider it at this meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Hoenig is questioning the need to bring back a certain topic for discussion at the current meeting, while acknowledging that there has been some improvement in the markets.


Passage number 79.
 MR. SACK. Just to be clear, we are not bringing up this issue because of something that has happened, a worsening of conditions, over the intermeeting period.  I think we left the last meeting thinking that this was an open issue and that we wanted to present the Committee with the full range of arguments on both sides and let the Committee decide it.  You know, we are well into the program.  We are at a point where people are beginning to discuss the exit.  Maybe there is an issue about whether it is the right time to be making changes like this, but we just wanted to present the case. In terms of timing, given the size of the program we are talking about, there is no issue. It would be very easy to get this program done in the size we have talked about, in the time left.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the issue being discussed was brought up in a previous meeting and that they wanted to present all sides of the argument to the Committee. There is also mention of timing and the feasibility of implementing the program.


Passage number 80.
 MR. HOENIG. Thank you very much, Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement of gratitude.


Passage number 81.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Just to be clear, we will survey everybody’s views either in the go-round or, if you don’t express a view in the go-round, we will check with you after the meeting.  So everyone’s thoughts will be heard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The statement simply outlines a process for ensuring that everyone's views will be heard during a meeting.


Passage number 82.
 MR. HOENIG. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions for Brian.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information that indicates contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there are additional questions for Brian and then switches to President Lacker, without any indication of disagreement or contention between them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 84.
 MR. LACKER. Yes. This has to do with our asset purchase program.  I want to refer to chart 25, “Balance Sheet Assets by Category,” on the last page of your presentation.  It looks as if, when we buy our large-scale assets, short-term liquidity facility usage goes down.  That suggests that maybe banks have a certain amount of reserves they want to hold, and when we buy stuff, they have to borrow less to have the reserves they want to hold.  In fact, reserves went down in the last intermeeting period, and we keep missing the forecast of reserve balances and short-term liquidity facility usage on the low side as we ramp up these purchases.  My understanding is that you go around facility by facility and construct these forecasts, and then reserves sort of pop out as the residual. Now we are going to keep purchasing assets, and my understanding is that the forecast says that we are going to take reserve balances from $700 billion to $1.4 trillion.  There is an interesting memo by Charles Sims and Kevin McDonald on the MarketSource website that forecasts balances for the large banks and for various bank categories like community banks.  My sense is that there is a sort of judgmental forecast as to how the shares of total reserve balances are going to change, but it has Bank of America—this is the largest holder—going from $140 billion to something over $250 billion.  I checked this morning.  They are planning to reduce their reserve balances over the next several months, and the reason is that the cost of carry is too high.  I mean, it is valuable to them in terms of the liquidity it gives them; but at 25 basis points, it is below their cost of funds, and they are planning to shift funds into cash equivalents, like Treasuries and agencies, that are higher yielding and have a lower cost to carry. So my question is, What effects do you expect, if this hypothesis is true, of our expanding large-scale asset purchases enough that short-term liquidity facility usage is driven to zero and yet reserve balances keep going up.  What yields are going to change to get banks to hold this. How does that square with the Greenbook’s forecast that yields increase rather than decrease over the period.  And how much stimulus does that provide, in some broad sense.  I realize that is a tall order, but I am just raising the question of whether there is a discrete change in the sense of the stimulus we provide as we cross that threshold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is questioning the effectiveness of expanding large-scale asset purchases and the impact it will have on short-term liquidity facility usage and reserve balances. They also question the forecasted increase in yields and the overall stimulus provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 85.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is how quantitative easing works.  You induce banks to substitute away from reserves, but they have to hold the reserves in the end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention or disagreement in the passage. While the first sentence explains how quantitative easing works, the second sentence introduces an opposing viewpoint by stating that, ultimately, banks have to hold the reserves. This suggests that there may be a disagreement or differing opinions on the effectiveness or consequences of quantitative easing.


Passage number 86.
 MR. LACKER. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage only includes a statement and does not express any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 87.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So the yields change, assuming that we would be more accommodative.  And that is exactly what we are trying to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It states a fact (yields change) and expresses agreement with the action being taken (trying to be more accommodative).


Passage number 88.
 MR. LACKER. Well, I argued in January that is the effect of what we were having to do, so I am aware of that.  But we didn’t sign up to do an infinite amount of it.  We want to do the right amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply reflects the speaker's acknowledgement of a previous argument and their assertion that they only want to do the "right amount" of something.


Passage number 89.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the word "right" alone. More context is needed to determine if there is any disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 90.
 MR. LACKER. And as economic conditions change—and I argued this in January as well—we need to adapt, just the way we adapt our funds rate when the funds rate is operative.  We ought to be thinking about how much stimulus we are supplying.  So the question arises, Do we know what kind of stimulus we are going to be supplying.  Apparently, the banking system isn’t planning on doubling their holding of reserves any time soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement and discussion of the need for adaptation and stimulus supply.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 91.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, these asset-purchase plans are not set in stone.  We began them in March at a time of very weak conditions.  We have reviewed them at each meeting.  And if we decide there is too much stimulus in the economy, given our projections, then we can reduce them. So they are a choice variable at each meeting.  But you have just described exactly the way the quantitative easing part of this is supposed to work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage suggests that there may be disagreement or contention regarding the implementation of asset-purchase plans and quantitative easing. While it mentions the flexibility to review and reduce stimulus if deemed necessary, the statement "But you have just described exactly the way the quantitative easing part of this is supposed to work" implies that someone may have a different perspective or interpretation of how quantitative easing should be implemented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 92.
 MR. LACKER. Yes, I know. But is this consistent.  I mean, this suggests that, when we cross this threshold, there will be a discrete downward effect on these longer yields.  We may want that; we may not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrase "We may want that; we may not" which implies that there are opposing views or differing opinions about the potential effects of crossing a certain threshold on longer yields.


Passage number 93.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I don’t see any reason why it would be discontinuous.  I think it is continuous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their belief that the subject under discussion, which is not specified in the passage,  is continuous.


Passage number 94.
 MR. LACKER. Well, because there is a discontinuity in the use of our short-term liquidity facilities at zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Lacker.


Passage number 95.
 MR. CARPENTER. Just one minor clarification, though, President Lacker.  Some of the facilities, if we take two of them in particular—well, just take the CPFF as a single example.  Atits peak, the CPFF was very, very large—well over $200 billion.  And it wasn’t necessarily just banks borrowing that. As that usage came down, that was not in the first instance a bank deciding that they have access to funds in one case and so they are going to give it up in another case. So it is not obvious that it is quite as tight a link of reduced use of liquidity facilities, simply because of the increase in the provision of balances from that asset purchase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a clarification made by Mr. Carpenter regarding the usage of the CPFF facility and its impact on the provision of balances.


Passage number 96.
 MR. LACKER. No, I understand that the CPFF is in this orange part here.  And to some extent that is different from the PCF and the TAF, where it is driven by their demand for funds, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 97.
 MR. SACK. Yes. I would just add, as Chairman Bernanke said, that the example you gave of Bank of America is basically describing the portfolio balance effect, which underlies the stock effect that I talked about.  Basically, the system as a whole has to be forced to hold these liquid assets instead of longer-term assets.  To make participants happy to do that, the yields on the longer-term assets have to be lower.  The way we have thought about it is that this is all priced in already. If you believe a stock effect, where the effects are based on the expectation of what the stocks are going to be, completing the asset purchase programs that are already announced is going to force this portfolio reallocation.  But markets tend to bring it forward, so you don’t get the flow effect as it happens. You get it priced up front.  This flow versus stock issue is something that we are conscious of, and maybe you are raising the fact that the flow issue also depends on the level of reserves, and so we are still going to get some effect there.  But we tend to think of most of the effect as coming through the expected stock, even though we allow some possibility of flow effects and make recommendations for policymakers to hedge themselves in case there are these flow effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mostly a statement of agreement and explanation between Mr. Sack and Chairman Bernanke on the topic of portfolio balance and the effects of asset purchase programs.


Passage number 98.
MR. LACKER. Strange as this may sound, I am sort of willing to entertain the notion that the yield curve doesn’t build in this sort of effect yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing their openness to considering the idea that the yield curve may not currently reflect a certain effect. There are no opposing views or conflicting arguments presented in this passage.


Passage number 99.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You have raised a good point, President Lacker, about the substitutability between these two forms of stimulus, and I think we ought to continue to think about that. If there are no objections, I would like to go on to the next portion.  We have some staff presentations on reserve management, which bears exactly on some of these issues, and then a presentation on the TALF.  So let me turn first to Chris Burke.  We will hear four presentations, and then we will have Q&A for all four.  Chris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement and willingness to continue thinking about a point raised.


Passage number 100.
 MR. BURKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The FOMC has discussed using reverse repo operations in scale as part of its strategy for eventually draining reserves and raising short-term interest rates from their current low levels.  This briefing will provide an update on operational readiness, describe some of the key aspects of the program and their implications, and briefly discuss the importance of counterparties, including a discussion of the special case of conducting reverse repos with the GSEs. An important operational aspect of large-scale reverse repos is the form of settlement.  There are three different types of settlement—delivery versus payment, held in custody, and triparty. The Federal Reserve has used all three, but for large-scale reverse repos, triparty settlement is the only feasible choice.  In triparty repo, both the borrower and the lender have cash and collateral accounts at the same triparty repo agent, either JPMorgan Chase or Bank of New York Mellon.  There are several reasons why triparty settlement is required.  Most important, it provides access to the wide range of institutional cash investors who use triparty repo.  In addition, triparty agents provide collateral management services for term repo and other services that current FRBNY systems are not set up to provide. A Federal Reserve reverse repo in the triparty structure, however, is not sufficient to drain reserves, as at the end of the day the funds that the Fed borrowed are in the Federal Reserve account of the clearing bank.  To drain reserves, therefore, the clearing banks must take the additional step of sending the funds to the Fed at the end of the day, and because of the nature of triparty, the Fed must return the funds to the clearing banks each morning.  These additional steps create operational and legal complexities for the program.  As such, the staff believes that the Desk should establish a complete operational and legal system for conducting reverse repos using Treasury and direct agency debt first, before designing the ability to conduct reverse repos using agency MBS collateral, which involves further complexities.An initial reverse repo program with the capacity of as much as $100 billion, using primary dealers as counterparties and Treasury and direct agency debt as collateral, is expected to be available in early September.  This has required the establishment of new tools to manage the operational aspects of the program, new legal documentation with both the clearing banks and the dealers, and negotiations with the clearing banks on the fees involved.  Because the main services that triparty repo agents perform involve the management and pricing of collateral, the triparty fees are paid by the collateral providers. Even though the Federal Reserve has been using the triparty system for repo transactions for years without paying fees, the use of triparty repo to drain reserves will require the Fed to pay fees to the clearing banks.  Initial discussions with the clearing banks suggest that annual triparty fees for a reverse repo portfolio of $500 billion are likely to be in the range of $10 million to $15 million.  Current discussions with the clearing banks are focused on eliminating the differences in proposed fees from the two clearing banks and reducing the final fees. Negotiations could take up to another month to complete and document. The legal and fee groundwork laid for reverse repos using Treasury and agency debt should also cover the use of agency mortgage-backed securities.  However, new operational processes will need to be designed and implemented for agency MBS, primarily because of our use of investment managers and custodial accounts for managing our agency MBS holdings.  We anticipate that the extension to agency MBS collateral should be completed in the fourth quarter. The most important issue regarding the potential scope of the reverse repo program is the set of counterparties.  Our current open market operations are conducted with only the 18 primary dealers.  However, primary dealers tend to be net borrowers, not net lenders, in the repo market, meaning that as a group they are a poor fit as reverse repo counterparties.  Further, dealers have limited capacity to act as intermediaries between the Fed and other cash investors, as doing so would gross up their balance sheets. Based on discussions with about half the primary dealer community, total dealer capacity for reverse repos is expected to be only about $100 billion and perhaps only half of that on month-ends.  Dealers simply do not have the balance sheet capacity to handle the size of program being contemplated.  Thus a program of any size will require an expansion of the counterparty list.  The identification and establishment of an expanded set of counterparties, which is what would enable the expansion of the program beyond its initial $100 billion size, should be complete by year-end.   One area of exploration related to expanded counterparties is a reverse repo program focused on the GSEs, in particular Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae, and the 12 Federal Home Loan Banks.  Nearly all have expressed a willingness to consider engaging in reverse repos with the Fed, and current estimates suggest that a program targeted at these GSEs would be between $50 billion and $75 billion in size. The potential costs and benefits of a program of this nature, however, require more study, as the magnitude of the effect on the federal funds rate is not yet fully clear.  A $75 billion program would not substantially reduce the overall level of reserve   balances from their current and expected elevated levels.  And while it may be the case that removing these particular participants in the federal funds market would help increase federal funds rates in general, that conclusion is not obvious.  Staff members at the New York Fed and the Board are working to better understand the potential rate effects of such a program.  In addition, removing the GSEs from the brokered federal funds market would significantly shrink that market and make it more idiosyncratic and perhaps a less relevant indicator of broader funding conditions. These are issues that will have to be addressed when the FOMC considers the scope of the reverse repo program and the way it fits into a broader strategy for tightening financial conditions. My purpose today was simply to indicate some of the operational conclusions that we have reached to date and define some of the issues that policymakers will have to take into consideration going forward.  Thank you. Seth Carpenter will now update you on the term deposit facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the use of reverse repo operations and the operational aspects of the program.


Passage number 101.
 MR. CARPENTER. Thank you, Chris. A term deposit facility could be another part of the tool kit for implementing a decision to raise short-term interest rates.  Because a deposit facility would be created under the authority for paying interest on reserves, access would be limited to depository institutions and not, for example, the GSEs. This distinction is a clear difference from Chris’s description of reverse repos.  Funds deposited in a term deposit facility would not be available to clear payments, satisfy reserve or clearing balance requirements, or be treated as balances for purposes of calculating overdraft fees. In essence, by shifting balances out of DIs’ master accounts, a deposit facility would lower excess reserves.   The quantity of excess reserves that could be absorbed by a deposit facility is unclear, though logically it should increase as the interest rate paid on term deposits rises. The staff is evaluating two potential approaches for setting the rate paid on term deposits.  The Federal Reserve could auction a fixed quantity of term deposits, with the rate established in the auction.  Alternatively, the Federal Reserve could post the interest rates that it will pay on term deposits, and DIs would decide what quantities they wish to deposit at those rates.  In either case, the rate paid would be constrained by the statutory requirement that rates not exceed prevailing market rates.  The staff currently envisions that a deposit facility would be a somewhat blunt tool and be used to drain a block of reserve balances rather than as an instrument for day­to-day reserves management.  The auction-rate approach would likely give the Federal Reserve greater control over the quantity of term deposits than would a posted-rate facility. Such control might be desirable if other tools, such as reverse repos or asset sales, were to drain such a large quantity of reserves that precision over the level of reserves would become important again.  That said, under either approach, settlement would likely occur with a lag of at least one day, partly to enhance the predictability of the quantity of reserves.   In practice, the Federal Reserve would announce the details of each operation, and an administrator would enter those details into an automated application that has been   largely developed. Using a web-based interface for the new application, depository institutions would submit tenders electronically and get notification of awards.  For auction-rate facilities, in particular, the application also provides the capability of noncompetitive bids, which might appeal to some of the smaller depository institutions. The background work to put a deposit facility into operation is well under way.  The Federal Reserve could announce a deposit facility as early as November and implement the facility before the end of the year.  IAS, the Integrated Accounting System, has been modified to accept settlement entries from the new term deposit application. During the next several months, System staff members will complete and test the deposit facility application. Implementing a deposit facility would also require a number of additional steps beyond those already completed, including preparing any necessary Federal Register notices, drafting legal agreements, educating DIs about the new facility, obtaining signed versions of the legal agreements from DIs that may wish to use the facility, and issuing the electronic certificates that DIs would need to access the deposit facility application through the web-based interface. Completing these steps would take several months and entail a significant, coordinated effort by System staff members across a number of business lines. Jamie McAndrews will now discuss reserve collateral accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is informational and does not contain any visible contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 102.
   MR. MCANDREWS. Thank you, Seth. I will update the Committee on the possibility of creating reserve collateral accounts as a means to achieve better control of the federal funds rate using interest on reserves.  As you know, the effective federal funds rate has generally been lower than the interest rate paid on excess reserves since October 2008, and the size of this divergence has fluctuated over time. Competition among banks might be expected to narrow that divergence because buying funds and placing them on deposit at their Federal Reserve Bank is both relatively inexpensive and completely risk free.  One explanation for the divergence is that imperfections in the fed funds market short-circuit the competitive process by which the fed funds rate would be bid up.  Some banks are paying, for example, 15 basis points to borrow and then earn 25 basis points at the Fed, but other banks are not bidding up the rate to 16 basis points or higher.  Reserve collateral accounts are intended to facilitate competition that would bid up the rate and generate a tighter link between the interest rate paid on excess reserves and the market rate.  Creating this tighter link now would help dispel doubts about the Fed’s ability to use interest on excess reserves to raise the fed funds rate when the time comes. Why isn’t competition bidding up rates more efficiently.  One possible reason is that counterparty credit risk impedes rate-based competition.  Fed funds trades are uncollateralized loans. Consequently, a firm must carefully select its counterparties and limit the amount lent to each of them.  These restrictions limit competition for funds. If a firm could be freed from concern about its counterparty’s credit quality, it could search among a wider set of firms for higher bids and for larger trade sizes.  Reserve collateral accounts, or RCAs, would create the possibility of collateralized fed funds trades, which would allow many more banks to bid for funds in the market. How do RCAs facilitate collateralized fed funds trades.  To begin, note that an analysis of data from Fedwire suggests that, in July 2009, approximately half of the daily average of $125 billion of fed funds trades consisted of GSEs lending to banks, with the other half consisting of bank-to-bank trades.  So suppose that two firms, a GSE and a bank, agree to use RCAs to conduct collateralized fed funds trades.  The bank would request that its Federal Reserve Bank create an RCA, separate from the bank’s master account.  The account would have a unique feature:  The bank could not wire funds out of its own RCA. The funds in the account would, however, earn interest on reserves for the bank paid at the rate on excess reserves.  Under the terms of their collateralized fed funds trade, the GSE would wire funds into the bank’s RCA, and the next day, the GSE would pull the funds out of the bank’s RCA back into its own account, using the operational capabilities of the Fed’s National Settlement Service.  So the account can be thought of as a locked box into which funds are placed and to which the GSE is given the key.  The funds are put into the box by the GSE at night, they earn interest for the bank, and the GSE retrieves the funds the next day. Separately, the GSE and the bank agree on what interest rate the GSE would earn from the deal.   This arrangement would be governed by agreements among the Federal Reserve Bank, the GSE, and the bank, in which the Fed would acknowledge that the GSE has a lien on the funds in the RCA. That acknowledgement would allow the GSE to perfect a security interest in the account.  As a result, if the bank with which it was doing the deals failed, the GSE would still get back its principal, as the funds in the account would be collateral for repayment.  With the infrastructure of RCAs in place, we could expect the GSEs and other firms, perhaps including banks, to establish RCAs with banks if they can earn higher rates by doing so.  Parties to RCA agreements would be free to borrow or lend on an uncollateralized basis; this possibility should help in aligning short-term rates through arbitrage activity. Another possible impediment to competition for funds in the current environment might come from banks’ balance sheet concerns.  Some banks might fear that their buffer of capital to assets above minimum levels is too low for them to bid aggressively for funds. Establishing an RCA would be most attractive to those banks with the least balance sheet concerns, because they would be willing to pay the highest rates. In this way, RCAs would allow market prices to be determined by the banks that are best positioned to purchase funds, which would further reduce the divergence of market rates from the interest rate paid on excess reserves. Our next step would be to approach a number of the GSEs and some banks to gauge their views as to the feasibility of RCAs and their attractiveness.  If a sufficient appetite for these arrangements appears to exist, Federal Reserve staff would then plan to establish a Systemwide steering group to form a precise timeline for all the implementation steps and to determine if any remaining unforeseen impediments to the creation of RCAs exist. I now turn to Bill Nelson, who will update the Committee on issues in the TALF program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker discusses the possibility of creating reserve collateral accounts as a means to achieve better control of the federal funds rate. They mention that the current divergence between the effective federal funds rate and the interest rate paid on excess reserves may be due to imperfections in the fed funds market. They propose that reserve collateral accounts could facilitate competition and generate a tighter link between the interest rate and the market rate. This implies that there is disagreement or debate about the current effectiveness of the fed funds market and how to improve it.


Passage number 103.
  MR. NELSON. Thank you, Jamie.  I will briefly review the staff’s evaluation of legacy RMBS as potential TALF collateral and then discuss a proposed extension of the facility’s end date. Staff members from the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and New York have worked to understand the potential economic and financial benefits and costs of accepting legacy RMBS as collateral for TALF loans.  The staff limited their investigation to about 16,000 bonds, with a face value of $1.2 trillion, that are still performing, have relatively straightforward structures, and were originally rated triple-A. RMBS are a complex and heterogeneous group of assets.  As a result, it’s impossible to identify a set of bonds with the lowest credit risk from the larger universe without conducting a bond-level analysis.  In short, there is no equivalent of the legacy super-senior CMBS bonds that are currently TALF eligible.  The prices of the pool of bonds under review have risen from their mid-March nadir, with gains accelerating in recent weeks. The expected return to an investor buying a bond at today’s prices is now typically half the return available a few months ago.  Given the recent increase in prices, adding legacy RMBS to the TALF, especially if confined to the safest bonds and paired with large haircuts, might not increase bond prices appreciably. Instead, the facility would act more as a backstop financing vehicle should risk premiums widen dramatically in coming months.  Moreover, because most bonds are expected to take at least some write-downs in coming years, to implement even a limited facility we would have to hire multiple vendors to carefully analyze candidate bonds, determine conservative haircuts, and effectively communicate loan terms to potential investors.   Turning to the TALF end date, currently the facility is scheduled to close on December 31, 2009.  The staff is proposing that the Board authorize TALF loans to finance new-issue CMBS through June 30, 2010, and authorize all other TALF loans through March 31. We are proposing an extension because at this point ABS and CMBS markets appear to require the TALF to function and because issuers and investors need assurance that the TALF will be available for several months into the future. The ABS and CMBS markets remain impaired and appear likely to remain impaired through the proposed new deadlines.  There is little near-term prospect for a significant revival of non-TALF investor interest in ABS in volume, and the economic recovery remains tentative and potentially contingent on the continued availability of credit for consumers and businesses.  The new-issue CMBS market has been shuttered for over a year, and the only deals on the horizon are relatively small TALF-financed deals. Despite the impairment, the TALF is encouraging the flow of credit to businesses and households.  Staff analysis and a recent survey of issuers indicate that the TALF has contributed to narrower spreads and has played a critical role in facilitating new securitizations.   There are benefits to announcing an extension sooner rather than waiting till the end date is closer. Potential issuers of new CMBS report needing six months, on average, to arrange relatively large deals involving multiple borrowers.  Consequently, an issuer that begins the process of putting together a new-issue  CMBS deal today risks not completing the deal by the end of 2009, after the current  TALF deadline. Similarly, potential investors in the TALF indicate that it takes time  to organize investment pools, and the looming deadline is damping interest.  While extending the TALF may yield benefits, it may also have costs.  In  particular, allowing the program to close might speed the development of alternative  methods for financing loans to businesses and households, albeit at the expense of  near-term disruptions in securitization markets.  A potential cost of extending the  deadline for legacy CMBS is that it might reduce the urgency among investors to  arrange TALF-financed deals.   If the Board decides to extend the facility in the manner proposed, it could  evaluate the need for a further extension later this year or early next year.  At that  time, the staff can propose potential adjustments to the program to make TALF  financing less attractive, if appropriate.  Conversely, if market conditions improve  more quickly and significantly than expected and conditions are no longer unusual  and exigent, the facility would be required to be closed at an earlier time.  These issues were discussed by the Board at a meeting yesterday.  No decisions  were made, but Board members generally expressed support for suspending staff  work on legacy RMBS and extending the TALF deadline to the proposed dates.  If  these are the Board’s conclusions after the discussion today, a press release reporting  the new end dates and indicating that further expansion of the TALF appears unlikely  at this time could be released later this week.  That concludes our prepared remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating the staff's evaluation of legacy RMBS as potential TALF collateral and discussing a proposed extension of the facility's end date. There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 104.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Just to summarize briefly—first, on our exit strategy, we have a belt-and-suspenders approach, a two-pronged approach.  One part is the interest rate on reserves, and the other is management of reserve balances.  What we heard today was, I think, considerable progress on a variety of mechanisms that would allow us to manage reserve balances to help us exit from our accommodative policies going forward.  On the TALF, to reiterate what Bill said, the sense of the Board—and we are interested in FOMC input—was that we would suspend any further expansion to other asset classes.  We looked at CLOs, RMBS, and CDOs. Is that the right list.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply summarizing information and stating the decisions made.


Passage number 105.
 MR. NELSON. CLOs, new issue RMBS, and now legacy RMBS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. Instead, it lists different financial products or securities without expressing any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 106.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. So just for clarity, we would announce later this week that we are suspending consideration of additional asset classes—not saying so, or perhaps even saying so—but obviously, if conditions change radically, we could revisit that.  But for now we will suspend that.  In the same press release we would announce the extension of the TALF to March 31 and for new CMBS only to June, because that particular category requires a much longer lead time to put together deals.  So that is what is on the table as far as the Board’s discussion is concerned.  Now, let me turn first to Q&A for the staff, and then we will have an opportunity for further discussion as well.  Are there any questions for the staff.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply providing information and discussing actions that will be taken.


Passage number 107.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I was just curious where the staff came out in rank ordering of these different proposals and whether they were viewed as complements or substitutes.  Should we on embark all three, or should we go forward with one faster than the other.  They were three separate briefings, but I didn’t get a sense of how to think of them in total.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity and seeking clarification on how the staff ranked and viewed the different proposals. They are questioning whether the proposals should be pursued together or if one should be prioritized over the others. The speaker mentions that they did not understand how to consider the proposals as a whole, indicating a lack of clarity rather than disagreement.


Passage number 108.
 MR. MADIGAN. I think at this stage we view all of them as potentially productive to work on further. They are at somewhat different stages of development, but I think that they all have significant plausibility as methods of dealing with reserve issues.  I think we wouldn’t recommend at this stage deciding definitely to use one in favor of another one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This can be seen in the use of phrases such as "I think" and "potentially productive" which indicate that Mr. Madigan is expressing his opinion without any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 109.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only consists of the name "Governor Kohn," without any additional context or information that could suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 110.
 MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question is a little like Bill’s question, but it is aimed, Jamie, at the RCAs.  Very clever.  I have a number of questions, but I wonder, if we do those other things, whether the RCAs, which strike me as a more radical kind of thing to do, are necessary or even helpful. In talking about the reverse RPs, we said there was concern that doing reverse RPs with Fannie and Freddie might detract from the workings of the fed funds–  brokered funds market.  Why wouldn’t the RCAs have the same negative effect.  And if we were doing reverse RPs with Fannie and Freddie, which seems like a more natural extension of what we are doing now, wouldn’t the RCAs be redundant with that.  What would they do.  Then, sort of more broadly, wouldn’t doing this splinter the fed funds market to some extent, detract from  liquidity in the market by breaking it into two pieces—a collateralized piece and a noncollateralized piece. And then, why aren’t RPs a substitute for RCAs.  What do we need those for when we have RPs already for securitized borrowing and lending and presumably putting upward pressure on the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It consists of a series of questions and concerns raised by Mr. Kohn.


Passage number 111.
 MR. MCANDREWS. Great list of questions.  With regard to the workings of the fed funds market, I think that, as I mentioned, there is about $125 billion traded per day in the fed funds market.  About half of that is bank to bank, and I don’t think we know how disruptive that would be if there were reverse RPs or whether that would continue. I have looked at the distribution of banks’ balances after you remove the fed funds trades they do per day, and there are still many banks that operate with negative balances per day and, therefore, have to enter the fed funds market. This is obviously a choice that they are making today.  Even with an expanded balance sheet of $1½ trillion, let’s say, the payments that cross our systems each day amount to about $3 trillion to $4 trillion. So there will still be a need for banks to trade fed funds.  I don’t think that that market would necessarily either disappear or be severely adversely affected. Would these be redundant if we used reverse RPs with the GSEs.  I think largely they would be redundant, if we use reverse RPs with the GSEs.  However, these would be available to banks as well as to other entities. So as Chris explained, if we just remove the balances from the GSEs, there is still a question of where the funds rate would settle.  I believe that the RCAs, by virtue of their applicability to any participant in the market, would set a harder floor on the fed  funds market.  I think the question is whether we think RPs are more operationally complex, more hands-on intervening in the market, versus the RCAs, which might be thought of as allowing the market participants to trade among themselves and find the rate. Then, the question is, Would the market bifurcate into two pieces.  That is a clear possibility. We would have the collateralized market, which would be the floor rate essentially, and the uncollateralized market, which would continue as it is today.  So it would add a new part to the market.  Whether or not that would be seen to be desirable I don’t know.  If I may say, as the Chairman was saying that we have a belt-and-suspenders approach, the RCAs are an idea to tighten the belt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 112.
 [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only includes the word "[Laughter]" and the name "Governor Warsh," which does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 113.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On a couple of the ideas that are being discussed with respect to excess reserve balances, the GSEs—either in Chris’s context as potential additional counterparties or in your context, Jamie—could be useful here.  What if the status of the GSEs changed during the period in which we need to conduct these operations.  I think in all likelihood the GSEs will be in the same muddled mess they are in now, and the Congress and the Administration will leave them as they are in effective conservatorship forever.  But what happens if in fact that is wrong and the GSEs end up finding themselves either more or less wards of the state with a different mission and capital structure.  Does the prospect of the change in that potentially limit our options—again, depending on when this period of draining excess reserves comes into being.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply posing a hypothetical scenario and asking a question about how it could potentially impact their options.


Passage number 114.
 MR. MCANDREWS. You are looking at me, but I will turn to Chris as well.  I think that, with regard to the balances of the GSEs, what is important is that all of these payments onmortgages funnel into the GSEs. So my first answer to your question is that I don’t think that part would change for the GSEs regardless of their overall regulatory environment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion in response to a question, but there is no disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 115.
 MR. BURKE. I guess a piece of it is going to have to do with their liquidity position.  In talking to them, I think they are feeling that they are being forced to hold more liquidity than they would have chosen to hold on their own. So as their future status changes, if they are required to hold more liquidity, then they might be selling more into these markets, and then these solutions would become more important.  Or if their liquidity requirements were to decrease, then they become a bit less of an issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply mentioning a potential factor (liquidity requirements) that could affect the importance of certain solutions in the future, depending on the changes in the entity's liquidity position.


Passage number 116.
 MR. CARPENTER. I think one extra point, because you did note accurately the role that the GSEs played in a lot of the discussion, we are still working out precisely whether it is the aggregate quantity of reserves all by itself that matters or if there is an extra effect of the GSEs selling into the market.  Chris noted the quantity of fed funds sales that the GSEs did, and so did Jamie.  Relative to the $750 billion of excess right now, it doesn’t seem as though it is that huge a portion. So there is definitely an argument to be made that we might be focusing too much attention on them utterly and completely idiosyncratically when it is a larger issue in terms of just the sheer quantity. I think all of these issues that Chris and Jamie brought up have to be seen through that filter as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 117.
 MR. BURKE. Our main tool for measuring the fed funds rate is the “fed funds effective,” which is looking at just that subset of fed funds transactions that are brokered.  And in that market, the GSEs dominate.  They are 80-plus percent of those transactions.  So when you start talking about doing something to those transactions, that is the backdrop to my statement that, if you remove those, you leave a small and potentially idiosyncratic market from which you are then calculating an effective fed funds rate.  So, to Seth’s point, a $75 billion program  targeted at them is not much with a backdrop of $700 billion or $1.4 trillion in excess, but it may be that their role and where they are trading and the visibility of their trades imply another transmission mechanism affecting just them.  That is one of the things that we are trying to puzzle out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage includes some contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Burke, is suggesting that removing the GSEs from the fed funds transactions could result in a small and potentially idiosyncratic market from which the effective fed funds rate is calculated. However, he also acknowledges that there might be another transmission mechanism affecting only the GSEs. This implies that there is a difference in opinion or uncertainty about the potential impact of removing the GSEs from these transactions.


Passage number 118.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Given these idiosyncrasies in the federal funds market, even though we might be operating in the overnight market, we may have to consider alternative ways of expressing our policy target.  That should be something we should keep on the table.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by President Rosengren, expressing a suggestion to consider alternative ways of expressing the policy target due to the idiosyncrasies in the federal funds market. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 119.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question is for Chris, and my question is this: Potentially we are going to be doing reverse repos both in large magnitudes and for extended periods of time.  Do you have any concern with having only two clearing banks that are central to that role.  And are there ways that we can either increase the competition or spread out the number of entities that can help with that infrastructure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about potential concerns and possible solutions related to the role of clearing banks in reverse repos.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 120.
 MR. BURKE. We have been working with our payment systems folks in New York, who have been working on identifying the issues with the triparty platform and working on alternatives to the triparty platform, which is, as you noted, based on those two institutions.  As we know with Bear and Lehman and the outcomes there, there are clearly issues with that system.  So, yes, we are somewhat concerned.  And I think, with the PDCF sunset date coming and the role that it is playing in backstopping triparty, clearly some issues are there.  A number of ideas have floated around. Some are less difficult to implement than others, but we are going to follow along with that work and, I hope, piggyback on that. We have started to think a bit about alternatives.  The scale of our program is such that it is going to carry a lot of weight whatever we do, so we are being quite cautious.  But depending on who our counterparties end up being, it is entirely possible that we could create our own sort of mini triparty with another clearing bank, say a State Street or something along those lines.  There are an awful lot of issues with that.  For that piece of the program, we would end up with a single clearing bank that was working on it. So it is absolutely an issue, it is a concern, and we are concerned about it, but we will continue to follow the progress of other groups.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the triparty platform and suggests exploring alternatives, while also acknowledging the difficulties and issues that come with implementing those alternatives.


Passage number 121.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. If I can just interject very briefly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply asking for permission to make a comment or interruption. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 122.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage "Vice Chair" does not contain enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 123.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. The triparty repo is probably going to be changed very substantially, and so I think that the clearing bank issue will be resolved in the context of that adjustment.  It won’t be the separate issue in terms of how we are doing the reserve management.  Triparty repo has to be altered, irrespective of the excess reserves issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 124.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions a person's title, President Plosser. No further information or context is provided to indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 125.
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question about both the TALF piece and the tools.  First of all, I very much support the Board’s views to suspend work on RMBS and expanding the range of assets we include in that.  It probably comes as no surprise to most people. I think that is the right thing to do.  The Board’s staff actually gave a pretty good, compelling case from my perspective of why that is a risky and maybe not a wise thing to do. With regard to the CMBS extension, I have two questions.  One is that, no matter when we choose to end it, if the view is that there are always six months of planning that go into it, when are we going to decide to actually stop it.  Part of that has to do with the question of what we mean by “unusual and exigent” circumstances and when that will come into play.  So we won’t get four months from June 30 and we won’t say, well, we need another six months to keep it going. I think we need to clarify a little for ourselves what the criteria are that we’re going to use to choose to say “no more” and when we’re going to stop it.  It also raises the question for me, given the long planning time, about some of the rationale for these programs and the 13(3) lending, in particular. It is unusual and exigent circumstances, but it has been things that had to be done immediately.  Given the long planning periods for CMBS and other types of lending— the Congress certainly was willing to do “cash for clunkers” and supply a lot of money to subsidize the automobile companies and the automobile industry— and given the unusual nature of the challenges in the commercial real estate market, oughtn’t this be a program for the Treasury rather than a short-term liquidity program for the commercial real estate market.  That is just an open question. How do we determine when the right time is going to be, and when is the six-month lead period going to be enough on the TALF. On the tools, in listening to the discussion, I was struck that for the reverse repos the volumes, at least relative to the size of our balance sheet, are pretty small.  And I, like everybody else, hope that interest on reserves works, that it is enough, and that we do not have to do a lot of this extra stuff.  But we need plans A′ and B to make sure that we can deliver on the policies that we want. So given the volumes that we would have to do, if the task really came to shrinking the balance sheet in order to be able to do this, are these tools enough to keep the interest rates where we want. I guess that raises the question for me, which is sort of the last stop, about actually selling assets. We did have a discussion—I think it was at the last meeting—in which we talked about income implications of selling assets and interest rates.  It seems to me, when we talk about reviewing these tools and mechanisms for hitting our targets in managing reserves, that understanding both the consequences and the mechanisms by which we would actually sell assets if the time came to do so need to be in our hip pocket.  I guess my request is that, in theprocess of reviewing these reserve management tools, we include the selling-assets piece as a way of better understanding what the consequences might be if the world came to that’s what we had to do. That’s all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a series of statements and questions made by Mr. Plosser during a meeting.


Passage number 126.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Buying and selling we know how to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple fact stating that the act of buying and selling is known and understood by the speaker.


Passage number 127.
  [Laughter] MR. PLOSSER. Buying and selling we know how to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact without any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 128.
 MR. BURKE. Should I comment on the scale question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for permission or guidance on whether they should comment on the scale question.


Passage number 129.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The question does not provide a passage to analyze and determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 130.
 MR. BURKE. There are clearly scale issues.  The entire size of the triparty repo market for collateral eligible for open market operations is not much more than $1 trillion.  So clearly, if we get into a market and start trying to double its size, there are going to be issues.  We are starting work now on how these tools might fit together.  One assumption may be that reverse repos would be one of a set of tools that we would use to achieve our objective.  As you note, it doesn’t seem likely that we’d be able to find a market to successfully reverse out $1.4 trillion in assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing the potential challenges and considerations of increasing the size of the triparty repo market, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 131.
 MR. PLOSSER. On a continuing basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It is a transcript extract and does not show any conflicting opinions or contradictory statements among the speakers.


Passage number 132.
 MR. BURKE. On a continuing basis.  Notwithstanding that, we will have over $2 trillion on our own balance sheet. But an interesting side effect of our doing this amount of repo is that we know the repo and the fed funds rates are very interconnected and that pressures in one flow over into the other. So the transmission mechanism may actually be that, as we do these reverse repos and we drive up GC rates, that the increase in GC rates flows through and starts affecting other rates. So it may be with this tool that you do not necessarily need to drain all of the excess out of the system before you start affecting short-term rates in general.  That is another aspect of this that we will be working on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the potential effects of using a specific tool and how it may impact short-term rates.


Passage number 133.
  MR. PLOSSER. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude in response to something or someone.


Passage number 134.
 MR. NELSON. With respect to the TALF, the criterion that we applied in thinking about the problem was that it should be appropriate for emergency lending to take place throughout the future period that the staff recommends that the facility stay open.  So in particular for CMBS, we thought that there was a reasonably high likelihood that the situation would remain unusual and exigent through June 30, 2010. In addition, we required that it would be helpful to be open.  Also, even if these criteria were met, if you could wait to announce, then it would be desirable to delay because your perspective on whether it is going to be unusual and exigent in the future will become more accurate as time passes.  But as I explained, there is a benefit to announcing now so that people can begin at this time to arrange these deals.  That said, as I noted, if the situation is not unusual and exigent at any point between now and then, it would still be necessary to close the facility down at that time regardless of the deadline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is outlining their criteria and requirements for emergency lending, and explaining the pros and cons of announcing the lending now versus waiting. There is no conflicting opinion or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, please provide the passage for analysis.


Passage number 136.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A quick question.  Brian, in your charts it says that the TALF is projected to go to $155 billion by the end of next year.  Does that include this extension.  That’s a projection with whatever we are expecting would come from this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question regarding the projection of funds for TALF.


Passage number 137.
 MR. SACK. Yes. When we did the balance sheet projections, we assumed the extensions that Bill talked about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is acknowledging a previous conversation or agreement.


Passage number 138.
 MR. EVANS. Okay. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is simply expressing gratitude for the information provided.


Passage number 139.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Impossible to determine without additional context.


Passage number 140.
 MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just to clarify your statement in terms of the Board’s decision suspending consideration of additional asset classes, I want to follow up on apoint you just made, Bill.  We are talking only in terms of high-grade CMBS, is that correct.  We are not going to extend that category to lower-grade CMBS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification on the board's decision regarding the consideration of different asset classes.


Passage number 141.
 MR. NELSON. That is right. There is no expectation that there will be a change in the types of CMBS that we would lend against.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 142.
 MR. FISHER. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude.


Passage number 143.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thanks. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple response expressing gratitude.


Passage number 144.
 MR. LACKER. About scale, I was wondering, the thought that occurs to me is that surely it is sort of endogenous. It is a matter of price.  If we pay them enough, they will increase their capacity. I mean, is that reasonable intuition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question, expressing a thought and asking for confirmation or verification.


Passage number 145.
 MR. BURKE. I think it is a reasonable intuition.  The discussions with the dealers suggest that there is a limit to the size of their balance sheet “regardless of price.”  That will be something to test, I suspect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal belief or suspicion about the limit of the dealers' balance sheet size, which he plans to test.


Passage number 146.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A vertical supply curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of laughter suggests a lighthearted or humorous tone, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention regarding a vertical supply curve.


Passage number 147.
 MR. LACKER. And just a question for Jamie McAndrews.  Chris Burke said that 80 percent of the funds market is GSEs to banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about a statement made by Chris Burke.


Passage number 148.
 MR. MCANDREWS. Brokered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating that the speaker, Mr. McAndrews, is a brokered individual.


Passage number 149.
 MR. LACKER. Brokered, right. That suggests that typically GSEs lend to a lot of banks. How many typical counterparties does a GSE have in the fed funds lending market. How small are the numbers.  How limited is competition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for information and clarification about the number of counterparties a GSE (Government-Sponsored Enterprise) has in the fed funds lending market and the level of competition.


Passage number 150.
 MR. MCANDREWS. I don’t have the figures in front of me.  It is in the dozens, and they lend very similar amounts.  We have looked at some of the activity.  It is very regular activity. They don’t seem to lend to that many for a period of time.  They apparently have lines of credit with several, but they choose to lend fairly repeatedly to individual participants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating facts about the lending activity of a group or organization.


Passage number 151.
  MR. LACKER. So you are essentially claiming there is an oligopsony consisting of dozens of U.S. banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Lacker.


Passage number 152.
 MR. MCANDREWS.  I am saying that we are far from perfect competition.  That is a market with search frictions and dominated by counterparty credit risk.  And it is likely that these impede pure rate-based competition that we would see if we alleviated the need to engage in counterparty credit risk—a screening. They could widen the net of potential counterparties to hundreds and thousands if they were alleviated from counterparty credit risk if these collateralized fed funds trades were available to them.  The issue is, How can we get competition so that in the interest rate on reserves that the Fed is paying to banks is a floor for society more generally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. It is simply presenting arguments and discussing the need for competition in the market.


Passage number 153.
 MR. CARPENTER. Just to reduce the incredulity a bit about the market power, one of the main factors of the non-collateralized market is that risk mitigants include just line limits.  All of the market participants know that the GSEs have limits on their counterparties, and they also know that on many days, if you were to add up the line limits across all their counterparties, that would be less than the aggregate amount they are going to want to sell into the market.  In that sense, each individual counterparty has a line limit.  They know that the GSEs are going to use up their line limits, and that is where the market power comes in because the aggregate amount that they would like to sell is greater than the sum of the individual line limits to counterparties. And the “dozens” is closer to two dozen, not three, four, or five dozen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing an explanation of how market power is derived from line limits in the non-collateralized market.


Passage number 154.
   MR. MCANDREWS. What Seth is explaining is very similar to the California energy market, where only one among dozens of generators would have to go out of service in order for maximum capacity to be used for all other generators.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply describing a similarity between what Seth is explaining and the California energy market.


Passage number 155.
  MR. LACKER. I guess the deeper question I have about this is—again, it seems clever, to echo Governor Kohn—that it seems like a lot of work for a few basis points.  We have lived for years tightly targeting the fed funds rate but tolerating the RP rate 10 or 15 basis points on either side of the fed funds rate. And we have never had a solid conviction that it was one and not the other that was relevant for the constellation of rates.  Or even look at, I don’t know, one-month T-bill rates, right. So tolerating 15 basis points seems in the grand scheme of things to be something we are willing to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a question and seeking clarification on the topic of tolerating a few basis points in relation to the fed funds rate.


Passage number 156.
 MR. MADIGAN. A question, President Lacker, is whether it would persist at just 15 basis points, 10 basis points, or so as the level of rates goes up.  And we just don’t know that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they do not have knowledge or information about a specific question.


Passage number 157.
 MR. LACKER. That is a serious question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a serious question.


Passage number 158.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Vice Chairman." This is simply a title or position and does not imply any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 159.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I have a question about the brokered fed funds market versus the other. It seems as though we are a bit captured by the brokered fed funds market because that is where we have the rate information.  But couldn’t we actually get the rate information on the bank-to-bank funds market if we really made an effort and because we regulate these entities.  [Laughter]  And if that were the case, we might not want to have the brokered funds market be the dominant element driving our decisions.  It is just an observation question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a rhetorical observation and asking a question for clarification purposes.


Passage number 160.
 MR. MCANDREWS. We gathered that information today with error, and I think we can improve it if we work with the banks.  It is with some delay, so the brokers are real time, which is a benefit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging that there was an error in gathering information but believes that it can be improved by working with the banks. They also mention that brokers provide real-time information, which they view as a benefit.


Passage number 161.
   MR. BURKE. But in principle you could establish a collection scheme by which you get directly from the banks at the close of business each day the average rate and volume of business that they have done and then aggregate it and get a more complete picture of fed funds rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Burke is presenting a hypothetical scenario and suggesting a possible method to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of fed funds rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 162.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Then you don’t have to worry about the GSEs contaminating your observations of the brokered funds market.  You know, a lot of this is an effort to take the GSEs and the fact that they are contaminating that market.  There might be an easier way to ignore that market and go to the broader market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that the GSEs are contaminating the brokered funds market, while the second statement implies that there might be an easier way to ignore that market and focus on the broader market. This indicates a difference in opinion or contention regarding the impact of GSEs on the market.


Passage number 163.
 MR. BURKE. Until very recently, all of our evidence suggested that the brokered fed funds market was just a good and representative subset of the overall market.  Clearly, we are under the impression that that has changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states the evidence they had before and acknowledges that their impression has changed based on new information.


Passage number 164.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, not so much anymore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage, but it has diminished over time.


Passage number 165.
  MR. BURKE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes someone stating their agreement.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Once again, there is a lot of benefit to trying to figure out what is the right target and what is the most meaningful target for policy.  Are there more questions or comments on this range of issues that anyone would like to bring up.  We will of course have two more go-rounds.  If not, we have a vote to ratify domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the importance of figuring out the right target for policy and asking if there are any further questions or comments on the topic. The mention of a vote to ratify domestic open market operations does not imply disagreement, but rather a step in the decision-making process.


Passage number 167.
 MR. KOHN. So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection. Okay. Why don’t we take a coffee break.  We have coffee available.  Return at 4:15.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply suggests taking a coffee break and provides information about the availability of coffee. The mention of returning at a specific time and the expression of gratitude are also indicators of a cooperative and agreeable atmosphere.


Passage number 169.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Why don’t we recommence and turn to the economic situation.  Presentation is by Larry Slifman and Nathan Sheets.  Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Larry Slifman and Nathan Sheets will be giving a presentation on the economic situation.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there questions for our colleagues.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple statement and request for questions. There is no contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 171.
  MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A question for Nathan. You know, the Chinese economy is increasingly a central focus as we evaluate the global economy.  And you referenced the bank lending in the last quarter, which appeared to be directed lending, top down, telling them to lend.  Some years ago there was continuing concern about the banking system in China being insolvent. They seem to have muddled through that, but do we know anything about the potential of a banking crisis in China that could have been exacerbated by this directed lending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question from Mr. Lockhart to Nathan about the Chinese economy and the potential for a banking crisis.


Passage number 172.
 MR. SHEETS. My sense is that there are some significant risks to the banking system associated with this extraordinarily rapid rise in bank credit that we have seen over the last six months. Now, a good chunk of that lending was associated with the fiscal stimulus program, and so in some sense it is at least being implicitly guaranteed by the government.  Another piece of it seems to be related to lending to regional and provincial governments.  So, again, there is something of a public guarantee.  But I think, even over and above what we can link even loosely to the fiscal stimulus, there was a substantial quantity of lending that happened.  I personally find it difficult to believe that that much credit could be allocated as quickly as we saw in the first half of the year and for it all to be perfectly efficiently allocated.  So my instinct here is that at some point we will see some bad loans emerge.  I think that is a risk.  I think there is also ample room to question how effective and efficient the Chinese banks are.  On the other hand, you have the Chinese government, which has ample resources.  So my sense is that, yes, at some point down the road we are going to see some financial aftermath of what has happened over the last  six months.  But my sense is also that the Chinese authorities have resources to be able to recapitalize and address and resolve these problems in their banking sector without its necessarily being a first-order issue for the Chinese economy or more broadly for the global economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's personal opinion and analysis of the situation, without opposing views or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 173.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as President Stern is mentioned without any conflicting information or contrasting views.


Passage number 174.
 MR. STERN. Yes, thank you. Larry, I was struck by the decline in the productivity and cost measure of compensation in the first half.  Is there something special going on there.  Or should we conclude that compensation is less sticky than we might have earlier thought.  If so, what are the implications, if any, for employment going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker asks a question and provides two possible explanations for the decline in productivity and cost measure of compensation.


Passage number 175.
 MR. SLIFMAN. We don’t know for sure, but our speculation is that some of this had to do with bonus payments—that there are just a lot fewer bonus payments being made now than had been made in 2008, 2007, and so on.  So we think that that might have been part of what is going on; that is, taking the bonuses out lowers the level of compensation.  But the broader point is that we think that labor market slack is having an effect on wage determination; probably there is less nominal wage stickiness in the economy than there was 20 or 30 years ago.  And as I said, with the unemployment rate up in the 9½ percent range, that is putting a lot of downward pressure on wage determination.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents the speaker's speculation and opinion on the factors affecting wage determination in the current labor market.


Passage number 176.
 MR. STERN. There certainly have been a lot of anecdotes about voluntary cuts in wages and salaries to preserve employment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that there have been anecdotes about voluntary cuts in wages and salaries to preserve employment.


Passage number 177.
 MR. SLIFMAN. Absolutely. So while we have not built in further outright declines in hourly compensation in the forecast, we do have very slow rates of increase in hourly compensation in the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that there are slow rates of increase in hourly compensation in the forecast.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without additional information.


Passage number 179.
  MR. BULLARD. Larry, a year ago or more, we talked some about regime-switching models, where when we entered recession some of the relationships are different, coefficients are different, and so on. Now it appears that we might be exiting the recession.  Would we switch back to some sort of more normal times model, or is this all by the bye here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification on whether the current situation would require a shift back to a "normal times model."


Passage number 180.
 MR. SLIFMAN. In a mechanical sense, the way we have implemented this in the forecast for much of 2008–09 is to take what our models would want to forecast and then put in negative add factors to take account of the financial turmoil as well as a regime switching that you would get in a normal recession. In 2010, we are not getting rid of them, but we are diminishing the size of those negative add factors as we think the financial system recuperates and as we move out of recession and into a recovery period.  But that said, it is important to keep in mind that this recovery is still quite tepid by historical standards.  Typically, the economy goes back to its previous peak level of real GDP in two to three quarters.  In our projection, it takes seven quarters for that to occur; so these things are still, in our view, weighing heavily on the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of how their forecasting models incorporate negative factors to account for financial turmoil and a slow recovery period, and they acknowledge that the recovery is still sluggish compared to historical standards.


Passage number 181.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 182.
 MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to ask a question of Nathan.  At our last meeting and in previous meetings in talking about China, the issue was whether or not they might be able to convert their economy to be more domestic demand driven.  Clearly, the stimulus package, in addition to leaking into the securities markets and all of the corruption that has ensued, has affected infrastructure, and that is where I think you see some of this boom coming in the rest of Asia.  For what it is worth, my Chinese contacts and the ones in Singapore suggest that there still is a long-term dependency on U.S. and European demand, to the point that they assert that this boom or boomlet might go on for another two years or so.  But unless we  pick up demand and unless Europe picks up demand, it is unlikely to continue.  I wonder if that is an assessment that you might share.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply one person asking a question and expressing their own opinion based on information from their contacts.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 183.
 MR. SHEETS. I think it is very much the intention of the Chinese authorities to continue these policies until they see the pickup in external demand.  Governor Tarullo used the analogy at the last meeting of the Chinese being in a holding pattern, waiting for the global economy to pick up, and I think that is exactly the right analogy.  I guess what I am wondering and what I am questioning is whether they can calibrate this stimulus, particularly the awesome monetary stimulus, in such a way that they are able to build a bridge from where they are to the time when global demand picks up and whether there might not be some significant imbalances that manifest themselves between now and that point in time. One way to articulate this concern very concretely is that I very much doubt that six months ago the Chinese authorities came to the conclusion that in the second quarter of the year they wanted to put in stimulus such that the economy would expand at an 18½ percent annual rate. The fact that they got this outcome really emphasizes the blunt nature of the policy tools they have. If they overshoot in the second quarter, I see that there is a risk they may further overshoot on the upside or significantly undershoot on the downside. So I just don’t fully see what the exit strategy is.  Earlier this decade, people were very concerned about a hard landing in China, and they were able to thread the needle.  Maybe they will be able to do that again.  In fact, for what it is worth, that is what our forecast has written down as a baseline against which to talk about these risks.  So there is a chance that they will be able to grow at 9 percent on average for the next six quarters or the next couple of years.  But I for one am very concerned.  I see this rebound in China as really being the key driver of a lot of what we have seen in the global economy, certainly in emerging Asia and Japan and even echoes   of it in certain places in Europe, such as Germany, where exports are picking up.  So if the pace of Chinese recovery steps down, we are looking at a much softer global outlook than we are with a stronger China or a Chinese growth path similar to what we have in the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the Chinese government's ability to calibrate their stimulus measures and worries about potential imbalances and risks. They question the exit strategy and express doubt about the sustainability of China's economic growth.


Passage number 184.
 MR. FISHER. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: This is a simple expression of gratitude, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 185.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agree with the idea that they are looking to Europe and the United States.  But in the latest strategic and economic dialogue that we had with the Chinese— Governor Warsh was there as well—I heard much more seriousness about a longer-term transition to a more domestically driven economy.  What time frame that has and how that bears on the current situation is a different question, and I heard much more talk about that and a much more detailed discussion of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the idea that they are looking to Europe and the United States, but also acknowledges a different question regarding the time frame of transitioning to a domestically driven economy.


Passage number 186.
 MR. SHEETS. Consistent with that, to their credit, through this period of softness and external demand, instead of trying to depreciate the exchange rate, they have depended on domestic demand and fiscal stimulus, and they are trying to do it themselves.  So I would say that is a step in the right direction.  But then the question is, How committed are they, and at what pace are they willing to pursue the deeper structural reforms that are going to be necessary to support private spending and private consumption in China, such as developing financial markets and social safety nets and that sort of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing credit and positive opinion about China's approach to addressing external demand and softness in their economy.


Passage number 187.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions.  Seeing none, we are ready for our economic go-round.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that there are no other questions, indicating agreement or consensus among those present.


Passage number 188.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing gratitude towards President Fisher without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 189.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, President Fisher.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 190.
   MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Having exhausted my limited stock of witticisms about coming last in line before the Chairman, I asked Debbie to move me up.  [Laughter] But I also wanted to come a little earlier because, even in the five months since my first FOMC meeting, a lot has changed.  At that time, we were contemplating essentially two scenarios, very bad and even worse. In no small part because of the various actions of the Federal Reserve, the financial system and the economy have largely stabilized, albeit at historically lower levels than we would certainly like to see. It seems very likely now there will be positive, perhaps quite positive, growth in the second half of this year. As for 2010, more upside risk has crept into many people’s forecasts.  So in thinking about our policies going forward, we may be at a point at which it is useful to consider alternative outcomes in a roughly probabilistic fashion and to test how readily we can craft the narrative that leads to each outcome.  It would be a bit quixotic of me to undertake this task for all seven of the Greenbook scenarios to which Larry alluded earlier, so let me distill the manifold possibilities to just three.  One, grind it out—a gradual, somewhat halting recovery that leads to 2010 growth somewhere in the vicinity of trend but below what one might expect in a rebound from a severe slump.  Two, relapse—a significant stumble for the recovery next year, with GDP growth again dropping significantly below trend.  And, three, rejuvenation—a much more robust recovery, with GDP growth significantly exceeding trend, not quite a V-shape perhaps but a reasonably steep slope on the way up. So just to put my cards on the table, I would assign roughly even odds to the first possible outcome, the grind-out scenario.  Not coincidentally, I regard the Greenbook extended baseline to be consistent with this outcome.  Although I am somewhat less optimistic about next year than the staff is, I note that their forecast for the second half of this year is pretty conservative.  So ifone averages out their forecast over six quarters, it yields something akin to the first outcome.  Of the remaining two, I see a somewhat greater chance of relapse than of rejuvenation, though I should say that I now regard the odds of the two alternative outcomes as considerably less skewed than I thought as recently as the June meeting.  So clearly I find the story of measured recovery the easiest to tell, in part because the very factors that augur well for the remainder of 2009 may not have sufficient staying power to maintain a healthy pace of recovery through all of next year. The salutary effects of the fiscal stimulus package will start tapering off in the first part of next year. The undoubted need for firms to replenish their inventories will lead to sustained production increases only if consumption increases can themselves be generated and maintained.  The case for a steady increase in personal consumption expenditures is certainly plausible, but it is hardly compelling. According to the reported employment cost index, private wages and salaries have been decelerating. With large and still growing slack in labor markets, there is good reason to believe that personal income will continue to suffer from rising unemployment and suppressed wage gains. Moreover, there remains, as Larry mentioned, the important question of what saving rate we will see once incomes do begin to rise again.  The Greenbook makes a reasonable case based on past experience for a 4 percent rate, but the present crisis may contain the seeds of a behavioral shift among some classes of consumers that could move the rate up a percentage point or more. It appears that even the new normalcy in credit availability, both retail and wholesale, may be some way off.  The progress in the corporate bond markets, and to a lesser degree short-term funding markets and plain vanilla securitization markets, has not extended to credit markets more generally. In particular, the rate of decline in bank lending has been accelerating during thespring and summer.  There will doubtless be multiple revisions to the July figures, but the preliminary estimate of a whopping 18 percent decline spread across all forms of lending is a sobering reminder of the difficulties ahead.  While a considerable part of this drop is surely attributable to the decline in demand and cautiousness in underwriting that are typical of recessions, it seems likely that there are also structural factors in both bank lending and credit markets, such as capital impairment and business model challenges, that will weigh on credit markets for some time. I can certainly tell the other two stories—though with less conviction and, in the interest of time, more briefly.  A relapse could occur if privately generated demand cannot adequately fill in behind the waning effect of fiscal stimulus, given such factors as the expected persistently high levels of unemployment; the potential for more-rapid efforts to repair personal, corporate, and financial balance sheets; and the severe retrenchment of sub-federal government spending that is coming in the next two budget cycles.  If commercial real estate markets turn out to be even moderately worse than currently expected—bad enough—loan losses at many regional and community banks could become truly debilitating.   Rejuvenation might come if both confidence and wealth are significantly boosted by a continuation of the equity market rally and a more rapid recovery of housing markets.  The latter of course would also prompt a greater rebound in construction.  Along with the effects of pent-up consumer demand for durables and other items, these developments could provide not just a substitute for fiscal stimulus but a boost beyond the temporary effects of cash-for-clunkers, infrastructure investment, and the various income transfer features of the February legislative package. Global economic recovery, particularly in Asia, may proceed more quickly with an attendant boost to U.S. export growth.  While I can sketch out this more optimistic path, each of   its elements seems quite a bit less likely than those supporting the more sluggish outcome and modestly less likely than the catalyst for relapse. I will be interested to hear if some of you can tell this last tale more convincingly.  For the present, though, what I think is most important in my little exercise is that the chances of next year being somewhere between tepid and bad appear to me somewhere north of 75 percent in the absence of further monetary or fiscal policy measures.  Where exactly along that spectrum the actual outcome falls will probably not become much clearer for some time.  If this is a reasonable way of looking at things, our best-advised posture for at least a few more, and maybe more than a few more, meetings may be the somewhat unsatisfactory and awkward one of neither lifting another implement out of our toolbox nor closing the box up and declaring the job finished. Mom was right at least sometimes:  Patience really can be a virtue.  [Laughter] Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions three possible outcomes for the economy: a gradual recovery, a relapse, or a robust recovery. The speaker then expresses their opinion that the most likely outcome is a tepid or bad recovery, with chances north of 75 percent, unless further monetary or fiscal policy measures are taken. This view contradicts the more optimistic outlook presented in the Greenbook forecast.


Passage number 191.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Rosengren without providing any details about his actions, statements, or any other element that would suggest contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 192.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data since the last meeting have been broadly consistent with what we expected in our June forecast.  We have received confirmation that the economy has improved significantly from the sharp declines in the first quarter. Economic growth in the second half of 2009 is likely to be positive, albeit too slow to prevent further job losses. Our forecast still expects a weak recovery as the balance sheets of consumers, businesses, and banks slowly improve.  The improvement is, of course, contingent on no significant adverse shocks appearing over the next year.  It also assumes that households and businesses will increase spending, as the stimulus provided by the variety of fiscal and monetary programs subsides—a component of the forecast that remains quite tentative at this point.  That the rate of decline in payroll employment in July was much slower than earlier in the year is welcome news.  However, the unemployment rate is quite high and is likely to remain quite elevated for several more years.  With many workers on reduced hours and much of the labor force still concerned about their job prospects, workers are accepting much lower growth in wages and benefits. Models run by economists in my research department that estimate inflation as a markup over labor costs, as well as many specifications of traditional Phillips curves used to forecast inflation, imply outcomes closer to the disinflation scenario in the Greenbook.  Thus, there is a significant downside risk to the baseline forecast to inflation. Significant impediments to the recovery, of which I will highlight just two, also remain.  Until recently, most complaints by businesses in New England regarding credit availability were from customers of large, out-of-region banks that needed TARP capital.  However, there are increasing complaints that small and medium-sized banks are now behaving as if they are capital constrained, despite New England’s smaller exposure to the real estate and auto-related problems that plague many other parts of the country.  The problem appears particularly acute for commercial real estate. Part 2 of the Greenbook characterizes commercial real estate as dismal.  Most of my contacts are using much more colorful language.  Problems with commercial real estate look likely to get worse, and many banks’ loan loss reserves already lag with the growth in nonperforming loans. Tight credit conditions are likely to make it difficult for businesses and households to finance spending critical for the recovery.  A second potential concern is the unintended consequences of some of the remedies to recent problems.  One example is money market mutual funds, which have experienced declines in assets as investors have increased their risk appetite, as Brian highlighted. At the same time, the SEC is considering measures that would   reduce the risk of mutual funds, including potentially prohibiting purchases of asset-backed commercial paper and A2/P2 commercial paper and reducing the weighted average maturity of holdings. While reducing the risk of mutual funds is desirable, if poorly implemented it could disrupt asset markets where mutual funds have been key players.  Although I am cautiously optimistic that the recovery is beginning, the situation remains quite fragile.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains statements that indicate differing viewpoints and potential challenges to the recovery. For example, the speaker mentions that economic growth is likely to be positive in the second half of 2009 but too slow to prevent further job losses. They also mention downside risks to the baseline forecast for inflation and significant impediments to the recovery, such as credit availability and problems with commercial real estate. Additionally, they express concern about potential unintended consequences of certain remedies to recent problems, such as the SEC's measures to reduce risk in money market mutual funds. Overall, there are indications of disagreement and potential challenges to the recovery.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude to President Plosser.


Passage number 194.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Lockhart.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 195.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook for the economy has not changed materially since the last meeting.  I think we’re in the beginning stages of what is likely to be an exceptionally slow recovery. In the period since the last FOMC, we engaged our contacts in the Sixth District and elsewhere around the country on the questions of slack in the economy, inflationary pressures, the inventory situation, and the state of the real estate sector, particularly commercial real estate. In residential real estate, we are seeing more stability in sales and prices in our District, even in the Florida markets.  The exception to this improved picture is the market for condominiums in large urban areas, which remains burdened by oversupply and very slow sales, due in part to very limited credit availability.  The commercial real estate sector is still deteriorating and poses a threat to recovery in its potential drag on the credit system.  Our  District contacts reported rising vacancy rates across every significant market and property type, resulting in widespread rent concessions.  Financial contacts opined that so far delinquency, default, and valuation problems have been managed through restructuring but pointed out that much of the refinancing calendar is ahead. The Southeast has a sizable leisure and hospitality industry, which is suffering from a slow tourist season. Even with pervasive rate concessions, hospitality and resort vacancy rates are high. We asked a number of contacts about inventory levels and the direction of inventories.  We got the sense that inventory reduction has a bit further to go before firms align their inventories-to-sales prospects.  Business contacts at all points along the spectrum from materials manufacturing to retail claim that they are still cutting inventories.  Furthermore, based on these conversations, I doubt that inventories will be replenished to pre-recession levels as the economy improves.  This projection of businesses running on leaner inventories on an extended basis contributes to my view that the recovery will be exceptionally weak. In the latest round of calls made in preparation for this meeting, we probed contacts about their perceptions on available production capacity and willingness to rehire in a recovery.  We heard that a large share of what is counted as excess production capacity should not be considered standing ready to be brought back into service.  Contacts expressed unwillingness to bring previously idled capacity, including permanent hires, back on line without much stronger buyer commitments and better margins.  This suggests much less disinflation potential in a slow-growth scenario than would otherwise be the case. In this cycle, our financial market contacts exhibited much more confidence and described an unwinding of the flight to quality based on the view that a catastrophic scenario has been avoided. These contacts reported that they believe markets in general have confidence and,   more particularly, that the Fed has the tools to engineer an exit strategy as recovery proceeds.  A widely held concern, however, is the timing of exit and the risk of a premature exit.  In preparation for the meeting, we had a long conference call with several representatives of the American Securitization Forum in an attempt to gauge the rebound of the securitization sector and its ability to support consumer activity.  We talked about the TALF earlier today, and they said that the TALF had been successful in bringing back the triple-A segment, but they cited a number of factors that pointed to a protracted period of less securitization.  This adds to my view that consumer spending broadly will be constrained over at least the medium term.  I think it’s plausible that a major shift in household spending appetite is under way.  But even if no structural change in consumer behavior is building, consumer credit markets seem to be weighed down by a still-compromised securitization process and constraints on credit card terms and issuance. My view of the outlook is less optimistic than the Greenbook’s baseline scenario.  There are elements of the Greenbook’s “higher saving rate” and “labor market damage” scenarios in my current thinking about recovery. I see an economy burdened by voluntarily restrained and credit-constrained consumer spending, a still-challenged financial industry that will be slow to expand credit, weak re-employment prospects, and what we believe is lower growth potential during a period of necessary structural adjustments.  In light of this expected sluggish pace of recovery, I see the risks to economic growth as still weighted to the downside.   My view of inflation risks is roughly balanced.  I do not get a sense that inflationary pressures are on the rise, and I don’t see any indication that businesses and households are acting on inflation concerns in any way that would suggest that inflation expectations are currently on the rise. That said, in almost every venue I am hearing strong concerns that inflationary  pressures will develop in the intermediate term as the economy recovers.  And to anticipate the policy discussion just a bit, I don’t think these concerns warrant an immediate policy response, but they do tell me that our messaging is dealing with challenging crosscurrents and is particularly crucial at this time.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement or contention. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, expresses a less optimistic outlook for the economy compared to the Greenbook's baseline scenario. He mentions elements of the Greenbook's "higher saving rate" and "labor market damage" scenarios in his current thinking about the recovery. He also mentions concerns about inflationary pressures developing in the intermediate term, while acknowledging that immediate policy response may not be necessary.


Passage number 196.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Yellen.


Passage number 197.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone to President Stern.


Passage number 198.
 MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start with some comments about the District economy, where the anecdotes have been distinctly a mixed bag recently.  On the positive side, clearly, there has been some acceleration in hiring in parts of the service sector.  Auto sales are improving at least for the time being.  Volumes in the housing market in terms of sales of both new and existing homes have picked up, and there are certainly anecdotes of the positive effects from the fiscal stimulus program regarding some infrastructure projects and so  forth. On the negative side, things related to transportation, whether it is trucking or volumes from the ports and so on and so forth, are weak.  Residential and commercial construction remains weak, and tourism activity and most other measures of discretionary consumer spending are pretty soft as well. As far as the national economy is concerned, I do think that the contraction in activity has ended and expansion has resumed.  If we think about the circumstances today relative to four or five months ago, the bulk of the surprises both here and abroad have been on the positive side in terms of economic performance, and I would include in that the corporate earnings reports that we have been getting. Now, there may be some noise in all of this, of course, but I think it has been going on long enough and looks broad enough that there is a real signal here.  Also, financial conditions have distinctly improved in both equity and credit markets and certainly more broadly than I would have earlier expected.  So that is all to the good.  And I do think that the latest information on compensation, where it appears that it is less sticky than we might have earlier expected, may augur well for employment at least going forward.  All of those are on the positive side.  My trajectory for real economic growth for the balance of this year and next year is for a bit more rapid growth—and it has been for some time—than in the Greenbook.  I would not make any changes to it at this point, but if I were going to, I would probably mark it up a little further given the way things have developed. Let me just make a comment or two about the dual mandate at this point.  As everybody is well aware, we have had a very significant shock or a series of financial shocks, and in the wake of that, it seems to me that we ought not expect to achieve the dual mandate very quickly.  Now, as far as inflation is concerned, if you take the Greenbook forecast seriously—and I do— and you look at core inflation, we are not very far off from it, at least not unless you are really   wedded to 2 percent as the precise target. But as far as employment is concerned, we are a good deal further away, and of course, if you look at the experience of the economy coming out of the recessions of ’90, ’91, and 2001, even though I would argue that a fair amount of stimulus was applied during and following those recessions, it took quite some time for employment to pick up in a sustained way and for the unemployment rate to begin to decline in a sustained way.  What I conclude from that, and what I think we ought to be prepared for this time around as well, is that recessions are partly about, maybe largely about, resource reallocation, and it simply takes time for that to occur.  There is only so much that traditional stimulative policies can do to hasten those kinds of adjustments, and if that is a reasonably accurate assessment of the situation, it is simply going to take time for us to resume the achievement of the dual mandate.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Stern, sharing his observations and analysis of the District and national economy. There is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 200.
 MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy remains weak. The latest reading on Eighth District unemployment, 9.3 percent, is about the same as the national average, but this does mask a considerable variation within the District.  Arkansas, for instance, has an unemployment rate of 7.1 percent, whereas Kentucky and Tennessee are at 11 percent. This variation has actually increased the spread between those numbers, which has about doubled in the last year. Like others here, the reports from my contacts are mixed.  There are reports of continuing job cuts from contacts in the automotive, transportation, electrical equipment, and aerospace industries—Boeing has a big presence in St. Louis.  But firms in steel, fabricated metal, furniture, and plastic products reported plans to actually hire additional workers.  I would interpret mixed signals like this as typical of a business-cycle trough, and I am hopeful that this   is what we are experiencing. I think the story from the Eighth District is very consistent with the narrative for the national economy. On the national outlook, I am encouraged by signs of improvement, especially that the financial market turmoil continues to abate by many measures, but I think we still have some way to go on that dimension.  And while the financial sector continues to repair, we are still vulnerable to further shocks, and so we have to remain vigilant.  My sense is that we have established the credibility of government guarantees in many areas since late last year, and that the credibility of government guarantees has largely controlled what Governor Warsh and many others have called the Panic of 2008.  I think we may be at the end of that phase right about now.  Control of the panic is not the same as actually having a healthy and efficient financial intermediation sector.  The next phase will be to emphasize efficiency and health in the financial intermediation industry.  My sense is that getting that right will have important consequences for U.S. economic growth in the medium term.  In particular, the Japanese have been widely criticized for not finding the right policies during this phase, contributing to their lost decade outcome. I thought that during the intermeeting period our discussion and communication of exit strategy, mainly by Chairman Bernanke but also by many others around the table, was very useful. Markets seemed to back off the idea that the Fed does not have a plan.  I think we did establish that the Fed certainly has tools and a plan for exit, and I think some medium-term inflation fears receded during the intermeeting period because of that communication.  More— maybe much more—may have to be done in this area, though, because the message is quite a complicated one, as I found myself trying to explain to people.  We have complicated interactions among our set of liquidity programs, the asset-purchase program, and what to do   about interest rates going forward in the longer or medium term.  One lesson from this intermeeting experience is that markets are still pretty focused on interest rates at the end of the day, really overly focused on interest rates, given this Committee’s apparent plans and given the fact that we have stressed that we intend to keep rates low for an extended period.  I would like to knock markets further off the focus on rates because our plans do not contemplate moving back to ordinary interest rate targeting any time soon.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an overview of the current state of the Eighth District economy and expressing their interpretation and hopefulness for the future.


Passage number 201.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Thank you, President Hoenig" expresses appreciation towards President Hoenig and does not involve any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 202.
 MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start with the District.  Like the national economy, we are showing some signs of stabilization.  In our manufacturing surveys and with contacts, we have seen modest increases in production and new orders for the past couple of months, driven in part by rising export demand.  In housing, sales and home prices have stabilized, and the inventory of unsold homes is the lowest in some time.  With the collapse of the energy market, we did see some really sharp declines in drilling and production activities, and the declines account for much of the fall in our structure investments during the first two quarters of this year. With the stabilization of that market, that area has also stabilized in our region as oil production or drilling has begun to stabilize and increase slightly. The labor markets, as everyone else has said, tend to lag, and they remain weak.  In the nonresidential real estate markets, the volume of commercial construction activity continues to fall relatively sharply, and the financial difficulties in the industry continue to worsen.  Delinquency rates on construction loans are rising.  CMBS quality is deteriorating, and there is little refinancing available for maturing loans, and that is the case even when the properties are leased. There is just a very significant reluctance to finance right now.  Appraisers are also being quite conservative. If they take a leased property and they look at their 2006 appraisal values,   they will discount them 20 percent, the assumption being that the higher cap rates have to be worth less and harder to finance.  For those that are not leased or not occupied, the discounts run from 30 to 60 percent, with the greatest number in the condominium markets.  However, they are working through that. The banks are being conservative right now, and I will come back to that in just a second. In terms of the national outlook, I agree with others who have said that the economy is showing mixed data, and that is usually an indication that we are likely at the bottom of the recession. I expect very modest growth in the second half of this year and then a picking-up of momentum as we get into 2010, as fiscal stimulus engages even more than it has at this point.  Monetary policy remains easy.  Inventory rebuilding begins to occur, and consumer and business attitudes hopefully improve, and I think the consumer attitude will.  It has been there in the past, and I think it will be once again. Obviously, the risk to the outlook is in the financial system, which remains weak.  Setting aside the largest institutions, we know that there is some retrenching in regional and community banks, especially in the commercial real estate area.  What we find—and I think it is interesting—is that the banks with stress in their commercial real estate portfolio usually have stress in the rest of their portfolio as well—C&I loans and so forth.  But in this instance, I think that going forward their effects will not be as negative as we sometimes fear, for a couple of reasons. They are in a defensive mode right now.  They are conserving capital. Those that can survive will survive; and as the economy improves, they will be able, and will be interested in beginning, to lend again. For those that will not survive, another fiscal net is there, and that is called the FDIC because many of those regional and community banks will go under purchase and assumption when they fail.  What that does is take the bad assets out, set them aside, and recapitalize the bank, which is then actually in a better position to reengage as a financial institution than it otherwise would be. So they are either going to strengthen themselves and come out of this, or they are going to be taken over, which will recapitalize them.  I think that will be a mitigating factor on the drag that these banks will otherwise have. So it is a climb out. It is not an easy climb out, but on the outlook side, I think that it is a pretty positive outlook going forward so long as the economy is basically turning around and improving.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing various aspects of the economy, noting signs of stabilization and modest growth in some areas, while also acknowledging weaknesses in the labor market and commercial real estate. The speaker also expresses optimism for future growth and potential mitigating factors for the negative effects of the financial system.


Passage number 203.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. We made a great deal of progress on our agenda, and I understand that there is a 6:00 p.m. reception for the Conference of Presidents.  So if everyone is agreeable, why don’t we adjourn and begin tomorrow at 9:00 a.m.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 204.
 [Meeting recessed] August 12, 2009—Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody.  Overnight, Brian Madigan polled the members about the issue of adding ARMs to the MBS program, and we did not find a consensus in either direction. We are pretty evenly divided.  So what I propose that we do is to hold this in abeyance until such future date as we decide to make significant changes in the MBS program one way or the other.  At that point, if we were to expand it, for example, we might want to reconsider. But if we are winding it down, there would not be much point.  So we won’t take any further action on this until such time as we reconsider the MBS program.  Let’s continue with our economic go-round.  President Pianalto, you are first up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The speaker simply states that there was no consensus reached on the issue of adding ARMs to the MBS program and proposes to hold off on any further action until the MBS program is reconsidered.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 205.
  MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My contacts are growing more confident that the sharp decline in economic activity is in the process of ending.  Auto producers are benefiting from the very popular cash-for-clunkers program.  The success of this program is now showing up not just in sales but also in plants restarting or increasing production.  Similarly, housing markets in my District appear to be stabilizing, with starts actually heading up.  This, of course, is welcome news to the producers of building materials, who have been waiting a long time to see any signs of a recovery in housing. Still, it would be hard to characterize the mood of business executives in my District as good. “Resignation” is a better summary.  The declines in their activity levels have been so large that the uptick in growth that they are now experiencing is easily being met either by inventories or by only incremental increases in production.  Most of my business contacts anticipate that their surplus capacity will continue for months or even years to come.  They agree with President Fisher’s view that there is too much of everything relative to demand. The auto industry remains a clear example.  A number of assembly plants in my District are not going to survive the restructuring that has already been announced.  When I consider only the plants in my District that are going to continue to produce after the restructuring is completed, I find that those auto assembly plants produced 2.3 million cars and light trucks in 2007. Toyota and Honda plants account for over half of the total.  Now, to give you an example of how low production has been for the past few months, in June these same plants collectively produced less than 36 percent of their 2007 output.  Honda and Toyota were operating at well less than two-thirds of their 2007 levels, while the Big Three were at roughly 10 percent of their 2007 levels. The cash-for-clunkers program has been viewed as a national success, boosting July auto sales by 16 percent above June sales. Nevertheless, while this was a sizable percentage increase at the national level, this represents just a month’s worth of 2007 production capacity for the surviving plants in my District.  This is hardly a dent in the excess capacity available in this entire industry. The problem is not limited to autos.  Primary metal producers, as an example, are operating at less than 50 percent of their capacity.  One community banker in my District who noted improving economic conditions cautioned that every plant in her region is operating on some form of reduced workweek.  In fact, the dominant reaction of business people in my District to date has not been to close plants permanently but rather to hunker down and manage output levels to match current demand by cutting back on labor or other variable inputs.  Workforces have largely accepted a variety of pay and hour cutbacks to make these lower levels of output possible. This downward pressure on wages is showing up strongly both in the employment cost index and, as we saw, in yesterday’s unit labor cost numbers.  While this pattern might sound as if it is limited just to the Midwest, international producers report similar experiences in their locations worldwide.  From the producer standpoint, it is just hard to see an impending acceleration of prices, although the growing stability in output does seem to have been enough to limit further discounting. To gain further insight on the output gap, I met with a group of academic advisers who worked on different models that try various approaches of evaluating the output gap over the business cycle.  They all essentially agreed with my business contacts’ opinions that it is likely to take a long time before this output gap is absorbed.  Combining their perspective with the information that I gathered from my business contacts, I ended up leaving my output projection largely consistent with my forecast at the last meeting, which has been broadly consistent with the Greenbook’s viewpoint on output. I expect output to grow slowly in the second half of this year, followed by a return to more-solid growth rates next year. Although I expect inflation to dip in the coming months, my outlook for core inflation calls for a gradual climb back toward 2 percent in the next two or three years.  My inflation outlook runs a little higher than the Greenbook baseline, largely because of differences in our views of where inflation expectations will settle out.  And although the large output gap in my outlook does serve as a disinflationary pressure, the research on this issue leads me to be cautious about how much effect this output gap is going to exert on my inflation projection. So the risks to my outlook remain to the downside for output because the improvements that I have seen, notably in housing and auto sales, have relied on stimulus programs that may be quickly depleted and a still uncertain recovery in consumer spending.  My talks with both researchers and business people leave me with a lot of uncertainty about the inflation trend, and I see those risks remaining symmetric.  So while the news has been encouraging, I think watchful waiting seems like the right course for monetary policy to me.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains both positive and negative information about the state of the economy, indicating that there is contention or disagreement. On one hand, there is mention of improving economic conditions such as stabilizing housing markets and increased auto sales. On the other hand, there is emphasis on the large surplus capacity, reduced workweeks, and downward pressure on wages. These conflicting views create a sense of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 206.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Lacker.


Passage number 207.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from the speaker to the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 208.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like I think most people around the table, I am pretty confident that real GDP growth will be positive this quarter.  Much of the economic news has been better since the last meeting, with a wide range of indicators suggesting that the recession is either over or will be over very soon.  For the remainder of the year, the economy should be boosted by three factors that a lot of people have cited around the table—recovery in housing and a significant rise in motor vehicle sales, the effect of the fiscal stimulus program in supporting domestic demand, and a sharp swing in the pace of inventory investment.  In fact, if the inventory swing were concentrated in a particular quarter, we could actually see fairly rapid growth for a brief period.   But I expect that, as in the 2001–03 period, the recovery will be slower than usual, at least over the next year or two. In particular, I expect that consumption is likely to grow only modestly. First, growth of real disposable income will probably be weak by historical standards.  As I noted at the last meeting, there are a number of special factors that boosted real disposable income in the first half of the year, helping to offset a sharp drop in hours worked and very sluggish hourly wage gains.  These special factors will be absent during the second half of the year. Second, households are still adjusting to the sharp drop in net worth caused by what will likely be a persistent decline in home prices and last year’s fall in equity prices.  This suggests to me that the desired saving rate will not decline sharply as the recession comes to an end.  As a consequence, consumer spending is unlikely to rise much faster than income.  In other words, weak income growth will act as an effective constraint on the pace of consumer spending.  Third, the financial system is still in the middle of a prolonged adjustment process.  Banks and other financial institutions are working their way through large credit losses, and the securitization  markets are recovering only very slowly.  This means that credit availability will be constrained for some time to come, and this will also serve to limit the pace of the recovery. Despite the big buildup of slack in the economy, the core measures of inflation have been somewhat sticky.  I don’t think this will last. Thus, I think the risks on inflation are still likely to be on the downside over the next year or two. There are two reasons why I think core inflation is likely to decline going forward. First, the variables that respond to labor market slack, such as the employment cost index, have already fallen quite sharply.  This suggests that the output gap is exerting downward pressure on labor costs, which is a key component of overall costs in many industries. Second, during the first half of the year, core services inflation has been lower than core goods inflation. I think this is meaningful because core services inflation exhibits much more inertia than core goods inflation and because it is unusual for inflation for core services to be running lower than core goods inflation in the first place.  I don’t expect that we will see this pattern persist for long, and I suspect that it is more likely that core goods inflation will moderate than that core services inflation will pick up in the near term.  So I would expect the overall core inflation rate to come down.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own analysis and predictions about the state of the economy and inflation.


Passage number 209.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 210.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards Governor Warsh, without any indication of discord.


Passage number 211.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a courteous expression of thanks from the speaker to Governor Duke.


Passage number 212.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. Are there questions for Brian.  Seeing none, we can begin our go-round with President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement and request for questions.


Passage number 213.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the policy described in alternative B, much for the reasons laid out in the Bluebook and as Brian just explained in his  lead-in. The economic story in my view is unfolding close to my expectations, and negative deviations from this outlook might justify an increment of stimulus as detailed in alternative A, but I don’t see such deviations developing quite yet.  At the same time, as noted in the earlier go-round, I view the economy as remaining in a fragile condition, so I think the reduction in stimulus laid out in alternative C is premature.  I support the language in alternative B (revised).  I think it best serves us in remaining flexible and keeping our options open. And I don’t favor the language “prepared to consider” in alternative B′. In our deliberations, we translated this subtly suggestive language into Southern.  In Southern it would come out “fixin’ to ponder.” [Laughter] If you detect a little sarcasm in that, that was my view of the “prepared to consider” language.  I do support the extension of TALF. I favor this.  As I mentioned in my economic go-round discussion, we had a long conversation with the American Securitization Forum, and the take-away from that conversation convinced me that the securitization sector is extremely vital to the financial system.  Its recovery is important, and it continues to need help. I think it does raise the question, in terms of exit, of whether we will have to extend the TALF further in order to continue that support, particularly for CMBS, beyond June 1 of next year.  So at this time, I think it is sensible to extend the TALF.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker in the passage expresses his support for alternative B and explains his reasons for his position. He also expresses his opinion on the language used in alternative B and shares his view on the extension of TALF. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 214.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to President Plosser.


Passage number 215.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Fisher without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Is the coffee ready, do you think.  [Laughter] All right. It is 10:30. Why don’t we take a 20-minute break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 217.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Why don’t we recommence.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply setting the scene for the conversation to continue after a coffee break.


Passage number 218.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The baseline forecast has inflation too low and unemployment too high for the next several years.  Such a forecast would almost surely imply further easing, if we had not hit the zero bound.  The asset-purchase program has probably helped stabilize markets and lowered key interest rates compared with what they would have been without the purchases. However, the amount of macroeconomic stimulus produced to date by our large asset purchases has been smaller than I expected.  In part, our implementation continues to favor market functioning over the broader macroeconomic goals of pushing rates down more aggressively to more rapidly achieve desired macroeconomic outcomes.  Given current implementation strategies, I prefer alternative B (revised), though I remain concerned about the pace of a likely recovery and would favor more-aggressive measures if the economy were to falter or the risk of significant disinflation were to increase.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker stating their observations and preferences regarding the baseline forecast, asset-purchase program, and macroeconomic goals.


Passage number 219.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Kohn.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
 MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, favor alternative B (revised). Despite the series of positive surprises that President Stern pointed out yesterday, since March the center of gravity of expectations around this table is for a slow recovery—maybe a little faster than the Greenbook but not much—and damped inflation.   I think it is way too early to signal that we are thinking about withdrawing or cutting back on stimulus, so that leaves one with two consequences.  I would keep the “extended period” language in there unchanged, and I would not curtail the large-scale asset-purchase programs.  I would complete our announced purchases, with the possible exception of the agency securities, as that market is not liquid enough.  I would taper off those mortgage-backed security purchases over the fourth quarter and maybe into the first quarter to get up to the total, but I am okay with waiting until next meeting to tell the public what we are going to do there.  I think the public is expecting something like alternative B (revised).  They won’t miss it, and we can do that next time.  I am okay with winding up the Treasury purchase program.  The economic situation is improving.  There are some costs in terms of concerns about the exit strategy and our ability to keep inflation low. But I wouldn’t rule out anything for the future, including resuming the purchases under certain circumstances.   I think we need to keep all our options open.  As President Rosengren just said, the central tendency itself isn’t a really satisfactory outcome relative to our legislative mandate.  There is huge uncertainty. And while there is upside risk, there is still a lot of downside risk as well. And, there are nontrivial odds on whether we get a slow recovery, inflation begins to abate, unemployment rises, and bank losses mount further, and we are back into a kind of adverse feedback loop in the financial markets.  I don’t think that is what is going to happen, but I think there is some possibility.  There are lots of things we need to think about if the economy starts going down and if we start getting into a deflationary situation. In that case, if we were to resume Treasury purchases while inflation was going down and while the economy was weakening, there wouldn’t be adverse consequences for inflation expectations.  So all of those things lead me to want to keep all of the options open, and I think alternative B (revised) does a good job of that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, is in favor of alternative B (revised) and believes it is too early to signal a withdrawal or cutting back on stimulus. He argues for keeping the "extended period" language unchanged and not curtailing the large-scale asset-purchase programs. He also mentions the possibility of resuming purchases under certain circumstances and keeping options open. This contrasts with a potential viewpoint that may advocate for withdrawing or cutting back on stimulus and curtailment of asset purchases.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Stern.


Passage number 222.
 MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B (revised). I think it has at least two important virtues. One is that it maintains our flexibility, and the second is that it is likely to do no harm.  [Laughter] And I think these are both constructive.  I have given some serious thought to alternative C, but I really think it is premature to go to something like that.  In that connection, I have been asking myself if it is possible that the economy will grow considerably more rapidly over the next six quarters than I currently expect and than is indicated in the Greenbook. And I just don’t see the ingredients, the precursors, for something like that over that time frame.  So I think alternative C is premature at this point. In light of the discussion, I have also been thinking some more about the inflation situation and the inflation outlook.  I have never been a particular enthusiast of the gap models, mainly because my impression is that you have to work pretty hard empirically to get a significant and stable relationship.  I guess if you work hard enough you can, but I don’t think it is overwhelming.  The staff can correct me if I have mischaracterized that situation.  On the other hand, it takes a model to beat a model, and I don’t think we have another model in the short run.  So we are kind of left with that. But in the longer run, I do think it pays to look at the monetary aggregates. In particular, if you look at M2, you see that—going back as far as 2003, anyway— growth there has been pretty moderate for a sustained period of time, something between 5 and 6 percent on average.  It was certainly rapid last year.  It was certainly rapid in the first quarter of this year, but it has tapered off again. I certainly don’t see in the aggregate data a case for a sustained near-term burst of inflation—“near-term” meaning within the next six or eight quarters. You might say, “Well, the monetary base gives you a different picture”; but if the base were so reliable, we would have targeted it. I think we have learned that its relation to broader aggregates and to things like inflation just isn’t very convincing even in the longer run.  So I don’t see a significant inflation threat in the near term.  I do think, if you look at those M2 numbers, we may want to bring those down consistent with the price stability part of the dual mandate eventually.  But there doesn’t seem to be any urgency to it, and I think the deceleration required isn’t likely to be terribly great. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing their thoughts on alternative options, the economy, inflation, and the monetary aggregates. There does not appear to be any conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 224.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think we need to be very careful going forward and watch the banking system very carefully as we continue with our large-scale asset-purchase program, as we discussed yesterday.  I don’t think of discussing cutting back on additional purchases as withdrawing stimulus so much as reducing the size of the planned increase in stimulus.  Our understanding of just what will happen when we reach this discontinuity, when our asset holdings drive short-term liquidity facility usage to zero, is significant.  And there is a chance that we may inadvertently at that time begin increasing our stimulus quite powerfully and more than we expect and more than we intend, just at a time when we are starting to consider withdrawing stimulus or reducing the amount of stimulus we provide in light of a strengthening economy. I see some merit in alternative C for this reason—to hedge our bets somewhat with the economy turning and downside risk moderating.  In addition, I think there are abundant reasons—at least, I see abundant reasons—to be deeply uncomfortable with large-scale holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities. There is a sense—and I think this was explicitly acknowledged in the design of the program—that it is impeding a structural transition to whatever is next by way of the configuration of our housing finance system.  But it also involves some very serious political entanglements that I have alluded to before and that give me pause about our ability to flexibly shed that portfolio should we find the need to do so. However, I am prepared at this meeting to support alternative B (revised) for now.  Along with President Stern, I think it is a little premature to scale back our announcement about what  we intend with mortgage-backed securities.  But, again, we need to be very watchful of what is going on in the banking system with reserve holdings, and it might be good to mount an effort to do that on a very systematic and granular basis.  More broadly, with the economy turning, I think it is time to stop looking around for credit spreads to fix.  As I said yesterday, our interventions in some segments of the credit market have reduced the supply of credit to other segments, and there are always going to be markets in which some spreads are elevated compared with the spreads that prevail in markets in which we have intervened.  That is just always going to be the case from now on.  Moreover, continuing to add market segments or to extend the life of programs beyond this point in the business cycle could be mistaken for an intention that we will extend our intervention deeper into the next expansion.   We have talked a lot about exit strategy. But when we have done so, it has been in the narrow sense of the capacity to manipulate our balance sheet and our policy tools in a way so as to raise the federal funds rate. Mr. Chairman, you have done a very good job of articulating our capacity and the tools we have for doing that and, I think, have allayed a lot of concerns in the public’s mind about our ability.  But one byproduct of the way in which we have done that is that some of the means of doing so allow for the continued coexistence of fairly broad and deep intervention—in other words, a large balance sheet and raising interest rates on reserves and so raising the funds rate without reducing our balance sheet.   That leaves open the broader question about our intervention in credit markets.  I think the other sense of exit strategy that we need to ponder is the nature of our engagement in credit markets and what transition that is going to display over the next couple of years.  I am assuming—I may be wrong as we haven’t talked about this—that at some point in the expansion we will want it to be the case that we are no longer intervening in any market, even MBS.  And Ithink that communicating about that transition would be useful and thinking about it would be useful as well. We have intervened on the basis that emergencies in credit markets warrant protecting the economy from damage from credit market malfunctions.  And when the economy recovers and is growing strongly, it seems to me that the compelling need for that will be diminished.  On the other hand, it is not clear that we have articulated principles that would necessarily lead an observer to believe that in an expansion we wouldn’t be intervening.  I refer again to the list of pros and cons that we heard yesterday about agency ARMs that make it seem as if elevated credit spreads are a primary consideration for a lot of these programs.  So I think it would useful for us to think more broadly about the transition we intend to make from the current level of engagement and intervention in credit markets to whatever the sort of normalcy is beyond that. This sets aside what we want people to expect from us in the next recession, which is another problem as well and another set of issues we need to grapple with at some point. But, again, I can support alternative B (revised).  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage because the speaker, Mr. Lacker, expresses disagreement or discomfort with certain aspects of the current policy and suggests alternative approaches. He discusses the potential unintended consequences of increasing stimulus, expresses concerns about large-scale holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities, questions the need for continued intervention in credit markets, and advocates for a clear transition plan away from intervention.


Passage number 225.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker, I think that there is pretty strong consensus that we do need to normalize and move out of special intervention as the economy recovers. And we have taken some steps in that direction, including letting one facility expire, reducing the size of others, and announcing this week that we are not going to add any categories to the TALF program.  So I think we agree with your perspective on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is a consensus and agrees with President Lacker's perspective on the need to normalize and move out of special intervention as the economy recovers.


Passage number 226.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone is expressing gratitude to the chairman.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 228.
 MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the revised version of alternative B.  I do want to emphasize, though, that I believe a strong case exists for further monetary stimulus.  This case is amply demonstrated by the unconstrained optimal policy path in the Bluebook,  which shows the nominal federal funds rate continuing to ease over the next four quarters and reaching negative 6 percent.  Moreover, even in the unlikely circumstance that we are lucky enough to get robust economic growth over the next few years, it will still be a long time before the economy is operating close to full employment.  And I found it striking that in none of the alternative scenarios in the Greenbook, even including the most optimistic one, would the Committee need to raise interest rates this year or in 2010. With regard to asset purchases, I would not argue for expanding our Treasury purchases.  I think it would be unwise at this time.  The bang for the buck from these purchases is probably pretty small, and our program has had some unfortunate costs.  It appears to be contributing to the growing concern about high long-term inflation.  Even though I don’t favor raising our current target for Treasury purchases now, I consider it important that we avoid completely closing the door on future Treasury purchases. I would associate myself with Governor Kohn’s comment that there could certainly come a time when the economic outlook worsens considerably. We shouldn’t rule out that possibility, and further long-term Treasury purchases could, in that type of scenario, be needed to stimulate the economy, so we shouldn’t rule out the use of that policy tool. The revised version of alternative B keeps the option open.  I think the wording of the original version of B would be likely to be read as closing the door to future purchases, and I don’t think we need the more explicit language in alternative B′ that says that we are prepared to consider resuming purchases. With respect to MBS and agency purchases, I am in favor of preserving our optionality, waiting to decide until closer to when the program comes to a conclusion in the same way that we did with Treasuries. Again, I wouldn’t want to take anything off the table at this point.  If we were to announce today either scaling back on the amounts we expect to purchase or announce   that we intend to end those programs, I think it would surprise markets and ratify expectations that it won’t be too long before we start raising the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MS. Yellen is expressing her support for the revised version of alternative B and stating her belief that further monetary stimulus is necessary. She does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 229.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is a polite closing statement from someone named President Evans.


Passage number 230.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor a continued wait-and-see approach, which I think is best captured roughly by alternative B, the revised version.  I would make some observations. The modest recovery in GDP is in progress, and the expected peak in the unemployment rate is six or more months away.  The Greenbook and Bluebook measures of our policy stance suggest to me that they are near policy accommodation stances that close the resource gaps within three years. I know we could hope to do better, but I think we pushed our nontraditional policies pretty far, and the remaining fruit is hanging pretty high.  I agree with President Stern when he says that sometimes there is just not a lot more that you can do or that you should consider doing. I interpret the prospective resource slack that we are facing to be large, and this is going to restrain inflationary influences from economic improvements and low policy rates.  I thought Governor Kohn did an excellent job of discussing the inflation prospects and walking us through inflation expectations and the resource gap and how they are interacting or how we have to take account of those. It does appear that inflation expectations have remained higher than one might have expected with this slack. That has been important, I think, for the evolution of inflation. That said, we are in uncharted territory with respect to the enormous expansion of our balance sheet and the public’s reaction to this, and so liquidity growth and historic-sized fiscal deficits as far as the eye can see are going to present a challenge at least from the public’s expectations. The narrow measures of money that we would look to as very troubling are not yet   in the broader measures, and I think that that is an important part of what we would be paying attention to if we saw large inflationary expectations.   For me, our current setting of policy seems appropriately accommodative to balance these risks.  Let’s be patient and monitor the situation more.  Until something breaks one way or the other, I would expect this type of policy outcome.  When the situation clarifies, we should make the appropriate judgments.  It could be that the downside risk appears and it is quite bad and we need to do something or the other way around.  I do not see the need to signal an alternative B about future programs.   So alternative B, the revised version.  I didn’t see the tremendous value in mentioning tapering off for Treasuries, given the deep market that we have, but that doesn’t seem to be expressed by others. So I am fine with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 231.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mentioning of President Pianalto indicate a polite gesture or acknowledgement, but there is no clear indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 232.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support the revised version of alternative B. Given the large output gap that I see closing only slowly and an inflation rate projection that remains low over the forecast period, I am comfortable maintaining the current level of monetary stimulus.  Market participants clearly recognize that our Treasury security purchases will cumulate to a level near the stated objective around the time of the next meeting.  So it seems appropriate to recognize this in our statement today, to be more transparent about our intentions, and I think alternative B does that well.  Also, as Brian mentioned, it is not necessary to specify at this meeting changes to our purchases of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities. So I prefer to wait until our September meeting to comment on those purchases.  Like others, I believe that it is important to leave our options open, and the revised version of alternative B gives us, I think, the appropriate flexibility that we need.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their support for alternative B and explains their reasoning for maintaining the current level of monetary stimulus. They also agree with waiting until the September meeting to comment on purchases of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities. There is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 233.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 234.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Just a question about your comment on the base.  Why wouldn’t Japan be a precedent for this experiment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks a question without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 235.
 MR. BULLARD. It is a great example to look at.  I don’t think theirs was that persistent, and so they didn’t get that much inflation.  Ours is looking pretty persistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the level of persistence in the inflation being discussed.


Passage number 236.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges the information about President Hoenig without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 237.
 MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me give the background on where I come out on this.  That is, as I mentioned yesterday, the evidence is that we are at or near the bottom of this cycle.  At least the evidence is pointing that way, and in that environment at this point, we obviously have excess capacity:  railroads, 50 percent in use.  That is to be expected.  But I think as we look ahead, we are starting to see improvement, and that should continue and perhaps accelerate, given the fiscal and monetary policy that is in place.  So it is not where we are; it is where we are going that matters importantly as we consider our choices.  I am not suggesting here that we tighten or exit where we are from a current easing policy, but only that we, as President Lacker said, stop increasing our purchases or increasing our easing process and back off in that because we can’t exit until we complete our entry into this, and I think it’s time to complete that.  We may not see inflation or asset bubbles now.  I think that is clear.  But the  more we pump into this balloon, the larger it will eventually be and the more difficult it will be to bring back down. And that is what I think we need to begin to think about if we are, in fact, recovering. So my view is that we begin to signal that we are.  I think that is perhaps what alternative B (revised) does. Although I would like to see us begin tapering immediately, I would be in favor of that alternative and that, as soon as possible, we stop purchasing assets and turn to the TAF and the primary credit facility as means of providing liquidity into the intermediation process or the banking industry and allow our economy to move more toward normality.  So my immediate goal is to cease purchasing assets and cease growing our balance sheet or allow our balance sheet to begin to shrink normally.  But the reality is that I think alternative B (revised) is the reasonable place to be at this point.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and providing their perspective on the current state of the economy and the appropriate course of action. There is no indication of any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 238.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 239.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B as revised.  Let me confine my remarks to the asset-purchase discussion in that alternative.  First, with respect to the Treasury purchases, I think that the Treasury purchase experiment has been a testament to the strengths of this institution.  I think we have had differences of opinion going back to discussions of last December on the merits of this program.  We debated it, we all marshaled our arguments, and we all decided at least publicly to support this experiment.  I think the stars have given us an opportunity to deftly exit the Treasury purchases.  Alternative B as revised gives us the flexibility, if circumstances warrant, to hold hands yet again, but I’d consider the prospects of that to be quite unlikely. The data of the intermeeting months on the Treasury purchases, particularly given the question of fiscal sustainability coming from the other branch of government, have made this particularly problematic for us to undertake successfully.  I do think the benefits have been outweighed by the costs, but we do have an opportunity to end it in way that lives up to the commitment that we made some months ago but doesn’t go beyond that.  I think alternative B as revised also does provide that flexibility should the situation change. On the tapering question that President Evans raised, my own sense is that it would not be necessary, if we had only Treasuries as part of our asset purchase, to go with the tapering.  Even out of an abundance of caution I don’t think that it would be necessary.  The reason that I suspect it’s a prudent move for us now is that it will be a signal to markets that, when we do undertake the mortgage-backed security discussion probably at our next meeting, they will have seen some bread crumbs as to how we could think about exiting or at least about cutting back on these. So all in all, I would favor the tapering approach, not because of Treasuries but because of the signaling effect on MBS. On the mortgage-backed securities, as President Yellen suggested, I think that we should take advantage of the option value and defer our discussion on that.  I would be interested in staff’s thoughts in advance of that meeting as to what the net benefits are of our continued presence in that market.  So while I do think there were marginal benefits, maybe even meaningful benefits, at the beginning of the MBS program, we are well past the point of diminishing returns on that.  I look forward to a broader discussion come September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker supports alternative B as revised and expresses his views on the asset-purchase discussion, specifically regarding Treasury purchases and tapering. He also suggests deferring the discussion on mortgage-backed securities.


Passage number 240.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any content or disagreement. It is a simple greeting and expression of gratitude.


Passage number 241.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given my pessimism about credit availability and concern about the likelihood of alternative scenarios, I started thinking about, well, if they came to pass, what policy action might we take. My thoughts are probably further colored by the time that I have spent with the TALF and with the staff working on the TALF.  But as I look at  the experience with the commercial paper facilities and the ABS markets, I do see signs that the markets outside of our purchases have improved. Then as we looked at the RMBS for the TALF, it became clear that the problems in the private mortgage market were probably beyond our tools to repair.  So although we have talked about a lot of market improvement, the only mortgage market now and for the foreseeable future is the government-supported market.  And I see the very likely need to support the mortgage market at least through visibility of how the GSEs might be resolved and perhaps even through that transition, and I hope that we would see some signs of how the private mortgage market might actually reemerge before we withdraw support to that market. So the MBS purchases in relation to the total outstanding and the originations right now are large, but it seems quite likely to me that we will need to extend the support, at least in time if not in total, well past March 2010.  I don’t see a similar need to expand Treasury purchases, and the tapering certainly prepares the way for a much bigger tapering job ahead with the MBS purchases. But I think we really do need to look at what we might need to do longer term on the mortgage market and when we announce what we are going to do on that.  And I do support alternative B (revised).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing her thoughts and opinions about the mortgage market and potential policy actions, but there is no specific disagreement being addressed.


Passage number 242.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 243.
 MR. TARULLO. I support alternative B (revised) for a lot of the reasons a lot of you have stated to this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, states that he supports alternative B, and he mentions that he shares the same reasons that others have stated previously.


Passage number 244.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "Vice Chairman" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 245.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First I want to make two brief comments, one on the dry tinder concept that we brought up at the last meeting and the other one on potential changes in the NAIRU.  The reason I want to bring these up is that I think  they are both relevant in terms of our communication strategy and our ability, by consistent messaging, to keep inflation expectations well anchored.  If we do not speak with a relatively consistent voice, I think we run risks in that dimension. The last time the view was expressed that excess reserves sitting on banks’ balance sheets are essentially dry tinder that could quickly fuel excessive credit creation and put the Fed behind the curve in terms of tightening monetary policy.  I have to admit that, in terms of imagery, this concern does seem compelling.  The banks are sitting on piles of money that could be used to extend credit on a moment’s notice.  However, I think this reasoning ignores a very, very important point.  Based on how monetary policies have been conducted for the past several decades, banks have always had the ability to expand credit whenever they like.  They don’t need a pile of dry tinder in the form of excess reserves to do so.  That’s because the Fed has committed itself to supply sufficient reserves to keep the federal funds rate at its target.  If banks want to expand credit and that drives up the demand for reserves, the Fed automatically meets that demand in its conduct of monetary policy.  So in terms of the ability of banks to expand credit rapidly, it makes no difference whether they have lots of excess reserves or not.  I think it is an important point. In terms of the NAIRU, there has been some discussion that the NAIRU may have moved up. I certainly do not dispute that idea and its implications.  But I think there is an implication that is sort of implied by some that this might be a reason to exit from our current stance of monetary policy somewhat earlier than otherwise.  I think we need to be careful about exaggerating the potential import of the possibility of a somewhat higher NAIRU.  The key question in a world where the unemployment rate is currently 9.4 percent and likely to rise higher is how much the NAIRU has increased.  To get an idea of what might be in the feasibleset of outcomes, we looked at the CBO’s estimates of the NAIRU, which extend back 55 years.  I am not saying that the CBO’s estimates of the NAIRU are perfect, but they are an interesting starting point. We found that the largest three-year increase in their estimate of the NAIRU over this 55-year period was 0.3 percentage point, and at its highest point in this fifty-five-year history, the NAIRU was still below 6½ percent. So what do I make of this.  Well, it implies to me that, even if one thinks that the NAIRU has increased, it is implausible to think that it has increased sufficiently to change the story meaningfully over the next couple of years.  We have a large output gap that is going to take a long time to close.  Thus, arguing that the NAIRU may be higher is likely just to confuse market participants about the issue at hand unless we can credibly claim that the NAIRU has increased so much that we are going to hit this very, very quickly.  I do not think that claim is plausible.  So I would be counseling people not to make this argument because it is going to confuse people about how quickly we are going to exit from our monetary policy regime. With respect to the statement, I favor alternative B as revised.  I think the case for expanding Treasury securities is very weak—first, given the improvement in financial conditions and the economic outlook.  When we did this in March, it was with considerable reluctance, I think, but it was because the outlook was really quite grim, and the outlook has improved significantly since then. Second, there are lots of uncertainties about what this would mean for inflation expectations, and that is the part of the Treasury purchase program that was always wrought with some peril, and we found out that there was really some risk associated with that in terms of that dimension.  Third, market participants do not expect us to expand it.  So I think that we should stick with alternative B as revised, where we basically say we’re bringing it to an end with the taper. I think Governor Warsh is absolutely correct that the tapering is not necessary for Treasuries but it is a good signaling device to imply what we are likely to do with the other programs. Financial conditions have improved considerably since the last meeting.  I think that is important.  It means that abstracting from other factors, such as the GDP revisions, the optimal unconstrained funds rate is considerably less negative now than it was at the last meeting.  But it still remains below the zero bound by most measures at a relatively high degree of confidence.  That suggests to me that a steady-as-she-goes policy for the time being is the right one.  That means keeping the pre-commitment of an extended period in place and completing the purchase programs that we had committed to earlier.  I have a strong presumption that, as we go forward, we are going to finish the agency MBS program.  On the agency debt program, I am sort of agnostic. I don’t think it is really that important whether we stop at $150 billion or we go all the way to $200 billion. But with the agency MBS program, the market has a strong presumption that we are going to do the whole thing, and I would hope at the next meeting, assuming that we are still on the same economic trajectory that we think we are going to be on, that we would commit to doing the whole thing at that meeting.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal opinions and preferences but does not directly contradict or argue against any other points.


Passage number 246.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Thank you all.  If you recall last March where we were and our concerns about both the financial system and the economy, we were extremely aggressive; and whether by dumb luck or prescience or whatever, we seem to have hit the sweet spot. The economy is improving.  The financial markets are improving, and I see little reason to increase stimulus at this point.  At the same time, obviously there is still a lot of uncertainty about consumption, final demand, and the strength of recovery, and I think I agree with the Vice Chairman that, by any reasonable calculation at least at this point, there still is a considerable amount of excess capacity in the economy.  So on that basis there is not much case either for pulling back on stimulus.  At the risk of sounding Nixonian, I think we should stay the course on our policy and continue along the lines we have been following since March. I would agree with the majority of the participants in proposing that we go with the revised version of alternative B. There was little discussion this time of the descriptive paragraphs, maybe again because we hit the sweet spot—I do not know—but the output description in particular is a little more upbeat and, I think, conveys the sense that there has been noticeable improvement even though there are still some important barriers to full recovery. I think that there is considerable agreement around the table that we should allow the Treasury program to expire as previously signaled.  I think the revised version of alternative B will be read primarily as saying that the FOMC is allowing this program to expire.  There is a bit of flexibility in the sense that we do not completely rule out a future program, and as Governor Kohn has pointed out, there could be contingencies in which we might want to consider a future program.  But I think it will be read mostly as just a bit of prudence on the part of the Committee to leave that potential option open for the future.  Again, I think the primary signal will be that the program is being allowed to expire. I agree with the Vice Chairman that the tapering aspect is useful as a signal.  It is going to essentially provide a bit of foreshadowing to the markets about how we may exit from the larger agency program.  We discussed today and I gave a lot of thought to announcing a tapering of the agency programs today as well.  I found it very difficult to write that in a way that didn’t sound as though we were conclusively ending those programs or going to the full extent.  What I would propose—along the lines of President Stern’s parting advice, which is always wise—is to do no harm.  I propose that we have at the next meeting a robust discussion of exactly how we want to exit or proceed with the agency MBS program.  And long the lines of what President Bullard   said, one possibility would be to extend it—to reduce the rate of purchase and extend it out.  It might be more effective in the sense that we would not be dominating the market as much but maybe have a longer horizon. Those are the kinds of issues that I think we ought to talk about in the next meeting.  On that basis, I think it is a bit wiser to leave the status quo on the agencies for this meeting, and that is also consistent with Brian Sack’s memo, which suggests that we do not yet have to begin the tapering process in the agency markets.  So my recommendation would be that we allow the Treasury program to expire and that we adopt the revised version of alternative B.  And before we go further, let me just turn to Brian Madigan for a moment because there was an issue he would like to highlight on the directive related to B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 247.
 MR. MADIGAN. Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I wanted to note two things for the Committee on the directive for B, which is on page 60 of the Bluebook.  First of all, of course, the directive would indicate now that the Desk is expected to purchase about $300 billion of Treasury securities rather than “up to,” and it includes language indicating that the Desk is to gradually slow the pace of purchases. The other point I want to make is that the following sentence is a little modified from the corresponding version in the previous directive.  The previous directive and the past few directives have indicated that the Committee anticipates that the combination of outright purchases and various liquidity facilities outstanding will cause the size of the Fed’s balance sheet to expand significantly in coming months.  With the liquidity facilities coming down pretty significantly, I think that it doesn’t make sense to continue to describe them as causing an increase in the balance sheet.  So we have suggested deleting the reference in that sentence to the liquidity facilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Madigan is simply pointing out two changes in the directive and suggesting a modification to improve clarity.


Passage number 248.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a direct question and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 249.
   MR. LACKER. Do we anticipate our purchases to expand the balance sheet significantly in coming months in view of recent history.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is seeking information and does not express any opposing views or disagreement.


Passage number 250.
 MR. MADIGAN. Well, certainly we expect the purchases to continue to add to the balance sheet. That is laid out in our projections in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. The speaker simply states that purchases are expected to add to the balance sheet, as outlined in projections.


Passage number 251.
 MR. LACKER. Haven’t we missed on our liquidity facility forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is presented as a question and does not express any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 252.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. As you point out, President Lacker, we are getting close to the zero bound on that side.  So it looks like a good bet that we will continue to see an increase in the overall balance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging and agreeing with the point made by President Lacker.


Passage number 253.
 MR. LACKER. So is it in the intermeeting period.  In the intermeeting period do we expect to drive this down to zero and on that basis.  Is that why we are expecting the balance sheet to expand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement and asks for confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 254.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Brian, do you have a reply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply a question asking for a reply from Brian.


Passage number 255.
 MR. MADIGAN. This is the monetary base that I am referring to, but as shown on page 51 of the Bluebook, our baseline projections show growth of 97 percent in August, 116 percent in September, and 60 percent in October.  So there is still pretty significant growth overall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the monetary base growth projections without expressing any disagreement or opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions or comments.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Any other questions or comments" implies that there may be differing opinions or potential disagreements among the audience or participants.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 257.
 MR. LACKER. Excuse me, I just want to be clear about the question.  You have described the forecasting procedure that goes program by program and neglects any consideration of the demand for reserves. And we keep missing on that basis in a way that suggests that the demand for reserves is driving demand for liquidity facilities, not the other way around. So I just raise the question. That is why I was asking.  Mr. Chairman, you called for a robust discussion next meeting of the MBS program; I think that is great.  This consideration,which we have been discussing, deserves some attention there, too.  What staff work could be done on that might be useful as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, raises a question and suggests that the demand for reserves is driving demand for liquidity facilities, rather than the other way around. He implies that the forecasting procedure described may be neglecting this important factor. This differs from the perspective of the Chairman, who called for a discussion on the MBS program without considering this aspect. Therefore, there is a disagreement on how the demand for reserves should be considered.


Passage number 258.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, the staff will look at that.  I think it is an interesting question, how much is pure substitution and how much the general improvements in markets are changing demand as well.  Any other questions or comments either for me or for Brian.  Seeing none, Debbie, would you call the roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their thoughts and inviting questions or comments from others.


Passage number 259.
 MS. DANKER. Yes. This vote encompasses the language of alternative B (revised) for the August FOMC statement and the directive from page 60 of the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


