Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on April 24–25, 2012 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 24, 2012, at 1:00 p.m., and continued on Wednesday, April 25, 2012, at 8:30 a.m. Those present were the following: Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Elizabeth Duke Jeffrey M. Lacker Dennis P. Lockhart Sandra Pianalto Sarah Bloom Raskin Daniel K. Tarullo John C. Williams Janet L. Yellen James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively William B. English, Secretary and Economist Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, William Nelson, Simon Potter, David Reifschneider, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of GovernorsJon W. Faust and Andrew T. Levin, Special Advisors to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Matthew J. Eichner, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Ellen E. Meade, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Daniel M. Covitz and David E. Lebow, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors David Bowman, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Jane E. Ihrig, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Gregory L. Stefani, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Jeff Fuhrer, Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, respectively Troy Davig, Ron Feldman, Mark E. Schweitzer, Christopher J. Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Minneapolis, Cleveland, and St. Louis, respectively John Fernald, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Andreas L. Hornstein and Lorie K.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply provides a list of the individuals present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Logan, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and New York, respectivelyTranscript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on April 24–25, 2012 April 24 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everybody.  I’d like to briefly introduce our first agenda item with a few words about our communications efforts.  As you know, we all have a considerable interest in trying to improve our communication—in particular, to do what we can to make our forward guidance more state-contingent, more explicit in terms of what the factors are that we will be looking at in making decisions about changing the stance of policy.  I know we’ve been doing this for a while, but I think it’s something we need to keep persisting at.  So one way to do that would be to put out alternative scenarios, get Committee participants’ reactions to those scenarios, and use that as a way to calibrate our reaction functions.  I commend the staff for taking the initiative to put together these scenarios that we’ll discuss today, and we’ll see how that works. An alternative approach to discovering our reaction function is through policy rules, and I want to make sure everybody knows that in the June meeting, we’ll be having a presentation and discussion of policy rules and their use both for communication and for decisionmaking.  I think it’s important that we think about them in the presence of a zero lower bound and also in the absence of a zero lower bound.  I would call to your attention a number of pieces of work that have already been circulated bearing on rules, including the nice effort you received recently that estimated Taylor rules based on the SEP results, which has also been done by three Reserve Banks that have done similar work.  I think that work shows that while there are certainly important differences across participants, there are also some areas of commonality, and that’s maybe something we can build on.  We also had some interesting work before the prior meeting, including a couple of staff memos and President Kocherlakota’s response to the memo on  LSAPs.  So there’s a lot already there, and we’ve had some good discussions, but again, I think this is an important direction.  And I urge everybody to keep thinking about these issues and to participate actively in our discussion in June. What I want to do now is turn to Thomas Laubach, whom we welcome back to the Federal Reserve after some absence.  Thomas was a coauthor of mine, and we worked on a book on inflation targeting many years ago.  Thomas is going to report on the scenarios exercise, and after he reports, we’ll have a chance for Q&A.  And then I would be interested to hear anyone who has any views on whether this is a constructive direction and, if it is, what further steps we might take. So—Thomas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the need for improved communication and the possibility of using alternative scenarios and policy rules to achieve that. There is no indication of disagreement or differing opinions among the speakers.


Passage number 3.
 MR. LAUBACH.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be referring to the handout in front of you called “Material for Alternative Scenarios for Contingency Planning.” At the March meeting, several of you suggested that a discussion of alternative scenarios could provide a means for the Committee to consider how policy would respond to different contingencies—something that could both facilitate your internal policy discussion and possibly also be used to provide more information to the public about your thinking.  To explore the potential of this idea, we sent you a memo that outlined four different scenarios for the evolution of the economy over the next six months, and then asked you a few questions intended to elicit your views on how policy might respond to these developments.  You all joined the game, and your responses to our questions were, we think, quite informative.  Before reviewing them, however, we should emphasize that this exercise was only an experiment and that the results should thus be interpreted cautiously.  In addition, our categorization of your responses required, in some cases, a little judgment on our part, and others might score the results somewhat differently. The main results from the survey are summarized in the top panel of the first page of the handout.  As noted by the first bullet, most of you said that scenario 1—the scenario consistent with the March Tealbook forecast—was the one closest to your own modal outlook.  Specifically, the middle-left panel shows that nine of you opted for scenario 1, while three of you thought the stronger activity of scenario 2 was more likely, and two of you chose the modest growth and somewhat higher inflation of scenario 4.  Finally, three of you resisted our attempt to shoehorn you into one scenario or the other, and said that a mix of scenario 1 with either 2 or 3 was most likely. 1 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).Returning to the upper panel, most of you thought that the differences across scenarios were large enough to merit adjustments from scenario to scenario in your individual assessment of appropriate policy.  This outcome was not obvious to us beforehand because the scenarios were not all that different relative to the uncertainty associated with forecasts six months ahead.  In any event, the middle-right table summarizes how your assessments of appropriate policy in scenarios 2, 3, and 4 qualitatively differed from your own assessment of appropriate policy in scenario 1.  Excluding four participants, for whom we were not able to infer their views on this issue, almost all of you thought that scenarios 2 and 4 would call for less accommodation relative to scenario 1, while scenario 3 would call for more accommodation.  In defining a change in accommodation, we include changes in your own assessment of appropriate announcements about the projected date of liftoff as well as any changes to the portfolio. Many of you also provided information on the appropriateness of additional balance sheet actions in the various scenarios.  As noted in the third bullet of the top panel, 10 of you said that additional asset purchases or actions to increase the duration of the SOMA portfolio would be, or at least could be, appropriate in response to the relatively weak economic conditions of scenario 3.  In addition, 4 of you mentioned that additional LSAPs or portfolio actions would be appropriate in scenario 1, and another 2 thought they could be appropriate, depending on the balance of risks. As noted under the fourth bullet in the top panel, many of you provided enough information for us to infer your views on whether the current policy—defined as preserving the “at least through late 2014” language but initiating no additional asset purchases or a new MEP—should be maintained or modified in each scenario. For our purposes, we score advancing the expected date of liftoff as a tightening in policy and, conversely, delaying the date as an easing; additional asset purchases, a new MEP, or adopting “aggressive” thresholds for inflation and unemployment are also scored as easing.  The results are summarized in the table at the bottom.  As shown in the first column, 8 participants favor maintaining the status quo in scenario 1, while 3 of you favor easing policy further.  In response to the stronger activity of scenario 2, however, 13 of you favored announcing a less accommodative policy than that now in place, generally by bringing forward the expected liftoff date for the funds rate.  A very similar result holds for the somewhat higher inflation conditions of scenario 4.  In contrast, 12 of you favored easing relative to current policy under the relatively weak conditions of scenario 3, primarily by purchasing additional assets or by lengthening the duration of the portfolio.  In this context, 3 of you expressed doubts that pushing the date-related forward guidance beyond late 2014 would be credible. Returning to the upper panel, the final bullet notes that several of you made it clear that your policy assessments depend not only on your modal outlooks for real activity and inflation, but also on your assessments of downside and upside risks.  Among the downside risks mentioned was fiscal policy, which several of you thought could be particularly important later this year.   Turning to the second exhibit, we also asked whether you would have found additional information on the economy helpful in answering questions about the four scenarios.  As indicated by the first bullet, many of you emphasized the difficulty of judging the appropriate response of monetary policy in the four scenarios without data for a broader array of indicators. As noted in the second bullet, you cited a number of examples; most frequently mentioned were additional measures of inflation and inflation expectations, house prices, a broader array of financial variables and indicators of financial stress, measures of foreign economic conditions and trade, additional labor market indicators such as initial claims, and survey data on business conditions such as the ISM.  Five of you also highlighted the importance of anecdotal information from business contacts.  Based on this feedback, any future exercise may therefore require more information—with the caveat that scenarios that are very complex and specific may be of limited help in advancing a general discussion about the appropriate policy response to changes in economic conditions. As reported under the third major bullet, several of you questioned the general design of the exercise. In particular, some of you noted that the scenario descriptions did not identify the fundamental shocks hitting the economy, nor did they reveal how events might play out over time. Although we left out this information to preserve the “real time” spirit of the exercise, some of you suggested that these exercises would be more useful if we provided details on the longer-run implications, perhaps through model simulations that extended several years into the future. Finally, several of you commented on how this sort of exercise might be used in the future should the Committee decide to repeat the experiment.  Three of you suggested that such exercises could be useful for internal deliberations, but thought that the Committee would need to develop further the use of, and discussions about, alternative scenarios before they could be employed for communications purposes.  In addition, two participants suggested that alternative scenarios could be used to develop a general description of the Committee’s policy reaction function.  Thank you; that concludes my prepared remarks.  We would be happy to take your questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the results of an experiment conducted by Mr. Laubach and his team.


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there any questions for Thomas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that Thomas is available for questions.


Passage number 5.
 MR. FISHER.  Can I make a comment, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context.


Passage number 6.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Certainly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "certainly" indicates affirmation or agreement, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 7.
 MR. FISHER.  First, I want to thank Thomas for making some sense out of this exercise.  I’m saying, how can you put socks on this octopus or, because there are 17, an octopus and a nonapus—or whatever 17 are.  This is very helpful.  Actually, Mr. Chairman, I found this exercise, plus the background material on LSAPs and MEP, to address what I raised in the last   meeting.  And just for the record, I was right when I said that with alternative scenarios, we didn’t enumerate the balance sheet and income effects that might occur as a result of one of those alternative scenarios obtaining.  I want to thank Bill English in front of the table for working with Evan Koenig and our staff in Dallas, and there’s some of that in the LSAP and the MEP memo.  But from the standpoint of just getting us to think, going through this exercise is useful.  Whether or not it would be useful to the public or confuse the public is another question.  So I was happy to hear Thomas say that it was experimental, and we might think about what we might do with this next, including addressing the design flaws that others felt were inherent in this exercise. I also want to thank Bill in front of the table for helping us get a sense, with that LSAP memo and the MEP memo, of the costs and possible downsides as well as some of the advantages of the different alternative scenarios we might envision.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing gratitude and agreement with the points made by others.


Passage number 8.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m still in question mode, if there are any questions.  If not, we can certainly take comments.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are open to answering any questions or accepting comments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 9.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes. I think I’m the outlier here in terms of how I reacted to the scenarios. It was a useful exercise, and the surprising thing was how much people actually adjusted their monetary policy forecasts in light of what were really relatively modest differences in the scenarios.  So I thought I’d just explain why I ended up in a very different place than many of you. The first reason is, the differences in the scenarios had very small implications for what was going to happen in 2013 and 2014.  Now, obviously, Thomas made the point that if you specified more about the financial variables, then you might be able to infer more about what would happen over the longer term.  But I don’t think the scenarios, as they were cast, had very strong implications for 2013 and 2014. Second, I thought that even if the scenarios had been somewhat more divergent, it’s not clear to me that it would actually have changed my outlook that much, because what’s really driving my views for 2013 and 2014 are the downside risks.  So you can have a scenario, but you still have this issue of how significant the downside risks are.  And right now, with Europe, the U.S. “fiscal cliff”—those are downside risks that are large in terms of their mass and how I think about the outlook relative to whether GDP growth is two-tenths firmer or two-tenths weaker over the next six months. And then finally, given the fact that we’re at the zero lower bound, the consequences of the downside are not symmetric with the consequences of the upside.  Again, until you actually see a scenario that demonstrably reduces the downside risk significantly, it wouldn’t be likely that I would want to change my monetary policy outlook.  So I was surprised by that. In terms of recommendations on how I would take this forward, I think it was a useful exercise. We should continue to try to see where we can take this.  Given my own personal preference, I’d prefer to have scenarios that have greater divergence.  And, in addition, it would be very good to have the scenarios have a lot more information about what’s happening to financial market variables, so you can see what the market is anticipating from the takeoff point in the fall of 2012, because that will, in a way, provide more color about how the market is assessing the scenarios. I think that will give us more context in terms of what you might want to do about monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the others in the group, stating that the scenarios had small implications for what would happen in 2013 and 2014 and that even if the scenarios were more divergent, it wouldn't change their outlook much. They also mention the importance of downside risks and the asymmetry of consequences at the zero lower bound. They suggest having scenarios with greater divergence and more information about financial market variables.


Passage number 10.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions, reactions, comments.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply indicates that there may be additional questions, reactions, or comments from someone referred to as "President Lacker." It does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 11.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to make a comment that I didn’t send in anything as part of the last request for comments but it occurs to me on reflecting on this briefing.  I think it’s really interesting the way you ask questions 3 and 4.  In 3, you asked, “In   the scenario closest to your current modal outlook, what would be the outlook for the appropriate stance of monetary policy ….” and “… what do you think the scenario would imply for the forward guidance regarding the appropriate time to begin raising the funds rate ….”  So you sort of ask, should we change the appropriate stance of policy.  And, if so, should we change the forward guidance.  You left out, it seems like, “What is your forecast.  Is your forecast going to change.”  Now, you may have done that under the presumption that, surely, we would change the forward guidance if our forecast changed, but our last discussions haven’t left me with a lot of certainty that that’s how we’re thinking about our forward-guidance language. I’m assuming that if our collective forecast in some sort of median sense changed, we would change the forward guidance.  And that’s what I was suggesting. I was one of the ones at the last meeting who suggested contingency planning, and what I was thinking is that it would have been nice if, when we adopted the language, we had thought through, well, what happens if our forecast advances in time by four months.  Are we going to change the language or not.  And this doesn’t quite get at that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is expressing his disagreement with the way the questions are asked and suggesting that the forward guidance language should be more clearly connected to changes in the forecast.  He believes that the language should be changed if the forecast changes, but he is not confident that the committee is thinking in the same way.


Passage number 12.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. It is simply stating that there are other comments to be made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 13.
 MR. EVANS.  I want to thank President Lacker for that comment because it reminded me of something.  At the last meeting, a number of people—I looked at the transcript from last time more carefully this time, and there were a number of comments—Jeff made them—about “late 2014” as a forecast. Is it a forecast, or is it a commitment.  And as I went through this scenario analysis, I thought about that issue.  It seems to me, as I think about this, that it’s much more than just a forecast. Obviously, a date is a forecast, but it also takes into account what the policy response function is that everybody has in their mind.  And so if I were asking a question, I’d ask the staff whether or not you gained any insights from this scenario analysis beyond just  how a different economic scenario plays out—did you gain any insights on what our individual policy reaction functions are.—because I thought Governor Yellen gave a very insightful speech last week where she pointed out that on the basis of the same economic outlook from our SEPs, you could come out in different places in terms of when you thought liftoff was.  If you’re using a Taylor (1993) response function, you’re much earlier than if you’re using a Taylor (1999) response function, and both are earlier than if you’re using an optimal control type of response.  And so it’s understanding that interplay between how the economy, downside risk, and that response function are playing out, plus how we’re thinking about it, that’s so fundamental to this.  If you have any insights, that would be great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is questioning whether the mention of "late 2014" is a forecast or a commitment, which indicates a difference of opinion or uncertainty. The speaker also references different policy response functions and suggests that different individuals may have different views on when liftoff should occur. This suggests a divergence of opinions or conflicting perspectives on the appropriate course of action.


Passage number 14.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I think the answer is, only to a very limited extent.  Essentially, we provided four data points, if you want, or four alternative scenarios, and then, as the answers to question 1 revealed, we also did not necessarily include all of the information that several participants would find critically important for saying anything about that. My impression is that the closest we come to this is this particular result that, despite the fact that the scenarios, as Vice Chairman Dudley pointed out, were relatively close to each other, actually they did elicit from many of the participants responses that they would change their views.  So you might see this as an indication that there is a fair degree of responsiveness to changes in economic conditions.  But I’m afraid that that’s about as far as you can go from what we have asked in these questions.  In order to get a better view on individual response functions, I think we would have to ask questions that would be much more pointed in that direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's impression and the limitations of the data provided.


Passage number 15.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply states "President Bullard."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 16.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I do have a few remarks on this exercise. First of all, I don’t think that this exercise, as constructed, would do very much to foster  transparency with the public regarding FOMC policy.  And so let me just elaborate on that for a minute.  This is 17 responses to four scenarios.  That’s a maze of 68 possibilities.  I don’t think that kind of information overload is very conducive to improving transparency.  If we actually went ahead with something like this, the number of scenarios would have to be expanded to encompass the full range of outcome uncertainty, but that would add to the information overload.  A lot of these comments actually echo Vice Chairman Dudley’s comments.  The information provided for each scenario is limited.  Normally, the Committee makes decisions based on a wide range of data from a wide range of sources. In principle, one would need a separate Tealbook for each scenario.  We would be saying, in effect, that we do not need all of that analysis to decide what to do in various states of the world.  That would simplify our meetings considerably.  I also think it’s an odd time to put heavy emphasis on the nature of the Committee’s interest rate feedback rule.  Adjustment of the policy rate has not been the primary tool of the Committee for years and likely will not be for years into the future. A better approach, I think, would be to get something like a monetary policy report.  Financial markets and other interested observers crave a digestible Fed view of the many issues that face the U.S. economy.  We could provide this by publishing a quarterly monetary policy report, as other central banks do.  A key advantage of a full report is that all of the important issues and uncertainties can be commented on in some way in the text.  This would provide a baseline both for members of this Committee and for outside observers.  To the extent that there are differing interpretations of events, this could also be noted and discussed in such a text.  The policy portion could be based on market expectations of policy at the time the report is produced.  This is what’s done at the Bank of England, for instance.  Alternative scenarios could also be discussed in a monetary policy report.  I think the United States is lagging behind other central  banks in providing such an assessment.  That would be a better way to go, in my view, as opposed to putting out this maze of information or core dump on what everybody is thinking about policy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Bullard expresses his disagreement and contention with the exercise that is being discussed. He explains why he believes that the exercise would not foster transparency with the public and suggests an alternative approach that he believes would be better.


Passage number 17.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard, how would you manage the input from the participants into the report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking President Bullard about his approach to managing input from participants into the report. There is no apparent contention or disagreement mentioned in this question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 18.
 MR. BULLARD.  It would be a staff report, and I think the Committee could comment, if it wanted to, on whether all of the points of view or all of the issues had been represented in the report.  But the report wouldn’t try to necessarily come down on every issue.  It could present different issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a potential for disagreement or contention in the passage as different Committee members may have different opinions on whether all points of view or issues have been represented in the report.


Passage number 19.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more information. The passage only mentions President Rosengren but does not provide any context or details about a specific topic or situation where there may be contention or disagreement.


Passage number 20.
 MR. ROSENGREN. I thought the exercise was quite interesting. I’m not sure it was clear to me how specific scenarios would help with communication, but it did raise two other thoughts as I was listening to your presentation.  One is whether you could just directly ask us what would be the inflation–unemployment combinations that would get us to tighten and what would be the inflation–unemployment combinations that would get us to ease.  Not so much for communication with the public but for communication with ourselves, it might be useful just to see the mappings that would get people to either tighten or ease. And the second observation was how we would ease.  We’ve mapped out in some detail how we would tighten.  How we would ease is a little less clear.  If you thought about something like a more severe scenario, like in the CCAR exercise or something like that, and made us think about what is the appropriate policy or combination of policies that we would think about and what the sequencing would be, that’s something we haven’t done yet—to address Vice Chairman Dudley’s comment that there are some downside risks.  So having some idea of what  combination of changing language and changing actions we would take in the event that we had more downside risk than we’re currently anticipating would be a second thing that I could imagine being useful—again, not so much as a communication tool, other than with people around the table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their thoughts and observations on the topic being discussed, but they do not express any disagreement or contention with the information presented.


Passage number 21.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Tarullo, without providing any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 22.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I begin from the premise that we’re going to need to do something about the SEP.  My scanning of the second set of results has reinforced that view.  I don’t know whether this is the right alternative, but I wanted first to comment on what Jim had said.  While I see the virtue of a monetary policy report, Jim, I’m not sure how much it’s going to communicate to the public if the views of the 17 people around the table are actually not particularly incorporated in it, because presumably what the public is most interested in is what they think the future path of policy would be.  And I was a bit surprised when you said you didn’t think there was enough data in there, because I had heard you consistently over the last couple of years to be arguing in favor of a more crisply stated reaction function, which one might understand a somewhat stylized scenario to provide.  So I don’t know if you wanted to comment on either of what may have been my misperceptions of what you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a response to a previous statement and there is no explicit disagreement stated.


Passage number 23.
 MR. BULLARD.  No, I’m definitely an advocate of state-contingent policy, but actually I was coming from your comment about not putting out too much information because it’s just confusing to the public.  But maybe people don’t see this as a communications exercise—more as an internal document.  So if you agree with Eric, he says, “Well, just ask everybody to write down a rule that most closely approximates what they would do.”  So you could definitely do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply offering his perspective and suggesting an alternative approach.


Passage number 24.
 MR. TARULLO.  I noted that Eric was moving in the direction of something that could be used for internal purposes.  That may be a good thing to do.  It wouldn’t solve what I think is the problem with the SEP, and I don’t know how broadly shared the view that the SEP is going to need some work will end up being.  But I hope we don’t—unless I’m a minority of one again—lose sight of the fact that we are putting this thing out now.  And based on at least my discussions with people outside the Fed after the last SEP was released, I do think we need to work on it some, because I’m not sure at this point that it’s clarifying as much as it is pushing more information out that’s hard to absorb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual expressing their opinion and hope for potential improvements in the release of the SEP (Summary of Economic Projections).


Passage number 25.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage "President Kocherlakota" does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement present. It only mentions the title of President Kocherlakota without any context or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 26.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thought there were a number of reasons why this kind of exercise could be helpful to us, and I was thinking about it largely for internal reasons, for fostering internal dialogue.  It encourages all of us to contemplate scenarios other than that in the staff’s outlook.  There’s a little bit of pushing in two different directions here.  I like Eric’s idea of how we would respond to different u’s and π’s.  I also like what the staff did in terms of eliciting what we would do in these various scenarios.  I thought it was interesting how sensitive people were to relatively small changes in scenarios.  That was the interesting piece of information, so maybe we should have scenarios that are small deviations, because that does tell us something. At the same time, I’m sympathetic to what the Vice Chairman said—that maybe we should have one or two extreme scenarios as well to think about.  So I would like to keep the small changes and then maybe add one or two that are the more extreme ones.  The problem with the u and π idea, I guess, is that you want to have some notion of how some people are going to be responding to the outlook.  It sounded like some people want to respond to a whole wide range of information beyond that.  But I don’t think these things aremutually exclusive.  We just don’t talk enough about any of this, and so maybe asking all of the participants, “What’s your closest approximation to what a Taylor-like rule would look like.” and then also going through this kind of scenario analysis—again, to foster internal dialogue— would be useful.  I personally would like to think that a high-level summary of this sort of discussion could eventually be part of the minutes—or maybe the ultimate dream of a monetary policy report, which President Bullard was offering. But even if we never share any of this with the public in any detail, it would be valuable for our own internal considerations. To be more specific, one thing I think would be helpful is, when changes are taking place in a reaction function, doing this kind of scenario analysis would really help structure those kinds of changes more than we currently do.  So what am I talking about here. If we go back and look at the Greenbook of January 2010, it was predicting the Committee would raise rates in late 2011, when unemployment was expected to be 8.2 percent and core inflation was expected to be 1.2 percent.  That was the staff’s forecast for what the Committee would do.  And so the current Tealbook estimates of the conditions surrounding liftoff are quite different from those that existed just over two years ago.  Now, this is not about whether this is a good thing or a bad thing.  There may well be good reasons why our reaction function—or the staff’s perception of our reaction, more correctly—should have changed in the last two years.  And there may be good reasons to change our reaction function in the future.  But I think we should be talking about these shifts when they’re taking place, and having this kind of scenario analysis—and the suggestion Eric made—would make us be more thorough and systematic about the costs and benefits of these kinds of shifts, as opposed to what happens now, which is that, by making decisions meeting to meeting, we end up implementing changes in our reaction function.  I would see this kind of scenario analysis taking place quarterly or semiannually, and it would   really facilitate exactly the kind of discussion I have in mind about, are we happy with our reaction function, or do we want to change it.  You don’t want to be changing it, obviously, every meeting, but when the circumstances require it, you might want to.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and ideas on the usefulness of conducting scenario analysis for fostering internal dialogue within the group. They mention different perspectives and ideas but there is no direct disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 27.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite statement of gratitude to Governor Duke.


Passage number 28.
 MS. DUKE.  I was just surprised by the suggestion of more divergent scenarios rather than less.  It seems to me that you would get more information if you kept narrowing the scenarios until you found that people didn’t react to them in some way as far as a change.  But that said, I thought it was really interesting. The results were really interesting—how closely everybody seemed to be aligned as far as when they would be inclined to shift policy.  And then one caveat is that I will confess I didn’t put nearly as much thought and angst into my answers to hypothetical scenarios as I do into making a real decision. Particularly if we were going to publicize it, it might not be quite so informative if we said what we would do, and then actually, when you get up to it, I’m not entirely sure that what we say we would do is actually what we would do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing her surprise and thoughts about the suggestion of more divergent scenarios, expressing her interest in the results, and acknowledging the potential limitations of hypothetical scenarios compared to real decision-making.


Passage number 29.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Other comments" is neutral and does not indicate any disagreement or contention. Additionally, the mention of President Evans without any context does not imply any disagreement either.


Passage number 30.
 MR. EVANS. I made a first intervention as a question, and I just want to be very clear that I certainly support the suggestion that we spend more time fleshing out what our individual policy reaction functions are.  I think the proposal that President Rosengren made is a good one—and others around the table.  How we come to some decision as to whether or not that’s a common policy rule, as President Kocherlakota was suggesting—we’ll have to talk about that a lot more, but I don’t hold out much hope that we have a common policy rule.  But understanding   that would be important for many of the reasons that Janet Yellen’s speech indicated.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Evans expresses support for spending more time on fleshing out individual policy reaction functions and agrees with the suggestion made by President Rosengren and others around the table. He also mentions that discussing the possibility of a common policy rule, as suggested by President Kocherlakota, would be important but expresses doubt about the likelihood of reaching a common policy rule.


Passage number 31.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I think it’s a good idea to follow different strategies or try different things to see what might work.  I guess I found this most useful in giving me some sense of what the thresholds might be for changing our overall stance-planning going forward. In that respect, it was very useful that these were all pretty realistic, broadly speaking, scenarios that we might in fact confront.  What I would suggest—and I didn’t hear a consistent message from around the table—is to try to maybe work backward for a little bit to think about how it might now be used.  And then perhaps the focus, it seems to me, would be on the internal deliberations first, and then work back and think about what using such things to inform the policy discussion might imply for the design of subsequent exercises.  Perhaps you could report to us just your general thinking on this before we do another exercise.  But I found it broadly useful.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own thoughts and suggestions on different strategies and how to approach future exercises.


Passage number 32.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I want to counter President Evans’s pessimism with some optimism of my own.  One of the things I took away from this is that—and you can see this from one of the charts on exhibit 1, the one on the right—I saw more commonality in response functions than I might have thought.  It’s not the same as my reaction function, in particular, but I thought there was more commonality of responses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 33.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I had that impression, too, and I was going to add that the estimates using the SEP of the Taylor-type reaction function is one way to look at that type of rule.  There were a lot of difficult econometric issues and so on—I understand that—but I thought that there was a reasonable amount of commonality there as well, and that some of the things we might discuss in June might give us a way to think about how to elicit that information from people and how to aggregate it.  So there are multiple ways we can go about this.  We can give some thought to an inflation report.  We already do, of course, a semiannual Monetary Policy Report. It would be interesting—maybe, President Bullard, you might have some thoughts about how the quarterly report would differ from the existing MPR. It might be a useful thing to discuss. Okay.  Well, this was useful.  I think most of us agree with Governor Tarullo that the SEP is still a work in progress, and we need to continue to figure out how best to use that vehicle, but I’m glad we’re taking some steps. Let me move on now to the next agenda item, which is “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations,” and I’ll turn it over to Brian Sack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses different ways of looking at a certain issue and makes suggestions for future discussion.


Passage number 34.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Brian, in figure 5 in exhibit 1, you attributed 50 to 70 basis points in the decline in 10-year yields to the rate guidance and, I think, to the maturity extension program. But if you look at figure 1 above, you see that essentially 100 percent of the decline occurred between July and October of last year, which was obviously before any of this was announced.  How do those two things fit together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 35.
 MR. SACK. That’s right.  In the middle of last year, you had several important events.  You had the “mid-2013” language implemented, and then in September, you had the maturity extension program and the reinvestment decision.  I think a lot of the decline in the middle of 2011 was in response to—or, in some cases, in anticipation of—those events.  What’s a little more puzzling is that you don’t see a big response, then, to the “late 2014” language that came in January, but of course, there were a lot of things going on at that time in terms of, perhaps, some reversal of flight-to-quality flows after the LTROs and so on.  So, of course, the regression is trying to parse all of these things out, but it’s not a perfect fit that gets every point of variation.  But in general, the regression looks at these factors and finds a significant effect for each of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Instead, it appears to be providing information and analysis on various events and their potential impact on market fluctuations.


Passage number 36.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There isn't enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 37.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I’d like to follow up on that, Mr. Chairman.  So SOMA holdings— presumably, you measure them in some way that lines up with when you expect the   announcement effect, or do you measure them via the September meeting announcement.  And the reason I ask is that I’m wondering how you identify separately the effect of a change in their anticipations of our SOMA holdings from that of a change in their anticipation of the path of the federal funds rate, which surely is influenced by an announcement that we deem the economy and the outlook would warrant a bunch of changes in our SOMA holdings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Lacker is questioning how the Federal Reserve identifies separately the effects of changes in market anticipation of SOMA holdings versus changes in anticipation of the federal funds rate. He suggests that the announcement of changes in SOMA holdings could influence expectations of the path of the federal funds rate.


Passage number 38.
 MR. SACK.  Right.  This is the result that was put in the Tealbook based on Board staff work, so I’m kind of speaking for Board staff.  We actually had a MarketSOURCE piece that presented similar material with a similar model, which I’ll come back to.  My understanding is that the SOMA holdings variable that was used is an actual measure of holdings in terms of 10-year equivalents.  So it’s intended to capture the amount of duration risk brought onto the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining their understanding of a specific variable.


Passage number 39.
 MR. LACKER. So when we buy them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement about buying something.


Passage number 40.
 MR. SACK.  When we buy them.  So over time, it’s going to capture the effects only when the actual balance sheet actions are realized. In practice, of course, what’s going to happen is, the market is going to anticipate those effects and move earlier.  So there’s going to be some timing mismatch, but the regression should still be able to sort out the effect. In the MarketSOURCE piece that we did, we included the actual holdings, and we included a forward-looking variable about the path of the balance sheet based on what I show in panel 6, and found a significant effect also associated with the expected path of the balance sheet; if you include that in the regression, it actually has a meaningful effect.  But of course, once it’s included, it reshuffles all the other effects.  So we end up with a story where policies overall are having the same magnitude of effect over this period, but it’s just attributing more to the anticipation of the balance sheet rather than the actual balance sheet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining how the market anticipates the effects of balance sheet actions and how including forward-looking variables in regression analysis can have a meaningful effect.


Passage number 41.
   MR. LACKER.  Fascinating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the statement "Fascinating" by Mr. Lacker.


Passage number 42.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Could I ask a follow-up question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage, as it is simply a request for permission to ask a follow-up question.


Passage number 43.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Interjection—Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes one word, "Interjection—Vice Chairman," which is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 44.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. How does the 45 percent probability of additional purchases fit into that regression.  Is that in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question seeking clarification about the inclusion of the 45 percent probability of additional purchases in a regression.


Passage number 45.
 MR. SACK. The panel to the right is an expected balance sheet path, and so the fact that those expectations have become positive is reflecting the anticipation of future policy actions. In our MarketSOURCE regression, it would be captured; in the regression presented in panel 5, it wouldn’t be—it would be an additional effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining two different regression models and how the effect mentioned would be captured in one model but not in the other.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions "President Bullard" without providing any context or information about any potential contention or disagreement. Without any additional details, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement within the passage.


Passage number 47.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Still on the same panel.  On July 29, a GDP report was issued.  It revised down U.S. GDP dramatically.  It showed that the recession was deeper than we thought and that the recovery was slower than we thought, and right after that, the Blue Chip forecast went down by about 1 percentage point, which is a huge thing in the Blue Chip.  So that’s one thing I often cite for this, both for panel 1 and for panel 5, but I don’t see it on this list. There could be some difficulties in disentangling the Committee’s response to that situation, as opposed to the actual deterioration in the outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating facts and discussing the potential difficulties in analyzing the Committee's response to the situation.


Passage number 48.
 MR. SACK.  Absolutely. I think that’s a good point.  What the panel says is that around 30 basis points came from the expected path of the federal funds rate.  It actually does not specifically try to identify what came from the shift in guidance versus what came just from the evolution of the economy and the perceived response to that.  So just to be clear, what we’re saying here is that we believe the policy guidance and the balance sheet played some role in affecting the expected path of the federal funds rate, in affecting rate uncertainty, and of course,  in affecting SOMA holdings.  But for the first two of those, the policy actions aren’t the complete story.  There are other things going on that are affecting the expected path of interest rates and the uncertainty around it.  So I don’t want people to add up the first three numbers and say, “Well, that is precisely the effect of our policy actions.”  That would be, obviously, too precise and, as we just said, those numbers involve other things.  What I’m trying to say is that I believe the guidance and the balance sheet actions have had a meaningful effect that is reflected in those first three numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining that while the policy guidance and balance sheet actions have had an effect on the expected path of the federal funds rate, there are other factors at play as well. The speaker is cautioning against attributing the entire effect solely to the policy actions.


Passage number 49.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given passage does not present any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 50.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement only mentions President Plosser without indicating any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 51.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I was going to ask the same question that President Bullard did for exactly the same reasons.  There was also the turmoil in Europe that was going on at the end of July, which was contributing to—and you’ve got that under flight to quality.  But I did want to expand on that with just one more question.  On the regression results, can you give me an idea of what the standard errors on these numbers are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a question being asked and a request for additional information.


Passage number 52.
 MR. SACK. I can give you a related piece of information, which is that the R-squared from the regression is 0.71.  So it actually has a lot of explanatory power over this period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage mentions a piece of information about the R-squared from the regression being 0.71 and its explanatory power over a certain period. There is no explicit disagreement or contention expressed in this passage.


Passage number 53.
 MR. PLOSSER. The real question is the identification of some of these things, rather than the overall R-squared—so, identifying the standard errors of these individual coefficients.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is discussing the importance of properly identifying individual coefficients' standard errors, rather than focusing solely on the overall R-squared.


Passage number 54.
 MR. SACK.  Oh, okay.  And on that, another related piece of information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement and a response.


Passage number 55.
 MR. PLOSSER.  It was a regression, wasn’t it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of information.


Passage number 56.
 MR. SACK.  The t statistics are very significant. To state the obvious, there’s a lot of uncertainty surrounding the estimates, and again, I don’t think we want to take the results reported in table 5 with too much precision.  They’re estimated imprecisely.  There are a variety of factors going into each variable.  Those points are all well understood.  But I would still argue strongly that what the Committee has done over the past year has played a very meaningful role in getting the 10-year Treasury yield down below 2 percent.  So that’s all I want to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the uncertainty surrounding the estimates but still argues that the Committee's actions have played a significant role in reducing the 10-year Treasury yield.


Passage number 57.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is insufficient information in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 58.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A question regarding panel 14.  I’d like to try to connect the dots between alternative A, which called for $400 billion of MEP in, I gather, maturities of four years or less. Panel 14 appears to show that the amount of three years or less is somewhat below $300 billion remaining, and then the amount of three to six years is quite substantial, actually.  So the question is about the practicability of $400 billion as in alternative A.  To what extent are we actually constrained if we were to consider another round of MEP, and what do you need to hold for normal open market operations in those maturity sectors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question regarding a specific panel and the feasibility of a certain amount of MEP, but there is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 59.
 MR. SACK. One of the points of the maturity extension program memo was to calibrate how much the staff feels could be done.  Obviously, a program of that nature is constrained by our holdings of short-term securities.  But the staff is comfortable with our ability to do another $400 billion program as long as the maturity of the securities sold is extended to four years.  So the bottom line is, essentially, with that extension to four years, we pick up a lot of capacity.  And of course, over time, we have securities marching down the yield curve so that some of what’s in the blue line is moving into the red line in any case.  Given the combination of those, we can get to $400 billion.  We could not do much more in the time horizon that was specified in the memo.  So there is a constraint there, but we could do the $400 billion. And I don’t see any significant operational consequences of having reduced our holdings sharply at the short end of the yield curve.  I think we always regarded the ability to sell short-term assets as a backup  draining plan in some sense.  If we were having trouble with the draining tools, of course, we could always sell assets, but if we sell shorter-term assets, we’re having less duration effect and just more reserve effects. We always regarded it in that way.  What these programs are doing is basically just taking advantage of that immediately rather than waiting to keep it as draining capacity in the future.  So I would say that’s the only operational consequence—that it reduces our ability later on to shrink the balance sheet through redemptions or through sales of the short-term securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily provides an explanation of the staff's perspective on the maturity extension program and the operational consequences of selling short-term assets.


Passage number 60.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, is expressing gratitude, which generally indicates agreement or appreciation.


Passage number 61.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Kocherlakota without providing any additional information that could indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 62.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, you’ll be glad to know that I want to go back to panel 4. I have a question about statements like the one the Committee made in January, with the longer forward guidance.  Outside observers have expressed a concern that those kinds of statements have two kinds of interpretations built into them.  One is that the Committee now sees the economy as doing rather poorly, and the other interpretation is, really the Committee hasn’t changed its views about what the economy is doing, but they just want to provide more stimulus.  So those are going to be somewhat offsetting.  Has the staff thought about how there might be a way to sort out between those two kinds of forces going on in that kind of forward guidance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification from the staff.


Passage number 63.
 MR. SACK. First of all, I think it’s, obviously, a very important distinction, and the extent to which that information can be communicated is very important.  The piece of evidence that we have that addresses that, I think, is the dealer survey that we presented at the last briefing, where it showed the perceived thresholds for the liftoff in the federal funds rate.  So you’re asking, are we talking about movements along that schedule or a shift in that schedule.And one thing I showed in that briefing is that after the longer guidance came in, actually that schedule shifted down.  So there was some perception, at least partly, that the rate effect was coming from a shift in the reaction function.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the importance of communication and referring to a dealer survey as evidence.


Passage number 64.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thank you.  That was very helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Kocherlakota found the information helpful.


Passage number 65.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 66.
 MS. DUKE.  Brian, when you talk about the MarketSOURCE piece, I’m not sure I’m looking at the same one, but the one I’m looking at, if I’m reading it correctly, talks about the likely movement in response to changing the liftoff date to mid-2014 from late 2014.  And the way I read that was that it would be expected to increase 10-year Treasury yields by 20 basis points, with half of that coming from the change in the liftoff date and the other half coming from a reduction in estimates of further balance sheet movement. So I’m trying to understand— because that ends up being more powerful than the estimate of an additional LSAP in the other memo—how much of it may be a reversal of some of the anticipation of additional LSAP that’s already somehow priced into the markets.  And would you expect that to be the same for the first two-quarter move versus another two-quarter move versus another two-quarter move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Duke is simply trying to understand the information and asking for clarification.


Passage number 67.
 MR. SACK. Just to be clear, in terms of the results that are comparable to panel 5, I was actually talking about a different MarketSOURCE piece called “Why Are Treasury Term Premia So Low.” which has a similar regression model to this.  But the piece you brought up is another important one, I think.  And that’s right; that piece was, first of all, just trying to map financial conditions into this liftoff date to give us a metric for thinking about whether a one- or two-quarter increment—is that a big policy increment or not.  But it ended up making this additional point that I think is very important, which is connected to what I was showing in panel 6: The liftoff date is going to have a larger effect on financial conditions because the exit guidance has  tied the balance sheet timing to that date, to the pattern of the federal funds rate.  And of course, the staff believes that the term premium effects are based on a forward-looking, anticipated path of the balance sheet. So that piece has an estimate in it that says, well, basically, changes in the liftoff date are essentially twice as powerful as you would have if the only consequence was the path of the federal funds rate.  And of course, if that’s true, policymakers would want to take that into consideration in adjusting that date.  So it’s interesting.  That adjustment is very different than other adjustments, like the slope of the policy path after that, because that one, the timing to liftoff, has a lot attached to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing various pieces of research and their findings, and offering their own analysis and interpretation of those findings.


Passage number 68.
 MS. DUKE.  There was a big “if” in your answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply referring to a condition or qualification in the previous answer without expressing disagreement or argument.


Passage number 69.
 MR. SACK.  Well, right.  Following on our previous discussion, these are estimates, so there’s a lot of uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging that the estimates being discussed have a certain degree of uncertainty.


Passage number 70.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman, do you have an interjection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question being asked to the Vice Chairman, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 71.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question.  I’ll wait my turn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the speaker has a question and is willing to wait their turn to ask it.


Passage number 72.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "Okay" at the beginning suggests agreement or acceptance, and "President Plosser" is a neutral statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 73.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I just want to follow up on this particular topic.  And, Mr. Chairman, this goes back to your comment earlier.  We moved the forward guidance out by 18 months in January.  And I look at your chart, panel 1—I don’t see anything that looks like what we did in August in terms of effects.  Now you’re telling me that if we pull it back by six months, we’re going to get a much larger effect. I’m just trying to understand how this works, how we come up with these numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and trying to understand how the numbers were calculated.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 74.
 MR. SACK. Here we’re talking about a full surprise.  So, first of all, the move by 18 months wasn’t a full surprise.  There was some expectation that it was going to be longer— not 18 months longer, but somewhat.  There actually is a downward movement in response that  you saw in financial markets.  Clearly, implied volatility responded and Treasury yields responded, and you can see it on the chart.  You just need a magnifying glass to see it. [Laughter] It’s that little notch down in January.  But I agree with the general sentiment that, given the way that was interpreted and the effects it seemed to have on expectations and volatility, especially effects on volatility and the balance sheet path, you would have expected to see a bigger effect.  So I take that on board.  But the move did affect markets, and I think what this says is that it just had a lot of effect through the expected funds rate path and maybe a little bit of effect through the term premium.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there was some expectation regarding the length of the move, but disagrees with the assumption that there should have been a bigger effect on the markets. The speaker believes that the move did affect markets, but primarily through the expected funds rate path and possibly a small effect on the term premium.


Passage number 75.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 76.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  On chart 18, you asked this question in the primary dealer survey about how much the unemployment rate and the inflation rate would have to change to induce a change in the forward guidance.  These seem to be pretty large relative to what we showed in our scenario analysis or what the SEP results suggest.  What should we draw from that distinction, if anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The person mentions that the unemployment rate and inflation rate mentioned in the primary dealer survey are significantly different from what was shown in the scenario analysis and SEP results. They question the implications of this distinction, if any.


Passage number 77.
 MR. SACK. I agree that they look large.  Let me focus on the policy guidance piece.  It certainly looks large relative to the idea that the Committee is, say, following Taylor (1999) and is willing to make one- or two-quarter adjustments in that date.  So essentially, ½ percentage point on the unemployment rate, as everyone understands, would be worth 100 basis points on the level of the funds rate under Taylor (1999).  The slope of the futures curve out there, and the slope of a lot of surveys, is less than 100 basis points.  So that should actually be something like a four-quarter shift, which seems like a very large increment relative to a reasonable increment for adjusting this date.  What I infer from that is that the market doesn’t think that liftoff date is simply driven by a reaction function like Taylor (1999), that they’re seeing some kind of   additional stickiness for the liftoff date in the reaction function.  Of course, we didn’t ask about the reasons, but there are a variety of reasons that that could be the case, such as asymmetric risks or commitment strategy, and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 78.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It does suggest, then, that the market will be somewhat surprised by the SEP results, because if you look at those results, the central tendency for 2014 really doesn’t change at all. It changes so marginally relative to this.  So taking this and combining with the SEP results, presumably the market would think that there was less stickiness. Is that a fair inference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario and asks whether it is a fair inference.


Passage number 79.
 MR. SACK.  Right—subject to the caveat that at the moment, it’s very complicated how the market sees the SEP versus the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of someone's opinion regarding the complexity of the market's perception of the SEP versus the statement.


Passage number 80.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since the passage is not provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 81.
 MR. SACK. If there was a change in the date in the statement given the change in the forecast presented in the SEP, it would be very surprising in light of the survey results.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. It simply states that it would be surprising if there was a change in the date given the survey results and the forecast presented in the SEP.


Passage number 82.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Right.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Right. Thanks" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply conveys agreement or acknowledgement.


Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions President Rosengren without discussing any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 84.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  My question is on panel 17.  We’ve had several comments highlighting problems with standard errors and implications of a weaker economy when we try to look at the effects of various policy changes.  But I was struck by how high the probabilities were for these, and I was wondering—to get a better sense of if we were to need to do further easing—when you asked this question, did they provide commentary on both the costs and benefits of each of these options.  My own view is, I’ve been actually surprised by how effective using language has been. I don’t know, when you talk about changing rate guidance here, whether that’s moving a date, whether it’s greater commitment—exactly what the question wason changing rate guidance.  But I wonder whether they gave you any more qualitative information that would give you a sense of why they pick one or the other.  And do I view these as independent or joint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is asking a question and expressing their own view, but there is no conflict or disagreement present.


Passage number 85.
 MR. SACK. We don’t know their joint distribution.  So we realized, among other things, that we can’t answer the question “What’s the perceived probability of no balance sheet action.” because some respondents could have expected increased duration and balance sheet expansion together.  I think in the next survey, we’ll try to correct that.  And your other specific question— the rate guidance question is not specific about a date. It’s just specific about a change to the guidance on the federal funds rate in the FOMC statement. I don’t think we get a great sense from the responses of some of the qualitative considerations you raised.  But my impression is that there are higher odds on balance sheet action than on rate guidance if further easing were warranted, because of how aggressive and far out the date has been pushed—that there is a sense that it’s difficult to give guidance about 2015 or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the limitations and shortcomings of their survey methodology and acknowledging the need for improvement in future surveys. They also express their own impression based on the responses, but there is no conflicting opinion or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 86.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Diminishing returns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "diminishing returns" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a concept that refers to a decrease in additional benefit or value gained from an input or effort. It is a commonly accepted concept in economics and does not inherently involve any disagreement or debate.


Passage number 87.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  But there are other options besides moving out the date.  You could make it very firm guidance that says, absolutely under no circumstances will we do anything out to this date, which might be a date earlier than the other date, for example.  You could think of a number of ways to increase the amount of commitment if we so chose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While Mr. Rosengren suggests exploring other options, there is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage. The passage simply presents alternative suggestions for increasing commitment without any conflicting opinions expressed.


Passage number 88.
 MR. SACK.  You could.  You could have a stronger commitment, or you could have more information on the conditioning thresholds.  However, the Committee hasn’t done either of those and, I think, has emphasized some of the shortcomings of an absolute date commitment. So it doesn’t seem as though market participants are looking for those changes.  They’re looking for more information over time about the reaction function, but I’m not sure they’re so confidentthey’re going to get it in the FOMC statement.  My guess is, in general, that the question about changing rate guidance is mainly seen as a question about moving the date in and out in its current form.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing possible changes that could be made regarding rate guidance, but states that the Committee has not made any of those changes and it does not seem like market participants are expecting those changes either. The speaker offers their own guess that changing rate guidance is mainly seen as a question about moving the date in and out in its current form.


Passage number 89.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions for Brian.  [No response] If not, I need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations.  Without objection. The other thing that Brian proposed is the annual renewal of the swap agreements with Canada and Mexico.  These are small swap agreements that we’ve renewed for quite a few years. We need to do this now if it’s going to be effective for 2013.  Are there questions or comments for Brian.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It mainly consists of statements about proposed actions and a request for questions or comments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 90.
 MR. LACKER.  On the swap lines, consistent with long-standing principle, I oppose these swap lines.  They represent, in both their origins and their rationale, supporting machinery for two purposes.  One is foreign exchange operations, which, as I’ve said before, I believe are inappropriate.  They’re redundant, they have been abandoned by modern central banks around the globe, and they threaten our independence under our system of governance since they’re always in conjunction with the U.S. Treasury.  Moreover, the second purpose would be to channel intergovernmental assistance to our fine NAFTA partners.  Deserving as they might be of that assistance, that’s a fiscal policy function that I think is best left to fiscal authorities.  So for those reasons, I would oppose the swap lines.  I’d urge you and the staff to begin now to negotiate their dissolution.  But barring that, I’ll vote against them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, expresses disagreement with the concept of swap lines and argues against their continuation. He provides reasons, such as redundancy, threats to independence, and the opinion that intergovernmental assistance is best handled by fiscal authorities.


Passage number 91.
 [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I hope the Bank of Japan doesn’t hear about this modernity issue that you’ve raised.  Any other comments or questions.  [No response] All right.  Without objection, except for President Lacker.  Okay.  Yes.  All right.  Thank you. Let’s move on now to the “Economic and Financial Situation,” and I’ll turn to David Wilcox.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The mentions of laughter and lack of response indicate a lighthearted and agreeable atmosphere.


Passage number 92.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  We’ll now have questions for any or all of our four presenters; all of you were very good.  Following that, consistent with our past practice, there will be an opportunity for anybody who wants to dig deeper into any of the financial stability issues or to raise any financial stability issues that have not been covered and that we should be discussing.  So let me start first with Qs and As.  Any questions for our staff. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 93.
 MR. FISHER.  Let me ask Steve Kamin—you mentioned a number on exports, which was higher than I expected.  What did you say our exports are year-to-date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply asking for clarification on the information shared by Steve Kamin regarding exports.


Passage number 94.
   MR. KAMIN.  Well, the exports number that I cited in my discussion was the first-quarter annual growth rate of 6.3 percent. That’s a solid number.  It’s actually well up from the much lower 2¾ percent rate at which our exports were growing in the fourth quarter.  The first-quarter number is a little bit downward revised from what we had earlier.  And then, going forward, we’re looking at growth that’s in that same neighborhood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and discussing statistics related to exports growth rates. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 95.
 MR. FISHER.  And, second, I noticed you didn’t talk about the French election.  I have a question, which is, as we saw in Brazil, isn’t it possible that if we have what some people consider an adverse outcome, we might end up with a Lula who actually happens to be a positive.  Do you have any thoughts on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 96.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, I think it’s certainly an important consideration.  Just to fill in the background, as is well understood, François Hollande, who basically was the top vote getter in the runoff election in France after Sarkozy, is well favored to win the regular elections that are coming down the pike.  He’s been quite critical of the austerity policies, both those in France and those that are contained in the fiscal pact, and, in principle, could be expected, if he were to significantly water down the French commitment to its own fiscal consolidation and to the multilateral EU-wide fiscal disciplines.  That might be understood as something that could undermine investor confidence in the region and could be very problematic.  So, clearly, the political situation in France poses additional uncertainty.  But that said, looking at the specifics, what Hollande has been apparently most focused on is the fact that one needs growth-promoting measures, in addition to just austerity, and that’s hardly an unwelcome message; that’s actually appropriate.  And as you’ve pointed out, we’ve had situations in the past where politicians who were seen as problematic, once they come into power, adopt more-prudent policies and actually   are quite supportive.  So I think the situation is more uncertain, but we’re definitely taking a wait-and-see approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing additional information and discussing different perspectives on the situation in France.


Passage number 97.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only shows gratitude or appreciation towards Mr. Fisher.


Passage number 98.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The Federal Reserve is officially neutral, however.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. It simply states a fact about the Federal Reserve being officially neutral.


Passage number 99.
 MR. FISHER.  I noticed that.  Can we comment on Nellie now, or do we wait.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is simply making an observation and asking for confirmation or clarification on the topic of discussing Nellie.


Passage number 100.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s wait.  Let’s have the questions first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both statements are amicable and suggest patience and a logical order of events.


Passage number 101.
 MR. FISHER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or disagreement. It simply states "Okay" in response to what someone must have said previously, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 102.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot provide an answer to this question as the passage is incomplete. It does not provide any information or context to indicate whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 103.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to ask the staff about inflation forecasts and economic capacity measures.  The Tealbook has had a string of misses on inflation over the last year or so.  In December of 2010, you were forecasting 1.1 percent for overall for 2011. The latest estimate is 2.7.  And it’s not just energy prices.  On core, you were forecasting 0.9 percent, and it came in at 1.8.  So I raise this with all due sympathy for anyone asked to forecast on a regular basis.  People like that deserve our sympathy and our support.  But I ask because, as you know, around the table, many of us bring very different frameworks to bear on the relationship between inflation and capacity.  So the view—I’ll call it view 1—is that the natural rate or measure of capacity is a very smooth variable.  And as a result, the gap is quite large now, and the gap has large effects on your inflation forecast, as is clear from your text.  This is illustrated very nicely in the box on pages 24 and 25 of the Tealbook A.  And there it shows your estimate of potential output, which has been revised downward over the last several years, at least the projection of it going forward, but it’s still a very smooth time series.  You also present NAIRU as an alternative estimate of economic capacity, and it, too, is very smooth. View 2, you might call it, is that the natural rate responds to all of the shocks that affect  economic production and economic demand and ought to be expected to vary at high frequencies.  This is a point that’s been argued forcefully by Professor Michael Woodford.  It’s a point that’s embodied in all of the DSGE models that we use in the DSGE exercise that’s conducted for periodic meetings. So I have a two-part question.  One is, on what do you rest your a priori weight you give to the smoothness of capacity measures.  And the second is, have your misses been leading you to move at all from view 1 in the direction of view 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is pointing out the staff's string of misses on inflation forecasts and questioning their reliance on smooth capacity measures. The speaker presents two different views on the relationship between inflation and capacity and asks the staff to explain their a priori weight given to the smoothness of capacity measures. This suggests that there is disagreement or a difference in perspectives on how to approach forecasting and understanding inflation and capacity.


Passage number 104.
 MR. WILCOX.  I guess I’d feel more compelled to express an opinion about our moving away from view 1 if I thought that we had adhered to view 1 before. I’m not quite sure—let me begin by referring you to page 32 in the Tealbook A, which shows the evolution of the forecasts.  And as you quite rightly point out, the trend in our inflation projection has been upward over the last more than a year.  I would, however, draw the contrast between the top panel and the middle panel.  The top panel shows that our estimates of GDP growth have been trending downward over that same period.  But the unemployment rate projections shown in the middle panel have been roughly trendless.  And, in particular, for us, a pretty important date is late 2010, which is the time when we last adjusted our assumptions about the long-run NAIRU and the supply parameters of the labor market. On net, the adjustments that we’ve made to the supply side and, in particular, to our gap measure have been to potential GDP—and, broadly speaking, have brought that measure into line with our assessment of resource slack as calibrated by the difference between the unemployment rate and the NAIRU. We put in place our NAIRU assumptions in late 2010.  Thus far, we haven’t seen any evidence that compels us to move off of those assumptions.  That could emerge.  For example, as I mentioned in my text, we’ve got the long-run NAIRU at some point coming back down to something like its pre-crisis level.  We   have 5¼ percent penciled in for the moment.  I don’t know what the timing of that return of labor market functioning is.  We pushed it off into the reasonably distant future.  That gets under way in our projection in 2015.  If you were going to take one measure of resource slack to the proverbial desert island, I would recommend that you take the difference between the unemployment rate and the NAIRU.  And as you can see there, whether it’s by luck—I happen to think, on behalf of my colleagues, that there is a modicum of skill involved—those have been roughly trendless over that period. Now, the relevance of this to the inflation projection:  This resource utilization, or slack, is one critical component by which this policymaking body exerts influence over inflation.  But if I did a variance decomposition for you of inflation, it does not figure very prominently in inflation outcomes.  It’s just simply a misconception that this is a primary determinant of inflation outcomes.  And I think Bob Tetlow did a variance decomposition some years ago that suggested that resource utilization accounts for something in the neighborhood of 15 or 20 percent of the forward variance of inflation outcomes—something like that. So inflation is difficult to forecast for sure, but this is one variable among many that are important in determining inflation outcomes.  That’s why I wanted to draw that point out—for the sake of clarity about our analytical framework and the degree to which we think resource utilization plays a role in inflation determination.  We think it has a tremendously important role in Committee thinking and policymaking, partly through inflation but also by dint of the other leg of the mandate.  So, obviously, it has tremendous importance to all of you quite aside from its role in inflation determination.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 105.
 MR. LACKER.  If I could follow up, Mr. Chairman.  I intended to try to draw you out on the observation that in many Tealbooks, you’ve said you expected—over this period I cite—   slack to be large and to hold down inflation.  Inflation wasn’t held down by as much as you expected, and I wondered if that led you to question the economic relevance of your measure of slack or whether slack was as large. That was what I was trying to get at.  So you can be unrepentant—that’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply trying to further understand the chairman's views and is not expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 106.
 MR. WILCOX.  That statement remains an accurate characterization.  We still think slack is significant, roughly 2 percentage points as measured by the unemployment rate.  We still think that’s playing an important role against a backdrop of stable inflation expectations.  We still think that slack is playing an important role in holding down inflation outcomes.  As that slack diminishes, we think that that’s going to release some of that downward pressure on inflation.  So that has been our narrative.  It probably is the case that we have adjusted the slope of our Phillips curve from several years ago and made that even flatter. I suspect that’s probably true, although I don’t have that empirical fact at my fingertips.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their beliefs and observations about the role of slack in the economy and its impact on inflation. They mention that they have adjusted their understanding of the Phillips curve, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 107.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states that the speaker thanked Mr. Lacker without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 108.
 MR. WILCOX.  But let me just add—we, too, have a DSGE model that we follow, among other empirical frameworks.  At times, it’s had really strikingly divergent points of view.  We have a coherent empirical framework. DSGE models are an alternative approach. I have not seen credible evidence in real time that there is an alternative empirical framework that offers superior forecasting performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they have a DSGE model that they follow and have had divergent points of view at times. They also mention that they have not seen credible evidence of an alternative empirical framework that offers superior forecasting performance. This passage does not involve any contradictory opinions or arguments.


Passage number 109.
 MR. LACKER.  Can I comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 110.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Just one thing—this is building on what David said.  There’s the DSGE models update that was distributed to the Committee that Mike Dotsey did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a fact about a DSGE models update that was distributed to the Committee by Mike Dotsey. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 111.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  It doesn’t have the natural rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not imply any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Yes" in response to an unspecified statement or question.


Passage number 112.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, there are four DSGE models.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the existence of four DSGE models without expressing disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
  They all have—MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know, but they don’t publish the natural rate.  The natural rate is not in there in these.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The disagreement is evident when Mr. Lacker interrupts and states that the natural rate is not included in what "they" publish.


Passage number 114.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  But the inflation forecast is in all of those published DSGE projections—the median for 2014 is 1.5 percent.  The highest, Philly’s, is 1.7 percent.  You’re correct, but the point is that they can have—I assume all of them do; I know EDO does— different measures of what slack is. EDO’s is less than the staff’s estimate of slack.  Even if you put it on the same conceptual basis, it’s less.  But the models have inflation forecasts, all four of them, that are very, very mild.  I’m saying that this is just to underscore David’s point, which is that there is a loose connection, shall we say, between various measures of slack and what the inflation forecast might be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing different measures of slack and their connection to inflation forecasts.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 115.
 MR. LACKER.  I’d point out that the DSGE models—as I understand those exercises, we run those models clean, right. We take the data that we have, and then we run them out.  You couldn’t do that, I would guess, with FRB/US.  And you don’t report to us forecasts that represent taking FRB/US through current data and just running it with no adjustments. What you give us—and this is what we expect from you—is a combination of information gleaned from various sources, including model projections, but it’s a judgmental forecast.  And that’s not what we get from the DSGE exercises. We get a mechanical projection that’s devoid of any of the judgmental inputs you provide.  So it’s not quite an apples-to-apples comparison there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing disagreement or contention with the way the DSGE models work compared to the FRB/US models. He argues that the DSGE models are mechanical projections devoid of judgmental inputs, while the FRB/US models provide a combination of information from various sources, including model projections and judgmental forecast.


Passage number 116.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Maybe we could go to President Rosengren.  Did you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests the possibility of seeking help from President Rosengren and the speaker asks if there is a question. There is no indication of conflicting opinions or disagreement.


Passage number 117.
 MR. ROSENGREN. I was actually going to make the same point—that the DSGE models have tended to be actually lower than the Tealbook forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Rosengren and the speaker (not identified in the given passage) agree that the DSGE models have tended to be lower than the Tealbook forecast.


Passage number 118.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans, you had an interjection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that someone had an interjection.


Passage number 119.
   MR. EVANS.  Yes. What I got out of Jeff’s point was, there have been a lot of surprises in terms of what the inflation projections have been.  I think if we went back to earlier in this cycle, we’d say we were surprised on the downside in 2009 as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the speaker's understanding of a point made by Jeff and adds a personal opinion about previous surprises during a specific time period.


Passage number 120.
  But I’m reminded of one of the strong contributions from the Minneapolis Fed research department several years ago where they—I’m blanking on who did this— MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Atkeson–Ohanian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply recalling a contribution made by the Minneapolis Fed research department and momentarily forgets the names of the individuals involved.


Passage number 121.
 MR. EVANS. —Atkeson–Ohanian, who said inflation is just very difficult to forecast, and it tends to be a surprise.  I have always thought that it would be fascinating if we went around the table and described a little better all of our methods for inflation determination, what we bring to bear in thinking about this.  But as I’ve looked at the Tealbook forecasts, I’ve always thought that they were about as good as anything I could write down, although I usually write down something a little bit different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Evans acknowledges that Atkeson-Ohanian believes inflation is difficult to forecast and tends to be a surprise. He also expresses his admiration for the Tealbook forecasts, stating that they are about as good as anything he could write down, although with slight differences. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 122.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage contains an indication of laughter, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 123.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Two-hander there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no indication of any contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Two-hander there" seems to be a straightforward observation or comment without any evident conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 124.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context in the given passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 125.
 MR. BULLARD.  Just to follow up on this—David, you might have said, “Well, statistically there hasn’t been a surprise.”  So I don’t know if inflation has been a surprise, but maybe not in the context of the total amount of uncertainty that surrounds all of these variables.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply an acknowledgement of different viewpoints or perspectives.


Passage number 126.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t know for sure.  Consistent with much of the earlier discussion surrounding Brian Sack’s briefing, boy, the confidence intervals are really, really wide.  So I don’t know whether we’ve had a statistically significant deviation from prediction.  It looks to me as though we’re up about a percentage point, and that looks to me as though that’s probably going to be within any reasonable confidence error.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating their uncertainty and inability to determine a statistically significant deviation from prediction based on the wide confidence intervals.


Passage number 127.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the given passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 128.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Dave, again to you—I need a little help in grasping the inference from the discussion in the Tealbook and your discussion of the fiscal drag and the “Fiscal Cliff” scenario.  If I read correctly, the Tealbook 2013 real GDP projection is 2¾ percent, and that involves an assumption of some fiscal drag.  And then I think the “Fiscal Cliff” discussion of an alternative scenario says it could equal as much as a 1 percent reduction in GDP.  So am I right to think that the underlying strength of the economy, if you assumed heroically that the Congress acted, would be as much as 3¾ percent in 2013, which is quite a steep improvement in GDP growth.  Help me understand all of that, if you would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lockhart is simply seeking clarification and understanding from the person he is addressing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 129.
 MR. WILCOX.  Okay.  As I mentioned yesterday at the Board briefing, we operate under the tyranny of having to write something down.  But, boy, if macroeconomic forecasting is a shot in the dark, then I don’t know what political forecasting is.  So, broadly, the spirit of what we tried to do was to get fiscal policy one step down the road toward a sustainable area.  Now, even in our baseline assumption, fiscal policy is not yet sustainable, even with that substantial tightening.  That said, in the baseline, we assumed that the 2001and 2003 tax cuts are extended and that the stimulus measures are allowed to expire—the payroll tax cuts and the emergency unemployment benefits. With that set of assumptions, our measure of fiscal impetus, which is the direct effect of discretionary fiscal policy on GDP growth, has a contractionary impulse of about 1 percentage point. Implicit in that is an assumption, maybe a hope—I don’t know, perhaps a prayer—that the Congress won’t allow every contractionary action to go into force that might go into force.  And, in particular, what they forestall in our baseline assumption is, they prevent the automatic sequestration budget cuts to spending from taking full effect, and they extend the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts, which, under current law, are scheduled to expire. If they  can’t get themselves organized to do that, then there would be additional tax payments to the U.S. Treasury amounting to about 2 percentage points of GDP—additional, incremental, to our baseline forecast.  We’ve assumed that GDP growth won’t slow to the full extent of that 2 percentage points of GDP, only by about half of that amount, because households, we think, will react as they usually do by smoothing through what they are likely to perceive as, certainly, a sudden change in their cash flow.  So we think that the additional decrement to GDP growth is likely to be about 1 percentage point in that case.  But surrounding all of that, boy, there would sure be a lot of Sturm und Drang about whether our political system can get its act together and that sort of thing.  And we’ve seen in recent episodes in the past that that can have quite significant effects on household and business confidence.  We wanted to put this “Fiscal Cliff” scenario in the Tealbook to elevate it for your attention.  But, gee, whether we’ve got the numbers right or not is really anybody’s guess.  I think that probably what I’d bank my wallet on is, I’d take a line through the numbers and just write in the words “consequences likely to be very significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that political forecasting is difficult and uncertain, stating that "whether we've got the numbers right or not is really anybody's guess." This implies that there is contention or disagreement about the accuracy of the predictions and the potential consequences of the fiscal cliff scenario.


Passage number 130.
” MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply shows gratitude and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  David, I heard a different question.  Maybe you can correct me.  The drag in 2013 is 1 percentage point, right.  And in 2012, it’s about what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a conversation where one person is seeking clarification on a specific question or topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
 MR. WILCOX.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The use of the honorific "Mr." suggests a formal or respectful tone, which is often associated with disagreement or potential conflict.


Passage number 133.
  Zero, because in the “Fiscal Cliff,” we haven’t assumed any— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, but the overall fiscal drag.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Zero, because in the 'Fiscal Cliff,' we haven't assumed any—" suggests that there is no assumption made, while "but the overall fiscal drag" simply adds additional information without contradicting the previous statement.


Passage number 134.
 MR. WILCOX.  Oh, it’s about ¼ percentage point for consolidated government at all levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a specific statistic about consolidated government at all levels without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  So if we abstract from all the fiscal influence, then your estimate of GDP growth in 2012 is 2.5 plus 0.25, or 2.75, and in 2013 it’s 2.8 plus 1.0, or   .8. So I think what I thought I heard, and maybe I misunderstood, was that, ignoring fiscal conditions for a minute, the underlying private sector seems to be accelerating by 1 full percentage point between 2012 and 2013.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing and clarifying what they believe they heard, but there is no disagreement present.


Passage number 136.
 MR. LOCKHART.  That was my question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that the speaker, Mr. Lockhart, has a question.


Passage number 137.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I thought the sense of the question was, what’s happening in the private sector that is that powerful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is reflecting on their own interpretation of the question and explaining their understanding of what it is asking.


Passage number 138.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think what’s happening in the private sector is—well, this is a little bit of a difficult conceptual experiment to imagine because we’re going to take away a big source of fiscal drag, which is probably one of the motivations why you all, for example, have adopted as accommodative a stance of monetary policy as you have.  But if we grant that, then what we’re seeing is, sure, 3.8 looks like a pretty significant, substantial step-up from what we’ve had, but we think the economy is progressing.  We think we’re moving through some of the issues that have presented substantial headwinds in the past, and if you can conceive of financial conditions, including monetary policy, remaining as accommodative as what we have in the baseline despite the absence of that huge amount of fiscal drag, then we think that, at that point, yes, we’re making progress.  Consumer sentiment is not yet robust by anybody’s description, but it has come up.  We think we’re beginning to see some signs of progress in housing markets.  It’s early, tentative, and reversible thus far, but it’s pretty eye-catching that we’ve had some house price increases.  We think that financial conditions otherwise are pretty accommodative, that credit outside the mortgage credit area is pretty well available, especially to creditworthy borrowers.  And so without this additional fiscal drag of 1 percentage point, I don’t know how strong it would be, but a pretty substantial improvement in the economy, I think, would ensue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their viewpoint and discussing the potential positive impacts on the economy if the fiscal drag is removed. They mention progress in consumer sentiment, housing markets, and availability of credit.


Passage number 139.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President George.


Passage number 140.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question was for Nellie on exhibit 3, about the vulnerabilities associated with low interest rates with financial institutions. I see that our portfolio banks may be taking on maturity risk, but for pension funds and insurance companies, do you have a sense of the types of risk assets they may be moving into at this stage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply seeking information and clarification on a specific topic.


Passage number 141.
 MS. LIANG.  I should start by saying that we’re at the front end of this work and we’re drawing on lots of people and expertise around the System and outside the Fed System.  So insurance companies—the key would be the life insurance companies that might have some type of annuity product with a minimum-guaranteed kind of return that they can’t alter.  Some of those institutions have incentives to take on assets to produce returns.  We haven’t seen a lot yet.  One reason is that the assets they hold are long term.  So they tend to hold lots of corporate bonds and lots of equities.  And those corporate bonds that they have on their balance sheets are still paying relatively high returns.  But their spreads are starting to compress.  So over the last 10 years, they earned a spread of about 1½ percent, and it’s contracting down to 1 percent.  A Moody’s study suggested that many of the large institutions wouldn’t get really pushed for about five years based on asset turnover.  But we are trying to do a little work on that.  Some firms can add a little bit of return with securities lending.  That’s one concern people are worried about.  But the aggregates aren’t showing very much pickup there.  We will come back to this—it’s a high priority.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about the current situation and some concerns, but there is no clear contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 142.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Thank you" is a polite response and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 143.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, maybe this is a good point to have any interjections or comments on financial stability.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement by President Lockhart about potentially inviting interjections or comments on financial stability. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 144.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I was just going to follow up. I’m under the impression that the insurance companies are quite constrained in taking on new risk by state regulation.  Most of   them are state regulated, and most of them have a pretty heavy constraint on what they can do in terms of, at least, securities that involve more risk. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question seeking clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 145.
 MS. LIANG.  I think that’s correct, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 146.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, it cannot be determined. The passage only provides the name "President Rosengren," but there is no additional context or information about the person's actions or statements to ascertain if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 147.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I had two questions on financial stability.  First of all, thank you for the very comprehensive, 149-page document.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing gratitude and acknowledging the length of a document.


Passage number 148.
  [Laughter] I did find that quite useful— MR. TARULLO.  Careful what you ask for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of "[Laughter]" suggests that the statement made by Mr. Tarullo was meant to be humorous or lighthearted.


Passage number 149.
 MR. ROSENGREN. —and quite wide ranging.  And I also appreciate getting it a little bit earlier than all of the other documents so we actually had time to read it.  So thank you for the report and the memo.  The first question relates to the very last thing you had in that 149-page report, which focused on broker–dealers and, I thought, was an exceptional presentation.  And a couple of things that I took from that—when I look at the list of the largest broker–dealers, they’re also on the list of the Moody’s downgrades, by and large.  Moody’s seems to be onto the same thing that this presentation is—that the broker–dealers have a funding model that, under duress, could be potentially troubling.  The memo also highlighted that the options we have are limited.  The dealer subs can’t go to the discount window.  Section 23A options are more difficult, and Dodd–Frank makes 13(3) more difficult.  So the memo does a nice job of highlighting that. If we try to think about how we mitigate broker–dealer funding problems, particularly should Europe worsen, one option would be to get the primary dealer credit facility up and running again, with all of the potential political implications that that would have. But if we want to mitigate it more than waiting and doing a 13(3) facility, I was just wondering what you thought the mitigation options were.  What I came up with was a larger SIFI surcharge for broker–dealers.  So if we think their funding model is different, it would be potentially that.  I note in your exhibit 2 that there is a big difference in long-term debt. Another option would be to alter the amount of long-term debt that you would expect broker–dealers to have so that resolution would be easier.  And the third would be to advocate for SIFIs to get discount window access so that once you became a SIFI and were under Federal Reserve supervision, you can access the discount window.  There are obviously problems with moral hazard and other things with that, but I was just wondering, as you think about what other mitigation we can do to a problem that was highlighted in the memo and your exhibit 2, do you have any other things that we should think about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different options for mitigating broker-dealer funding problems. They mention a few potential options and consider the potential implications and limitations of each. There is no argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 150.
 MS. LIANG.  You’ve gone through the key, and probably the easy, options—at least the first couple, which would be higher capital, which could include a surcharge.  I think the Dodd– Frank enhanced standards would apply higher capital standards to Goldman and Morgan for their interconnectedness. Liquidity management—or cash and liquidity, work which is ongoing— would help.  And these institutions, as I mentioned, have really increased their capital and their cash holdings and their liquidity profiles over the past few years.  So, those options, along with supervision, can help the two largest dealers.  One consideration that we did raise was the broker–dealers of foreign banking institutions.  That issue needs some careful thought, and that’s a discussion that is ongoing, because, as this presentation had mentioned, many of the largest U.S. broker–dealers are subs of foreign banking firms, and we don’t necessarily have the same holding company structure over them as we have over a Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs.  Because their risks are largely counterparty and funding, another option would be to think about whether more centralization of derivatives would reduce some of the risks—we’re moving in that direction. Work in the triparty market could help reduce risks—what you want to do is to reduce risks in their funding models, such as in the triparty.  That would be another area to move   forward on.  So there are a number of areas.  I have not considered discount window access for SIFIs.  FSOC has not yet designated any systemically important institutions. It currently does not consider that access to the discount window would be part of the package of being considered systemically important.  That’s just an entirely different line to go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting different options and considerations for addressing the risks and challenges faced by large financial institutions.


Passage number 151.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Vice Chairman" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 152.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I just wanted to make a very short interjection here.  I think one issue with requiring more capital or requiring more long-term debt is that it just comes around and then undermines profitability.  So it’s not clear that pushing on those two particular levers really gets you very far.  Obviously, the other thing you could do is, the firms could be forced to exit their trading businesses, which are the things that really require the wholesale funding.  And so if they exited their trading businesses, they’d be much smaller entities, they’d need much less capital, and they would need much less wholesale funding. The last thing is that it’s feasible conceptually to find a higher-rated parent—in other words, find some way of actually being rated more highly.  In the case of at least one firm that there is some question about, is there a firm that could come in and actually lend them their credit rating.  And that could be significant.  But it’s a very difficult problem, and you highlighted one key piece—that at the end of day, this really comes about, in part, because they don’t have clear access to the lender-of-last-resort facility.  I think the Moody’s ratings on these firms would be higher if they did have an explicit access to a lender of last resort.  So that’s one of the anomalies of our system, basically.  We allowed the growth of these very large broker–dealers, but we didn’t do anything to modify the lender-of-last-resort framework that we have, and so you could argue that that, at the end of the day, is really the contradiction or the tension.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing various options and potential solutions, but there is no argument or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 153.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement about Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 154.
MR. TARULLO.  Just to amplify what Bill said—Eric asked the question about the options, but it’s interesting to note that the option already taken by some of the continental Europeans is to reaffirm their willingness to stand behind their institutions.  So there’s that irony in the fact that the downgrade considerations that Nellie was alluding to applied to the very banks that Moody’s has concluded are less likely to be saved by the United States government as a result of all of these changes.  And it now looks as though the downgrades to French and German banks will be substantially less, even though they’ve raised no capital and their liquidity positions are not as strong, precisely because the governments of those countries have basically said that they are too big to fail and we’re going to stand behind them.  So there is this paradox of financial reform running into asymmetries in how governments are implementing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing additional information and stating a paradox or contradiction that exists in the implementation of financial reform.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Did you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Did you have a question" is a straightforward inquiry and does not imply any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 156.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. No, I was going to make a comment on financial stability. Is this the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they were planning on making a comment about financial stability and questioning if it is the appropriate time to do so.


Passage number 157.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the presence of the passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 158.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay. Let me just follow up a little bit more on the Moody’s thing.  I think where I come out on the whole issue of the Moody’s downgrade—it’s not that on the day, there’s going to be any great catastrophe, because the banks do have lots of capital, they have very large liquidity buffers, and the event is highly anticipated. There will be a little bit of a surprise in the sense that something that you think is likely to happen is different than something that actually does happen.  And there is some question about some of the firms— how big the downgrade will be and how idiosyncratic it will look.  If all the firms are taken down the same number of rating steps, that will be less severe to particular firms than if certain firms are taken down by more. So that’s the good news.  Nothing will probably happen really quickly. The bad news, though, is that this could really provoke a pretty vicious circle where liquidity flows out; profitability goes down; other rating agencies join in with their own downgrades, so the companies are no longer split-rated, but everybody rates some of these firms P-2; and then it really becomes a question of whether the broker–dealer trading operations are viable, because some customers will say, “I can’t do business with a broker–dealer that’s rated this way.”  And then the question is, can you actually have a viable trading operation if you can’t access the full range of customers. So at that point, the whole trading operation’s viability may be impaired, and then profitability continues to head down, and the whole thing spirals on itself.  Now, I don’t know that it has to go that way; probably in part, it will depend on what the market environment is.  If you have a very good market environment and profitability of this activity is very high, then presumably the firms could do okay, and maybe their ratings could get upgraded over time.  But if you’ve got a less benign environment where profitability of the whole sector is under pressure, then I think the thing would tend to culminate in an adverse way over time. Just generally speaking about the QS effort, Nellie, I thought it was terrific. It was a really good report, a good presentation.  You covered all the right things.  And relative to Steve’s view on Europe, I would be a little bit more cautious or a little bit more pessimistic than what you expressed.  I don’t think it’s a big difference, but I do think it’s a difference.  And I want to explain why.  The important thing about Europe is that we’re still very much in an adverse feedback world.  What are those adverse feedbacks.  Well, one bad loop is the fact that it’s the relationship between the performance of the countries’ economies in a world of fiscal restraint that then has consequences for housing prices; that in turn has consequences for the health of the banking system; and then finally, the deterioration in the banking system increases the claims on the fiscal capacity of the country.  So that’s a very bad adverse feedback loop that hasn’t beencorrected in any meaningful way that I can see. Another one is the fact, of course, that the fiscal austerity depresses economic activity, which causes quite a bit of slippage between the amount of fiscal adjustment that you undertake and how much actual improvement that generates in your outturn in terms of your budget balance.  And the third adverse loop that I think is really important with respect to how the Europeans have done this is that if there is official support forthcoming in a package of the EFSF or from the ECB bond purchases, that effectively subordinates the sovereign debt held by private entities, and so that makes it more difficult for the country to maintain or regain market access.  You could argue that the second adverse feedback loop is political.  The political support for more austerity lessens as this process continues.  So I’m pretty cautious about how this is all going to unfold.  At the end of the day, I guess I think we’re going to go the way we have been going—that you get temporary improvement, then things get worse, and then that provokes more action.  But I worry that each time we undertake the next chapter, the political support for monetary union shrinks or gets strained, and that at some point, the political support for this starts to give way. That’s a comment, but you can also take it as a question, and I’ll allow you to comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses a more cautious or pessimistic view on Europe compared to someone else (Steve), highlighting the adverse feedback loops and potential problems with official support packages. The speaker also expresses concern about the sustainability of political support for monetary union.


Passage number 159.
 MR. KAMIN. We’re very much aware of all of these considerations, and we very much agree with them. The question is basically, how do we factor all of these issues together as we develop our forecast.  And I think it might be helpful to go back to late November.  At that point, the situation was very adverse in Europe, and it looked at that time that the situation would get worse, would deteriorate further until very substantial policy actions were taken—for example, an IMF program for Italy—in order to really stop short this slide in investor expectations. In the event, we were surprised by how effective the LTROs were, along with the changed pricing of the Fed’s swaps and the fiscal compact, at improving the tone of investor confidence, and we had some period of normalization thereafter. Now, there are different ways to interpret what happened.  One of the ways that we interpret what happened was that there were two factors that were taking place simultaneously. One of them was this deep fiscal hole and concerns about fiscal sustainability, and the other factor interacting with that was deep weakness, both liquidity and solvency, in the banking sector.  And after the LTROs, when the funding situation of the banks got so much better, and when that coincided with the substantial reduction in sovereign spreads and improvement in sovereigns’ fiscal sustainability, we put a certain amount of weight on the possibility that the banking stability aspect of the problem had been more important in the previous deterioration than we might have judged, and therefore there might be more hope that investors weren’t judging the fiscal situation to be as bad as many people possibly could have. So that’s the way things transpired for a few months.  Then we’ve had this more recent slide in the financial situation, and now we’re left with trying to explain, well, why is that.  Now, part of it is probably just that financial markets got ahead of themselves a little bit in the first few months, and that’s standard.  Another factor that Brian has alluded to is that a lot of the LTROs’ takedown was being used to buy sovereign bonds, and with that having played out, there’s no more support.  And then finally, there were some adverse indicators that we’ve seen in terms of fiscal slippages in Spain and Italy.  So those are all the factors that we are confronted with now. We are very aware of, and place a pretty high weight on, the possibility that, basically, fiscal unsustainability is indeed looming larger in investors’ minds than we had anticipated.  But it’s very hard to prejudge exactly how these financial developments will go.  So for the time being, we’ve taken a fairly restrained approach toward revising our outlook, where we haveindeed taken on board the increased financial stresses in terms of now writing down a more adverse economic outlook for Europe.  But at the same time, we have not at this point assumed that financial conditions will keep on getting worse and worse and worse.  That’s the part we haven’t built in, because it’s a little bit premature.  We have to see how these things will play out.  But certainly, we’re looking at this carefully, and certainly, if we see more deterioration by the June forecast, you can expect that we will react probably much more forcefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 160.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think the interesting thing just over the last few weeks is that the political process does seem to have really deteriorated quite significantly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any specific disagreements or conflicts, but rather expresses a subjective opinion about the deterioration of the political process. It is a statement about the speaker's observation without any contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 161.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, that is absolutely true, and I will say that this can be thought of in both a positive and a negative sense.  Certainly from the negative sense, obviously, the fatigue that many countries are having with fiscal consolidation could be very damaging for investor confidence.  At the same time, it’s true that many people’s view is that in fact they’re overdoing it fiscally, and in fact, some countries that have fiscal space ought to use it.  So the results of this could be an agreement among the countries to allow those countries with more fiscal space to use it and maybe even—and this is, admittedly, a little farfetched—to provide a few more resources to those that don’t have.  Understand, that could be a felicitous outcome from an economic standpoint, even if not so likely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting different perspectives on fiscal consolidation and suggesting a possible agreement among countries.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 163.
  Let me turn to President Plosser MR. PLOSSER. I just have one very quick question for Nellie.  Nellie, a factual question.  I look at your exhibit 2, on the wholesale funding of the dealer firms.  Refresh my memory—that looks like a little over 60 percent, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question being asked by President Plosser.


Passage number 164.
 MS. LIANG.  The wholesale funding.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of "Yes" by Ms. Liang is simply an affirmation or agreement with the previous statement about wholesale funding.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 165.
 MR. PLOSSER.  So what did that look like in 2007.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the use of the word "So," which suggests that the speaker is making a counterpoint or expressing a different perspective on the subject being discussed.


Passage number 166.
MS. LIANG.  It was a little over 70.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 167.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It was higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "It was higher." It is a simple statement of fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 168.
 MS. LIANG.  It’s been coming down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states that "it's been coming down," indicating that something is descending or decreasing.


Passage number 169.
 MR. PLOSSER.  It was higher, right.  I was just wondering by how much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Mr. Plosser is simply asking for clarification or confirmation on a specific point. There is no disagreement or contention evident in this passage.


Passage number 170.
 MS. LIANG.  It’s not dramatic.  The firms have shrunk, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "The firms have shrunk, too." It is a simple statement providing information about the situation.


Passage number 171.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They’ve shrunk.  They’ve issued more long-term debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statements "They've shrunk" and "They've issued more long-term debt" are two separate statements without any conflicting information.


Passage number 172.
 MS. LIANG.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements that indicate contention or disagreement among the involved parties.


Passage number 173.
 MR. PLOSSER.  That was my question.  So it’s changed about 10 percentage points, maybe, and it’s mostly been substituted with long-term debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Plosser regarding a change in the composition of debt.


Passage number 174.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, and their banks are probably a little bit bigger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the size of their banks.


Passage number 175.
 MS. LIANG.  And capital.  They’ve issued some capital.  Oh, it’s actually 80 percent in 2004.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about capital issuance in 2004.


Passage number 176.
 MR. PLOSSER. Oh, okay.  So it’s down a fair amount, then.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. PLOSSER simply acknowledges the information provided and expresses appreciation for it.


Passage number 177.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm not able to generate a response to your question without any specific passage or context to analyze. If you provide more details or a specific passage, I'll be happy to help you determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 178.
 MR. LACKER.  Just to follow up, do you have a sense of the magnitude of the daylight exposure to the clearing banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question asked by Mr. Lacker is simply seeking information and does not express any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 179.
 MS. LIANG.  The intraday exposure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that Ms. Liang has intraday exposure, without any conflicting or conflicting opinions expressed.


Passage number 180.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m guessing it’s about the size of the bar labeled “Repo” since the repo is unwound with intraday credit extension from the two clearing banks.  Is that right, or is that rough, or do you want to get back to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is asking for clarification or confirmation on a specific point.


Passage number 181.
 MS. LIANG.  I think we should get back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Liang is not expressing any opposing or conflicting views.


Passage number 182.
 MR. EICHNER.  It would be about $1.4 trillion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states a sum of money without any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 183.
  MS. LIANG.  I think the triparty repo volumes on exhibit 3 give you—sorry, this is all through triparty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states the speaker's opinion about the triparty repo volumes on exhibit 3.


Passage number 184.
 MR. LACKER.  So that’s about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement.


Passage number 185.
 MS. LIANG. This is the triparty, so this is it.  But you’re asking about these particular firms.  There are more than those firms in this exhibit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Liang is simply stating a fact about the exhibit containing more firms than the ones being asked about.


Passage number 186.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But there are a number of changes under way to try to reduce that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is stating that there are changes being implemented to reduce something, but it does not indicate any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 187.
 MS. LIANG.  Yes, and they’ll have repo that’s bilateral as well that’s not in the intraday.  So I don’t have data here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about repo that is not included in the intraday data they have.


Passage number 188.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is simply expressing gratitude for something.


Passage number 189.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 190.
 MR. FISHER.  First, excuse me, Mr. Chairman—President Rosengren had two points.  Are you done, Eric.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a continuation of a conversation between Mr. Fisher and the Chairman regarding President Rosengren's points.


Passage number 191.
 MR. ROSENGREN. I’ll ask after you.  Go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rosengren simply states that he will ask after the other person has finished speaking.


Passage number 192.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, first, I want to thank Nellie for this work.  It’s 148 pages because 149 is blank, by the way [laughter]—plus exhibits. I think this is extremely helpful. It’s important for us to track this, and I wanted to thank you for that.  You also wrote the memo of March 9 about pension funds in answer to a question I had.  My first question is about pension funds.  If I remember that memo correctly, your real concern was state and local pension funds.  And you had some large numbers in there in terms of being underfunded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and asking for clarification.


Passage number 193.
 MS. LIANG.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. The passage mentions Ms. Liang without providing any context or further information. It is unclear what the disagreement or contention is specifically about without additional details.


Passage number 194.
   MR. FISHER.  Because we are worried about fiscal drag from all sources, I wonder if you could give us a quick summary of that concern and how that might be treated.  And then I have some other suggestions for you, but let’s start there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes Mr. Fisher expressing his concerns about fiscal drag and requesting a summary of those concerns. The tone appears to be cooperative and open for discussion.


Passage number 195.
 MS. LIANG.  I’m going to sound like a broken record.  This is an area where we’re starting again.  We just don’t have as much information as we would like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging a lack of information and expressing their frustration about it.


Passage number 196.
 MR. FISHER.  Even though you’re starting, could you give us some insight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is simply asking for insight from someone who is starting something.


Passage number 197.
 MS. LIANG. The large state and local pensions, as you know, are underfunded and have probably been so, though, for most of the past decade.  So this is not fully, totally new.  As the liabilities are coming closer, some of these issues are getting more prominent as the funds have to start paying out.  On corporate, I have here—I apologize; I don’t have all of the numbers with me—that the underfunding is about $300 billion, and on the state and local, the funding ratio is roughly the same.  But some of that’s bringing forward projected liabilities by discounting at current interest rates and by lower, depressed equity values.  So some of this underfunding will close naturally as the economy improves.  The actual drag on their current spending may not be as big because they’re not required to close their funding gaps each year.  For example, in the corporate sector, if they’re $300 billion underfunded, I think the actual cash contribution is on the order of $50 billion.  It’s not a very big number.  That said, there are probably some that look very weak.  One concern is that the funds reach for yield on investments or they just go for a little bit more of a levered return or something else that could cause problems.  For state and local, in the end they can tax.  They have a taxing authority, but that raises all kinds of issues that sound like Europe.  But the current underfunding isn’t one of those acute problems, at least not in the immediate term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the underfunding of large state and local pensions and discussing some potential issues and concerns.


Passage number 198.
 MR. TARULLO.  You asked about fiscal drag.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the person asked about fiscal drag.


Passage number 199.
  MR. FISHER.  Yes, that’s what I was concerned about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher expresses his concern about something, but there is no indication of an opposing viewpoint or disagreement.


Passage number 200.
 MR. TARULLO.  You’re asking how it may get pulled forward.  I thought President Fisher was asking how the concerns about funding might pull forward either some of the tax policies or other policies that you were talking about, which themselves would have a depressing effect on economic growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a clarification of what the previous speaker was asking.


Passage number 201.
 MS. LIANG.  That’s right.  It’s the cash contributions or pulling forward the taxes.  There are many states that have tried to implement cuts to benefits, and it varies state by state, so it’s a little difficult to come up with a view on whether that is a successful strategy.  But currently it, clearly, could be a drag for some.  I guess one point, though, is that the underfunding does not have to get covered immediately, and some of it, we think, naturally will close if the economy improves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the implementation of cuts to benefits and the potential impact on the economy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 202.
 MR. FISHER.  And then just a comment in terms of your asset valuation—I continue to be worried, and maybe I’m alone.  But if you look at longer-term trends—you commented in the paper, basically going back two decades; some of the charts you have go back to 1985.  From an equity market standpoint, those are not very long trends.  For example, if you go back pre-1968, current S&P market values are one standard deviation above the trend; if you go back to 1990, they’re right on trend.  So I think we have to be mindful of that fact, particularly given your last point of reaching for returns.  It would be helpful, at least to me as one reader of this who reads it very, very carefully, all 148 pages, that we have, perhaps, some longer-term time frames in terms of asset valuation to establish the trend lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher expresses his concern and disagreement with the asset valuation presented in the paper. He believes that longer-term trends should be considered, going back beyond two decades, and that the current S&P market values are above the trend lines.


Passage number 203.
 MS. LIANG.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage (based on the provided information).


Passage number 204.
 MR. FISHER.  And then, second, I would suggest we do it in deflated rather than nominal terms, and I’d be happy to talk to you about that separately.  But I want to endorse the concept that this is a valuable exercise, and thank you for doing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing agreement and appreciation for the concept being discussed.


Passage number 205.
 MS. LIANG.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states "MS. LIANG. Okay", which suggests agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 206.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards the chairman and there is no evidence of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 207.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I agree that looking at things like the effects of low interest rates on financial institutions is very important, and that’s why we’re doing it.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement and emphasizes the importance of considering the effects of low interest rates on financial institutions. The statement is supportive and positive in tone.


Passage number 208.
 MR. ROSENGREN. My second question is on page 64 of your big thing.  It’s on the farmland prices.  And I know I’m an odd person to ask about farmland prices.  Unlike President Fisher, I don’t buy anything with horns.  [Laughter] But as I was looking at the set of charts that you had there, the cropland prices have been going up, the price-to-rent ratio is dramatically higher than it was at any time in the last 50 years, and the debt is mostly to banks and the Farm Credit System.  Now, unlike some people, I might not do anything with interest rates in order to affect that, but I might want to think about doing something with supervisory policy, particularly if we had an ability to have a capital ratio that was more focused on agricultural loans.  So it’s a two-part question.  The write-up seems to be not as worried about this set of charts, so my question is, what would these charts have to look like for you to start getting worried.  And then the follow-on is, if you start getting worried, what would you do about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 209.
 MS. LIANG.  I think what you might view as less of a concern relates to the amount of debt outstanding in this sector, which would be the lower part.  And including the Farm Credit System, there is $150 billion of this debt outstanding.  So it’s fairly small. I’m always worried about saying that anymore, but, nonetheless, it is.  I think if it were larger and we thought the  loss rates on it were bigger, then we would be more concerned.  If we thought it was more privately held and distributed in complex ways, we’d be more concerned.  I believe, actually, that the supervisors did issue some guidance last year on this.  The FDIC and the Federal Reserve—they were quite concerned about these loans, and they did have some interagency conferences and discussed issuing guidance on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The speaker in the passage, Ms. Liang, expresses her opinions and concerns about the amount of debt outstanding in a certain sector. While she mentions that there were concerns expressed by FDIC and the Federal Reserve in the past, there is no clear indication of disagreement between different parties in the passage.


Passage number 210.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I think you’re right, but the trend lines didn’t change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that Mr. Rosengren agrees with something, without any opposing view or contradiction mentioned.


Passage number 211.
 MS. LIANG. I just don’t exactly remember, but I think guidance was issued.  It was discussed about a year ago.  Does that sound right.  Yes, I thought so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply depicts the speaker trying to recall a past event and affirming her belief that the recollection is correct.


Passage number 212.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a thank you statement and does not contain any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 213.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I understand that coffee has been ready for some time.  Why don’t we come back at 4:15, and then we’ll do the economic go-round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a suggestion or proposal for a plan to return at a specific time and then proceed with the "economic go-round."


Passage number 214.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Welcome back, everybody.  We’re going to now do the economic go-round.  I would very much like to get this done today so that we will be able to have sufficient time to discuss the policy issues tomorrow.  So please keep time in mind if at all possible.  I’ll start with President Rosengren, who is a model of terse excellence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their goal of completing the economic go-round and discussing policy issues the next day, while mentioning the President Rosengren as an example of someone who is efficient in their statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 215.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Going into the March meeting, we were confronted with labor market data that had been stronger than expected, but spending data that had been weaker than expected.  Since that meeting, we have been confronted with the opposite.  Labor market data were weaker than expected, but spending data were stronger.  What does this imply for the forecast.  The Tealbook seems to split the difference and ends up with an unemployment rate at the end of 2013 at 7.7 percent, only ½ percentage point lower than the current unemployment rate, a modest improvement over the next year and a half.  I, unfortunately, concur with this forecast and expect growth that makes only plodding improvements in a dismal employment situation despite an inflation rate that undershoots our 2 percent inflation target. I see a strange dichotomy between my modal and mean forecasts.  The forecast to which I assign the highest probability looks like many others around the table, with relatively subdued growth, modest progress toward full employment, and contained inflation.  After such a long period of stagnant growth, there should be significant pockets of pent-up demand.  Consumers are again purchasing cars, and they’re showing some signs of life in other areas.  In some regions of the country, like New England, we are again seeing cranes and help-wanted signs, harbingers of a better future that have not been present for most of the past five years.  However, my modal forecast is not equal to my mean forecast.  The mean is much lower.  The modal forecast assumes that downside risks do not materialize.  Unfortunately, fiscal sanity seems more a hope than a forecast; the willingness to address nuclearization of the Middle East seems postponed rather than addressed; and the recent spate of articles on Spain only highlights that holding together Europe will get more difficult with time, particularly if there’s not the political will to directly address fiscal transfers and consolidation without taking their collective economies to the edge, a process that surely has economic consequences.  Thus, I am worried that a variety of risks look as though they may deliver coal in our stocking at the end of the year.  Given the uncertainty in the current economic environment, it is important that we do not contribute to the uncertainty.  Unfortunately, I am afraid that we have. As I talk to business people around New England, I am struck by how different people have interpreted our statement.  Some seem to view our statement as a firm commitment and thus have been willing to take positions assuming no immediate risk of rate increases.  Others  seem to view it as a forecast, which may be proven wrong, and view more immediate rate increases as quite likely. Others treat it like a date announced for troop withdrawal—the date will hold unless conditions on the ground change dramatically.  Thus, despite our work on communications and transparency, we need to move to simple and unambiguous language if we want to prevent disappointment and anger from whatever actions or inactions we choose. I will leave that discussion of how best to do that to our meeting tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the contrasting views of the speaker on the forecast and the interpretation of the statement. The speaker expresses concern about downside risks and uncertainties in the current economic environment, while also acknowledging the different interpretations of the statement among business people.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 217.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Plosser and does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The statement is expressing gratitude to President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 219.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Pianalto. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 220.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have been seeing gradual but steady signs of improvement in my District economy and in the national economy.  At this point, I view the recent good news as evidence of a recovery on firmer footing, but not as evidence of a significant pickup in the pace of recovery.  I am now projecting GDP growth of 3 percent this year, which is up just a couple of tenths since March but up ½ percentage point since January. My projections for GDP growth in 2013 and 2014 are largely unchanged at around 3 percent. Given the first quarter’s employment reports, I have also lowered my unemployment rate path throughout the forecast horizon so that the unemployment rate reaches 7.2 percent in the fourth quarter of 2014.  And my inflation projection stays very near our longer-run inflation objective through 2014. I will comment on some of the key factors that I see supporting my outlook.  My confidence in the durability of the recovery has been boosted not only by the stronger incoming data, but also by comments from my business contacts.  Their recent reports have given me some assurance that not all of the good news in the first quarter was driven by warmer-than-usual weather. One such comment came from a major paint retailer.  He noted that while exterior paint sales have been boosted by warm weather, interior paint sales, which are hardly seasonal at all, have also been strong.  Survey results also show a broad-based improvement in sentiment and conditions for small and medium-sized businesses.  Despite ongoing uncertainty about economic and regulatory policy and the international economic weakness, small business sentiment as reported in the NFIB survey has moved higher over the last few months.  Another sign of improvement comes from the ADP data on employment.  The ADP estimates show that employment in firms with less than 500 workers has been rising solidly after many months of sluggish growth.  While the NFIB and the ADP indicators are not as reliable as the less timely data from the BLS, comments from my business contacts align with the NFIB and the ADP reports.  For example, a CEO of a company that provides accounting, payroll, and insurance services to more than 50,000 small and medium-sized businesses reported notably higher demand for his firm’s services in the first quarter.  An increase in his billings typically means small businesses are contemplating expansion or strategic moves.  And yet another piece of evidence that conditions for small and medium-sized businesses are improving is that banks in my District have reported a significant pickup in lending to small and medium-sized businesses. Turning to inflation, the recent news on consumer prices has led me to edge up my inflation projections throughout the forecast horizon.  The median CPI and the trimmed mean CPI have both risen 2.3 percent over the last three months.  Core PCE inflation is likely to rise at a similar rate in the first quarter, quite a bit faster than I had expected back in January. Despite these surprises, my forecast of core PCE inflation remains very close to 2 percent.  There are two forces that I expect will keep inflation in check.  The first is the continued low growth of compensation costs evident in the employment cost index.  The second is the stability of longer-term inflation expectations.  Despite the recent pickup in inflation rates, measures of inflation expectations based on financial market indicators have remained anchored. The Cleveland Fed’s expectation measures are below some of the financial-market-based measures of inflation expectations, but adjustment of these other measures for the inflation risk premium results in estimates that are quite consistent with our longer-run inflation objective. Turning to the uncertainty surrounding the outlook, my staff conducted some research on the current level of uncertainty compared with historical norms in a forecasting model, and this analysis showed that the uncertainty surrounding the GDP and unemployment forecast now falls within historical norms throughout the forecast horizon, while uncertainty around inflation generally remains higher than normal. So given the statistical evidence and my judgment that the recovery seems to be on a firmer footing, I think the uncertainty surrounding the forecast for GDP growth is now back down to a level consistent with the uncertainty of the past 20 years.  Despite the model results, I continue to see the outlook for unemployment as more uncertain than normal because of the questions surrounding the durability of the decline in the unemployment rate.  And in the case of the inflation outlook, drawing both on the model-based evidence and judgment, I continue to see uncertainty as higher than normal. As to the balance of risks, I think the risks are broadly balanced for GDP, unemployment, and inflation.  While headwinds like the problems in Europe do pose important downside risks, the recently improved news on the economy suggests that we could be underestimating the recovery’s momentum.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Ms. Pianalto about her projections for the economy.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Williams.


Passage number 222.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 223.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data received since our last meeting give me hope that the expansion is gaining momentum.  Now, I say “hope” because I still fear that this could prove to be another false start.  Or, as one of my business contacts put it, “It feels like riding a bicycle where, every time you take a few solid pedal strokes, the chain slips.” Despite this concern, the signs are mostly positive.  Credit conditions continue to improve, and the housing sector is looking better.  A major homebuilder in my District is notably upbeat on the prospects of a robust housing recovery.  He reports that existing real estate is picked over, sobuilders are getting started on new lots.  But even with the better data, I still expect only a moderate pace of real GDP growth of about 2½ percent this year and 2¾ percent next year. Importantly, some of the economy’s headwinds are not receding.  In particular, fiscal contraction is occurring at all levels of government. But what does this forecast of moderate growth mean for the trajectory of the unemployment rate.  Normally, I would rely on Okun’s law for this calculation and call it a day.  However, unfortunately, the apparent breakdown in Okun’s law over the past few years gives me pause.  A key issue is the behavior of the labor force participation rate, which has declined by 2¼ percentage points since the start of the recession.  The forecast for unemployment hinges on whether this decline is mostly structural or cyclical, like most of the issues we talk about around this table.  If it’s mostly structural, then the unemployment rate should decline steadily over the next few years.  If, instead, the decline in participation is in large part cyclical in nature, then the decline in the unemployment rate should be more modest as job gains are partly filled by workers rejoining the labor force. My staff took a closer look at the evidence regarding the decline in the participation rate and what it means going forward.  They examined which demographic groups are driving the recent declines and whether they are likely to return as labor market conditions improve.  They found that about half of the recent participation drop came from aging workers, some of whom may be retiring early in the face of a bad job market.  The remaining half came from abnormally high labor force withdrawals among two groups: youth; and adults between the ages of 25 and 54—I call them “the young.” [Laughter]  They conclude that most of these people are likely to return to the labor force when times get better. Now, a possible counterargument to this conclusion is that these labor force withdrawals reflect a hoard of mismatched workers whose future employment prospects are bleak.  But that seems improbable for a couple of reasons.  First, is it really likely that a large number of young people, or “the real young”—aged between 16 and 24—will permanently leave the labor force.  After all, they can go back to school and get the skills that they need. Second, surveys find that many prime-aged workers, 25 to 54, who are not currently in the labor force say that they want or are available for work.  And indeed, as the labor market has improved over recent months, this group of workers has started to reenter the labor force in considerable numbers.  My staff’s conclusion that much of the decline in participation is cyclical in nature is given additional support from aggregate statistical analysis of labor force participation trends.  For example, the Kalman filter estimates of trend participation using the FRB/US model imply that about half of the 2¼ percentage point decline in participation over the past four years is trend and the rest is cyclical. So in sum, my staff concludes that the trend rate of participation has declined significantly over the past four years, but this explains only about one-half of the overall decline in the participation rate since the beginning of the recession.  They estimate that as economic conditions improve over the next few years, up to 2 million sidelined individuals may return to the labor market.  All else being equal, that would add about 1¼ percentage points to the unemployment rate.  Of course, it’s hard to know just when these workers will return.  My best guess is that the unemployment rate will remain above 8 percent this year and slowly decline to about 7 percent at the end of 2014. Needless to say, there are countless risks to my forecast for economic activity besides the uncertainty regarding the participation rate and unemployment.  Most are to the downside:  The European situation remains perilous, the looming U.S. fiscal cliff is approaching, and events in the Mideast could send oil prices soaring.  Turning to inflation, increases in oil prices to date are likely to push inflation a bit above 2 percent in the first half of the year, but oil prices appear to have stabilized, and futures markets point to a downward trend in oil prices.  I expect the still-subdued growth in most measures of labor compensation to constrain inflation, and as my contacts consistently say, apart from workers with specialized IT or engineering skills, labor is plentiful and wage pressures are minimal.  With considerable slack remaining in labor markets for the next few years, I expect inflation to run somewhat below our 2 percent objective. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a speech by Williams discussing his views on the current state of the economy and his predictions for the future.


Passage number 224.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 225.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not include any contentious or disagreeable information. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 226.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My views on the economy and monetary policy have not changed materially over the last several meetings.  Resource slack remains unacceptably high.  Of course, our uncertainty over the size of the output gap is substantial.  The output gap could be smaller, or it could be larger.  Nevertheless, a large portion of the probability distribution seems to cover assessments that resource slack is large. For example, the Board staff has a conservative number, which has been mentioned several times already today.  They’ve not been shy about marking down their estimates of potential hours and structural productivity, but still, the latest Tealbook assessment today has the output gap at 4¾ percent. By the way, I just want to mention that in reviewing the March transcript, I noticed that there were a few comments from some participants as we talked about our mandate suggesting that our policy framework that we had adopted implied that maybe we shouldn’t use the term “dual mandate.”  I just want to associate myself with the viewpoint that there’s nothing that we said in that policy statement that spoke to the dual mandate—other than that “dual mandate” is important.  So I think it’s critical to continue to refer to it in those types of terms. By comparison, price pressures currently are well contained.  Indeed, even in the scenarios with upside inflation risks, such as those in the Tealbook, inflation rates remain within tolerable levels under our balanced-approach policy framework, which we adopted in January.Looking ahead, my outlook for economic growth has improved modestly over the last several months.  With appropriate monetary policy, we project real GDP will grow at about a 2¾ to 3 percent rate over the next 18 months.  I interpret my many business contact reports of continued moderate growth as being in line with these projections.  In my opinion, our current forward guidance is easily justified by the large resource gaps, contained inflation pressures over the medium term, and lack of a clear, substantial acceleration in growth that are features of this baseline forecast.  However, this projection feels fragile given the exceedingly cautious behavior I still hear on the part of businesses.  I can’t recall any conversations where someone reported to me expectations of a major acceleration in their business. One telling report came from my director who runs Manpower employment services.  His customers are not talking about any anticipatory hiring from him or on their own.  They are concentrating on the current demand for their products, and they’re following a just-in-time staffing policy. As a result, his business has been trending sideways for the past nine months. In this environment, the only alternative scenarios mentioned are downside events that would lead to another round of retrenchment in spending by cautious businesses and, ultimately, by consumers.  This doesn’t sound like an economy poised to achieve escape velocity.  Indeed, if we stop and consider the sweeping list of downside risks we face today, I personally find it difficult to avoid clinical depression.  In Europe, the ECB’s post-LTRO high has worn off, and markets are once again jittery.  I have trouble seeing a benign outcome for Europe over the next few years.  Maybe they can find a way to muddle through from time to time, but longer term, there are big issues.  At root, the problem is largely a collection of significant trade account imbalances within the euro zone.  These country imbalances would typically be best addressed with financial market adjustments under a flexible exchange rate system.  The EuropeanMonetary Union, without a political union, is instead forcing a slow, agonizing, and perhaps fruitless internal wage–price adjustment process across much of the continent.  As Milton Friedman said, changing one price, the exchange rate, is easier than changing thousands of prices. In the United States, as you’ve said so many times, Mr. Chairman, the table is set for a fiscal disaster at the end of this year.  The budgetary process will certainly throw one form or another of fiscal restraint at the economic recovery, and judging by last year’s brinkmanship and debt ceiling debacle, we are going to get a close-up view of the cliff’s staggering dangers before we achieve any resolution, whether it’s a good resolution or not.  So unless the private sector is truly accelerating over the next few months and has enough momentum to withstand these events, we could be in for extremely unpleasant developments late in the year. My bottom line is, we should not be complacent with our economic outlook in a world that is awash in downside risks.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is offering their perspective on the economy and monetary policy, but there is no obvious contradiction or conflict with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only contains a polite expression of gratitude towards President George.


Passage number 228.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  A two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the title "Mr. Kocherlakota: A two-hander."


Passage number 229.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions "President Kocherlakota" without providing any further context or information. It is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement based on the given text alone.


Passage number 230.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to briefly clarify President Evans’s remarks on the dual mandate.  You were expressing your comfort with retaining the language “dual mandate” in the statement. I wasn’t sure what you were saying. Sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is simply seeking clarification on President Evans' remarks about the dual mandate.


Passage number 231.
 MR. EVANS.  Oh, I’m sorry.  When I looked at the March transcript, I noticed that there were a number of people who commented that they thought that, from our policy statement that we adopted in January, there wasn’t any need to refer to things as a “dual mandate” or   whatever—we should maybe use “statutory mandate” or something like that. I just don’t recall any type of consensus agreement from that discussion process where we would change that language.  Thank you very much for asking for it to be clarified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they do not recall any consensus or agreement from a previous discussion regarding changing the language in a policy statement.


Passage number 232.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple acknowledgement of appreciation or thanks. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 233.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 234.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Economic activity in the 10th District has continued to expand since the last meeting.  Consumer spending has been relatively strong despite high gasoline prices, and housing activity is showing more-convincing signs of improvement.  In particular, optimism in the housing sector grew as home sales rose and the supply of homes tightened.  Job growth is also progressing.  Many business contacts report difficulties in finding workers, although the share of contacts reporting labor shortages and wage pressures remains lower than before the recession. Businesses remain confident of continued economic expansion, although some firms have tempered their expectations compared with a few months ago.  The energy sector remains robust, and farmland values in the District continue to rise rapidly.  Price gains also are extending to portions of the region that have strong oil-related revenue growth. Turning to the national economy, I continue to expect a moderate pace of growth going forward that slowly builds over time.  The unemployment rate over the last several months has fallen more rapidly than I previously expected, causing me to revise down my path for unemployment.  Looking ahead, though, I expect that future improvements in the unemployment rate will be more closely tied to economic growth.  As such, I anticipate modest improvement in the unemployment rate this year and larger declines in the years to come. Factors that I see supporting economic growth over the forecast horizon include the inherent resilience of the U.S.   economy, recovering demand, accommodative monetary policy, and improving labor markets.  That said, it will take some time, I think, for household debt levels, reductions in federal government spending, and the slow healing of the housing market to play out.  Of course, several factors continue to pose downside risks to this outlook.  There is considerable uncertainty about Europe; geopolitical tensions continue to pose the risk of higher oil prices leading to higher headline inflation and lower economic growth; and finally, the potential of falling off the fiscal cliff presents a significant source of uncertainty as the year progresses and a possible risk to the outlook. Turning to inflation, I expect that a gradually improving economy and stable inflation expectations will keep inflation near 2 percent over the forecast horizon.  Over the medium term, though, a highly accommodative monetary policy and large long-run fiscal imbalances pose upside risks to inflation. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly presents the speaker's observations and expectations about the economic activity in the 10th District and the national economy.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude and a sign-off by President Lacker.


Passage number 236.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Fifth District economy continues to improve.  Overall, the reports from our directors and other contacts have an increasingly positive tone, although there are a couple of exceptions that I’ll touch on. Manufacturing is a bright spot.  Our April survey was released just this morning, and it showed the composite index increasing from 7 in March to 14 in April.  Nonretail services continue to expand as well in April, but our retail index took an abrupt and steep nosedive.  We had a real strong report for March, and it looks as though there might have been some payback in April from the unseasonably strong foot traffic and sales in March. We continue to hear that economic activity in the Washington area is being affected by the uncertainty surrounding the federal budget outlook.  This comes after a stretch of a couple years in which the District and the economy around Washington did much better than the rest of the country.  Multiple contacts report significant anxiety regarding federal spending, and defense contractors, in particular, are said to be quite gloomy.  According to one contact, commercial real estate in Washington in the first quarter felt like a recession, and most lease renewals are coming in at about 20 percent less space than previously.  One exception to the gloom around D.C. is cybersecurity.  There’s been a huge amount of activity getting under way around Fort Meade in Maryland driven by some significant federal investments in consolidating and expanding federal capabilities. In addition, we’re told that the shredding business picked up after the GSA revelation. In West Virginia, drilling activity is falling off somewhat due to the decline in natural gas prices, similar to the report we just heard, but our contacts say that some drilling is continuing just to retain the leasing rights, and moreover, they say there’s about two years’ worth of infrastructure construction ahead for things like pipelines and processing facilities.  Outside of energy and the D.C. commercial real estate market—I won’t go into the details—the news from the rest of the District has been pretty encouraging. Turning to the national economy, the staff have taken a cautious approach to marking up the economic growth outlook in response to the stronger data flow that we saw last quarter; that caution seems wise to me, and I agree with their reasoning.  They rightly note that activity is likely to have been overstated, perhaps due to an unseasonably mild winter.  While the staff has tweaked the forecast a little bit, the contour is basically the same.  The prediction I submitted is a tad stronger than theirs for real GDP growth—2.7 percent this year, 3.0 next year, 3.5 for our centennial year.   I don’t think of my GDP growth projection, though, as that much different than the Tealbook’s.  The inflation projection is another story, however, and we discussed this a little bit earlier.  The Tealbook has inflation falling below 2 percent later this year and to around 1½ percent next year and the year after, and it explicitly attributes this to the projected low level of resource utilization that will help hold the average pace of inflation below the Committee’s objective. My sense is that the forecast misses have reflected an overly great a priori weight on the smoothness of the natural rate.  In my submission, I penciled in 2.0 percent for this year and next year.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker providing updates and opinions on the Fifth District economy, as well as the national economy. There is no indication of disagreement or argument among the speaker and others mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 237.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statement or context that suggests contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude from someone named President Lockhart.


Passage number 238.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In preparing for this meeting, we asked our directors and contacts in the Sixth District about three concerns.  First, we asked about their sense of growth prospects based on their most recent readings of the economy.  Specifically, we asked if there were indications of acceleration given the recent stronger-than-expected numbers, or, alternatively, slowing that may augur a mid-year swoon similar to that experienced in 2010 and 2011.  Second, we asked about their reading of employer thinking regarding ongoing and future hiring.  We tried to get at the question of how to reconcile the rate of job creation before the March payroll report with the apparent strength of the economy.  More specifically, we asked if the catch-up explanation rang true.  And, third, we asked about their views on price pressures, specifically their sense of pricing power broadly among their contacts and intentions to raise prices. Regarding economic growth, our business contacts generally see no basis for predicting either market acceleration or a slowdown.  The majority of our directors remain firm in the view that activity will continue to grow near the pace of the past six months. We heard little that  would suggest a pullback in consumer spending.  The expectation is for continued modest growth of consumer activity.  Auto sales remain strong, as others have noted, and our contacts at various points in the chain are pretty uniform in their belief that sales will remain strong for the foreseeable future. Interestingly, one contact who represents the largest auto retailer in the country argued that high gasoline prices are actually encouraging sales as consumers unload old cars for much more efficient new models.  A director representing a home-improvement retailer with national coverage supported the view that mild weather had brought forward some sales and expects some payback in the current quarter.  As regards business investment spending, we heard that capital investments continue to be aimed at productivity gains and cost savings or, in some cases, share capture.  Investment for actual business expansion remains considerably more subdued. Turning to the employment picture, the idea that recent job gains related to firms restaffing or catching up from prior deep cuts was supported by many of our contacts.  Most saw the mindset of businesses as quite cautious about ongoing and future hiring.  We also continue to hear anecdotes about shortages of qualified applicants for available jobs.  We asked about wage pressures in light of reported shortages of qualified applicants and detected little evidence of this. Lastly, we asked our contacts to assess any emerging threat of inflation.  A few firms indicated that they expect to try to push through price increases in an effort to improve margins, but most doubted their pricing power in the current economic environment. We did not hear a lot of concern about near-term inflationary pressures.  We did detect some heightened concern about longer-term inflation risks in our survey work.  In synthesizing all of the data and anecdotes, I have not made any material changes to my outlook since the March FOMC meeting.Because the first-quarter tracking estimates have been coming in a little above our earlier assumptions, we took on board a slightly stronger first quarter in our full-year estimate of GDP growth.  But my growth forecast hasn’t really changed much, and it is relatively close to 3 percent and is very similar to the Tealbook baseline.  Regarding the balance of risks to GDP growth and inflation, I have adjusted my views slightly and now see the risks reasonably balanced for both.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing the opinions and findings of their business contacts and directors, and there is no indication of disagreement among them.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply includes a polite expression of gratitude and a reference to the position of Vice Chairman.


Passage number 240.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of gratitude towards Governor Yellen.


Passage number 241.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At the previous FOMC meeting, my esteemed colleague, Governor Duke, noted that I was facing a key housing decision.  My family needs to vacate the townhouse that we have been renting for the past 18 months.  And, as Governor Duke described, it looked in March like we might well become homeowners here in D.C., perhaps suggestive of a broader trend of renters starting to come back into the housing  market. Now, I realize that all of you have been waiting with bated breath [laughter] to hear the outcome of our decisionmaking process, so I would like to finally bring to an end that suspense by letting you know that we decided not to buy.  Instead, we will be moving to another rental unit a mile or so away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a personal anecdote about the speaker's housing decision.


Passage number 242.
 MR. FISHER.  The market will be down 300 points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a simple prediction about the stock market and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 243.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 244.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a simple address or introduction.


Passage number 245.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the passage being provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 246.
 MR. FISHER.  May I just ask a question.  New information was introduced with your Zillow database.  Do they track building permits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is simply asking a question about whether Zillow tracks building permits.


Passage number 247.
  MS. YELLEN.  No, not that I know of, they’re mainly concerned with prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Yellen states that she is not aware of any contention or disagreement and says that the main concern is prices.


Passage number 248.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes.  The objective, it seems to me, is to try to determine a couple of things.  One is purchasing power, obviously, and how it affects consumption.  The other is employment, and I would just note that in March year-over-year building permits were up 30 percent; single, residential building permits, year over year, were up 18 percent with an increase in every region of the country.  I agree with you that we need to look at these data extremely carefully, but I wouldn’t rely on any single database to give us a full indication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the need to examine the data carefully but suggests not relying on any single database for a comprehensive analysis.


Passage number 249.
 MS. YELLEN.  The issue about building and construction activity, residential investment, that’s one aspect of housing that, to me, is relevant to the forecast, but housing prices have broad significance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contentious or disagreeing statements. It simply discusses the relevance and significance of housing prices in the forecast.


Passage number 250.
 MR. FISHER.  When you’re looking at prices, I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher states his agreement when looking at prices, indicating a consensus or alignment of opinions.


Passage number 251.
 MS. YELLEN. Again, in the Zillow data there is improvement in that in 2011, the national house-price index fell 5 percent, and in the first quarter it’s fallen at a 2 percent annual rate, so that does show an improvement.  You know—as David indicated and I would be happy to share these data with you—there is diversity across localities, and there are many where there is clear improvement, but also quite a number where there is deterioration.  According to this data set, which really is a very good data set, we haven’t turned the corner yet on house prices.  They’re still falling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of facts about house prices and the acknowledgement that there are both areas of improvement and areas of deterioration.


Passage number 252.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, thank you for introducing the new data set.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement shows gratitude for introducing a new data set.


Passage number 253.
 MS. YELLEN.  Happy to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions someone named Ms. Yellen being happy to do something.


Passage number 254.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Perhaps Governor Duke will extend the housing theme.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a possibility or suggestion that Governor Duke may extend the housing theme.


Passage number 255.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Despite the collapse of the Yellen index, [laughter] I remain optimistic about building strength in the recovery.  I continue to see signs that   pent-up demand is likely to finally show through and sustain some form of the “Virtuous Circle” alternative of the Tealbook.  Here are some of the reasons that I’m optimistic. First, with the exception of mortgage credit, which I’ll discuss separately, I can’t envision current credit conditions creating any drag on whatever momentum might be building in the economy.  Credit quality continues to improve, and in some cases, such as C&I and auto lending, charge-offs and delinquencies are at historic lows.  Demand for credit is weak, but banks are aggressively competing for whatever loan volume is available.  Funding for loans is abundant as deposits continue to grow, and banks need loans to bolster shrinking interest margins. As for pent-up demand, maybe the best place to watch for it might be in auto sales.  While auto sales have strengthened, they are still well below pre-crisis levels.  Inventories on dealer lots are pretty lean, and the low level of sales over the past few years has resulted in an aging of the existing fleet.  Furthermore, credit is plentiful enough across the full spectrum of credit quality to meet whatever demand materializes. Indeed, banks report a strong demand for auto loans, low delinquencies in auto portfolios, and record prices at auction for repossessed vehicles, but I will wait to see the data on total sales as I take Governor Yellen’s admonition to heart, and besides, I’ve seen her car.  [Laughter] Some other random comments from my bank calls give me a sense that discretionary consumer spending might also be coming from pent-up demand or at least from a less fearful consumer.  Spending on credit and debit cards is up 5 to 7 percent, with the majority of the increase coming from discretionary spending rather than for necessities.  What increase there is in necessity spending is apparently currently driven by fuel purchases.  Discount retailers also reported higher sales of discretionary items, while a higher-end retailer commented that customers were choosing higher price point items. Las Vegas visitor count and gaming revenues  are up, even as spending per visitor is not quite back to previous levels.  Tourism bounced back in southwest Florida this season, resulting in a need to book restaurant reservations weeks in advance.  And finally, an indicator of willingness to spend for what, in my opinion, is the most discretionary of purchases, one bank reported record demand for recreational vehicles and marine lending. Turning now to housing and mortgage lending, several programs designed to reduce the flow of foreclosed homes to the market seem to be getting good traction.  Most banks report mortgage lending at capacity with significant percentages of the volume coming from HARP 2 applications.  HARP 2 is the revised program aimed at refinancing underwater mortgages. In fact, HARP applications are so strong that one bank has revised its projection of aggregate gross 2012 mortgage production up from $1 trillion to $1.2 or $1.3 trillion.  REO to rental has been identified as a way to reduce the flow of owner-occupied properties to the market.  The GSEs are getting good response to their pilot offering of blocks of REO properties for sale, and seeing this response, a major servicer recently also put a bulk sale of homes on the market.  The State Attorneys General agreement has strong incentives to complete principal reduction modifications within the first 12 months, and early indications are that servicers are off to a fast start and borrower response rates are higher than expected. In the traditional homeowner-to-homeowner housing market, I continue to hear stories of shortened times on market, multiple offers, and other signals that a number of markets have shifted from favoring buyers to favoring sellers and that we may be at the inflection point between falling and rising prices.  And as evidence that continuing high levels of loans past due or in foreclosure do not necessarily preclude improvement in house prices, I would point out that  two areas, Phoenix and Florida, with the nation’s highest past due and foreclosure rates, have also, according to Zillow, seen stable and increasing prices. I asked staff to estimate the effect on economic conditions if house prices rose by more than we expect.  Using a scenario that put house prices 10 percent higher than the Tealbook baseline by the end of 2014 resulted in increased real GDP growth of 0.2 to 0.5 percentage point and a reduced unemployment rate of up to 0.2 percentage point in 2014, depending on the assumptions about the channels through which house prices might work.  I really have no idea how these anecdotes will play out or even where to look for the first signs in the data, but I believe that these stories indicate at least a potential to start a virtuous cycle.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How do the data in Las Vegas square with President Kocherlakota’s view on risk aversion. [Laughter]  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The laughter suggests that there is a disagreement or disbelief regarding President Kocherlakota's view on risk aversion.


Passage number 257.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The first thing I want to say is I’m not going to talk with President Dudley anymore on the day before these meetings because he takes all of the best stuff that comes out of our conversations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker will no longer talk with President Dudley before meetings because he takes all of the best insights from their conversations.


Passage number 258.
  [Laughter] MR. DUDLEY. Clear your money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The presence of laughter suggests a lighthearted or humorous tone, rather than an argumentative one. Additionally, the statement "Clear your money" does not involve a disagreement, but rather is a command or instruction.


Passage number 259.
 MR. TARULLO.  But it does shorten, though, what I can say because I can now just incorporate it by reference. I did want to reiterate and expand on a couple of things that Bill alluded to and a couple of things that he didn’t. First, although I, as people may remember, was among the more skeptical in each of the past two springs about the sustainability of what then appeared to be increasing economic growth, I’m actually somewhat more optimistic this time around. It does seem to me that some combination of the changes in household balance sheets, easing of financial conditions, trends inthe housing market, and PCE increases together suggests that there is some more prospect of self-sustaining momentum than we’ve seen.  Having said that though, I think almost every one of those elements has a qualification in it. The household balance sheets are in better shape, but income is not rising all that quickly and doesn’t show any particular prospect of doing so.  The housing market seems to have bottomed out and may be slightly improving, but as Janet explained, it hasn’t translated into firmer prices yet.  Moreover, I think that until the GSE reform issue has a clearer endpoint, you’re not going to see a restart in private-label securitization, which is going to hold down some growth in housing as well. The second point I wanted to make is that some factors that people refer to as downside risks are basically just that. The Middle East, which Eric referred to, is definitely a downside risk—something really bad happens, and the result is a shock to the economy.  But a couple of other things that a number of people—not here, but in the world—refer to as downside risks are more than that.  They’re the reality of decreased economic growth or impediments to growth as well as downside risks. On Europe, the continued European travails are likely both to produce periodic risk aversion globally, including in the United States, and to keep the dollar stronger than it otherwise would be, thereby making exports a less probable source of growth over the coming couple of years. I do think that the European situation is going to drag on.  The structure of EU decisionmaking, particularly in the presence of the shaky domestic positions of most incumbent governments, is almost assuring that that is the case.  And—this is somewhat in answer to Richard’s question earlier—although recent and potential electoral shifts may bring welcome attention to the need for growth policies for peripheral countries in an environment in which exchange rate changes are not an option, I think it’s very unlikely that that shift in orientation  will come without a good bit of rockiness in markets and in the politics of European councils.  There is not a framework in place that Europeans can dial up and dial down depending on shifts in sentiment.  Instead, you’ve had a quite polarized process that I don’t think is going to be easy to thaw with a change in government.  At best it’s going to take some time. Similarly, and Bill did allude to this, the fiscal issues to be addressed at the end of 2012 are not just a downside risk.  It’s a cliff, but it’s not as if we wait to see whether Thelma and Louise get to drive the car.  Instead, I think it’s already becoming a negative influence on the real economy or shortly will be.  This is not your normal case of regulatory or fiscal uncertainty.  We always have regulatory and fiscal uncertainty, but as David was saying in his presentation, the combination of the Bush tax cuts, the payroll tax cut, extended unemployment, and the debt ceiling at the same time, quite rationally produced a lot of heretofore quiet and soon-to-be considerably more public talk about whether there is reason to hold back on investments.  My guess is that as you get further into the year, a lot of that talk will have households thinking maybe we ought to wait before making a major purchase. All of those qualifications together put me in the more tepid end of forecasts for at least the next 12 to 15 months.  But as I’ve said the past couple of economic go-rounds, I don’t think it matters enormously whether those of you who are more in the central tendency or a little higher up are going to be proven right as opposed to me, who’s a little bit further down, precisely because of the fact that there is, by any reasonable measure, a substantial resource utilization gap still to be filled.  Here is where I can incorporate by reference the remarks today and in the past couple of weeks of various presidents of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, who have reviewed the labor market situation very well. I’d only add a couple of points.  As Bill said, again, there’s absolutely no sign of wage pressures, certainly not in the aggregate, and so far as  our staff, whom I continue to quiz on this point, can determine, not in any significant sector as well. There is a real prospect of structural damage.  Here I agree with what Narayana has been looking at for some time now, but it seems to me that the kind of structural damage that we may be facing is very unlikely to be a mismatch story.  If you look at the indications of typical mismatch, you’re not finding them right now in the data that we’re seeing.  One of the investment banks had a very nice little report on the experience of construction workers.  You’d think that if there’s one group that is likely to face mismatch it would be construction workers, but, in fact, the percentage of construction workers who have been in long-term unemployment is declining faster than in the labor market generally, and the hiring rate has risen much more rapidly than for the population as a whole.  It’s interesting—their wages in the new jobs are substantially lower than in their old jobs, but they are actually getting employed at a more rapid rate than in the economy more generally, so mismatch doesn’t seem to be an explanation there. Decline in the labor participation rate is something that obviously is going to have to be pored over, but one source of the actual decline, and John alluded to this, is in the very young cohort of people of 16 to 24.  That appears to have been largely, although not completely, explained by the fact that many college students who used to have part-time jobs can’t get them now.  As you think about it, if you are a college student working, you’re in the labor force and you have a job.  You’re in both the numerator and the denominator.  If you’re a college student who is not working anymore, you’re not counted as unemployed, and yet you’re now out of the labor force, and that may well be giving a slightly misleading indication of what’s been going on at that end of the labor market.  All in all, then, if there is a risk of structural damage, it still appears to me as though it’s the result of an insufficiently quick rebound in aggregate demand to get back into jobs all the people who lost them along the way, and not as a result of mismatches, which would defy any effort to create jobs through increased demand.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Tarullo expressing his opinions on the current economic situation.


Passage number 260.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply shows gratitude and acknowledges Governor Raskin.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 261.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  While some data have come in more positively, my projections remain mostly unchanged due to a continued concern about more than a modest strength and durability to our recovery.  I’ll focus my remarks on consumer spending as one relevant prism. In particular, there are five factors influencing my ongoing concerns regarding consumer spending.  Let’s call them, one, real disposable income is flat; two, new jobs are low wage; three, student debt can crowd out spending; four, this is a presidential election year; and, five, fiscal policy is becoming increasingly restrictive. The first factor relates to the weakness in real disposable income.  Of all the factors driving growth in consumption, the factor with the greatest effect is real disposable income.  However, Americans’ disposable income has been rising at a subpar pace in recent quarters and, given recent price increases at the gas pump, appears to have been especially anemic in the first quarter. Real wages, in particular, have remained flat for some time.  Unless income growth steps up considerably or households start to take on excessive amounts of debt again, I believe American households have insufficient means to propel faster consumption growth. The second factor influencing my concern about consumer spending relates to the fact that the job growth that has occurred has been concentrated in very low-wage occupations. According to the National Employment Law Project, lower-wage occupations—retail salespersons, office clerks, food prep workers, and stock clerks—grew by 3.2 percent from the first quarter of 2010 through the first quarter of 2011, while mid-wage occupations rose just 1.2 percent, and higher-wage occupations actually declined 1.2 percent.  This may suggest that workers across the distribution are taking less-lucrative positions.  They’re taking whatever jobs they can get.  This is a form of underemployment that isn’t captured by the latest employment data, but will likely continue to contribute to the subpar income growth.  Unfortunately, this may not turn around any time soon.  The Bureau of Labor Statistics projects that five of the top six occupations with the most job growth from 2010 to 2020 will be low-wage jobs. Third, I’m concerned that high levels of student debt coupled with a poor labor market for post-college entry-level jobs may impede consumer spending.  Total student borrowing has grown rapidly in recent years.  Structural forces, such as rapidly rising tuition and an increasing share of high school graduates entering post-secondary education, are the main culprits, though cyclical forces, such as a lack of good job market prospects, are likely also important. Increased levels of education-related debt incurred in youth may crowd out spending on cars, houses, or other items in later years.  This could affect not only today’s youth, but also today’s adults.  Many of my cohort feel pressured to take out loans to help with their children’s education expenses, and are themselves now helping make payments on student loans. Fourth, I project consumption to be damped this year through a worsening of consumer confidence as the presidential election heats up. It may feel as if the presidential debate is about dogs riding on car roofs.  No, the focus of this election year is the economy, and extensive campaigning is likely to accentuate discontent with the economic recovery. So even if the data are improving, that may be nearly irrelevant to people’s perception that the economic recovery is subpar.  This perception could show up in lackluster confidence and consumer spending.   Fifth and last, fiscal policy is likely to be essentially inoperative as a tool to help revive the economy.  In fact, the fiscal policy situation is worse than inoperative. It is actively contractionary.  Current estimates of total fiscal impetus indicate that fiscal policy is expected to impose a drag of a little more than ¼ percentage point of real GDP this year, 1 percentage point of GDP next year, and then a little more than ¼ percentage point of real GDP in 2014.  These expectations could be larger if any one of the pieces of legislation that the Congress needs to act on later this year fails to materialize. My projections reflect a sense that the fiscal cliff issues will not be resolved without collateral damage.  As we saw after the debt ceiling negotiations last summer, it is entirely possible that there will be a drop-off of consumer sentiment that will exacerbate the drag on consumption and the overall economy.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Raskin, expresses ongoing concerns about the strength and durability of the recovery, while acknowledging that some data have come in more positively. She lists five factors that influence her concerns regarding consumer spending, including flat real disposable income, low-wage job growth, student debt, the presidential election, and restrictive fiscal policy. These factors suggest a negative outlook for consumer spending, which is different from a more positive outlook that might be derived from the "positively" coming data.


Passage number 262.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Thank you all for contributions that were both insightful and crisp.  Very good.  I will hold off on my own comments until first thing in the morning.  We begin tomorrow at 8:30.  There is a reception and dinner available upstairs at the Terrace, and so I’ll see you then and see you in the morning.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and providing logistical information about the schedule and dinner arrangements.


Passage number 263.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Any questions for Bill.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite statement expressing gratitude and inviting questions for Bill from President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 264.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, I have a question about the optimal control exercise and using that as justification for the language in alternative B. My understanding of the optimal control exercise is that people know that you are keeping rates low in conditions in which you would normally raise them.  Is that a correct interpretation of what is going on.  Or maybe I’m misunderstanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is simply seeking clarification and expressing a need for further understanding.


Passage number 265.
 MR. ENGLISH. I am not sure that is exactly right. It is the optimal path for the funds rate, but given that people understand that that will be the optimal path of the funds rate.  So they understand that it is a conditional commitment to that path for the funds rate.  I’m not sure there is any sense that it is deviating from past behavior or from some rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and questioning whether there is any perception of deviation from past behavior or rules.


Passage number 266.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m sorry.  It is a credible path and it is an optimal path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the path being referred to is credible and optimal.


Passage number 267.
 MR. ENGLISH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 268.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But there would possibly be at the end some regret from the point of view of the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "there would possibly be at the end some regret" simply implies that there might be some regret from the Committee's perspective, without asserting any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 269.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  That’s what I was trying to get at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging what the other person was trying to convey.


Passage number 270.
 MR. FISHER.  Temptation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple mention of the word "Temptation" and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 271.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  There is a temptation, yes, whereas the language in alternative B maybe doesn’t convey that the Committee is facing temptation and deciding not to  go with that, if you see what I’m saying.  An important part of the stimulus that is being offered in the optimal control exercise is the fact that the Committee is willing to keep rates low, even though it is tempted to raise rates to fight inflation. It comes back to this conversation I had with Brian yesterday:  Are we keeping rates low because we think the economy is going to be bad for a very long time, or is it because we are trying to provide extra stimulus.  I think the people in the model, the optimal control exercise, know the answer to that.  I am not so sure that people reading the statement will be so clear on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing personal uncertainty about how the language in alternative B conveys the Committee's willingness to keep rates low.


Passage number 272.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I guess I would just point out that in the particular simulation the regret is pretty small because inflation is essentially 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 273.
 MR. FISHER.  That’s true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 274.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it only mentions the name of a person, "President Evans."


Passage number 275.
 MR. EVANS. It is certainly the case, the way you describe it, that a policymaker optimizing is going to make this choice and then later is going to be tempted to make a different choice.  We somehow, though, are willing to be totally agnostic about something like a Taylor rule, whether it be 1993 or 19 99.  We just put that on the table, and we don’t describe whether or not the policymaker would want to deviate.  If I wanted to get worked up about something like this, I could propose something like, what if we looked at Taylor (1999) plus two meetings beyond that.  That is a perfectly fine rule.  It all comes down to the public basically understanding we are in this for quite some time relative to how we look at this.  I don’t see a lot of value added beyond that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. It is just discussing different viewpoints and perspectives without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 276.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, if I might, Mr. Chairman.  All I was trying to suggest is that I think the public is confused about whether or not the Fed is keeping rates low because it thinks the economy is going to be bad over this stretch, or it is keeping rates low because it isproviding extra stimulus beyond that. In the optimal control exercise that parsing is done by the agents in the model, and the statement is not guiding them, in my view, effectively on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is simply trying to clarify the confusion surrounding the Federal Reserve's decision to keep interest rates low.


Passage number 277.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. My plan, if asked the question in the press conference, would be to say that there are a number of factors involved, including the outlook, the desire to provide additional stimulus to compensate for the zero lower bound, the downside risks—I think a story that says that there are a number of things that lead us to this decision would probably satisfy the public.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is providing a suggestion for how to respond to a question in a press conference.


Passage number 278.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  The press conference does provide a way to provide some color.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the press conference is a way to provide additional information or details. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 279.
 MR. ENGLISH. As I mentioned, we did make one change to the statement in paragraph 2, pointing out that the gradual pickup in the pace of growth that is projected is supported by the highly accommodative monetary policy, and that may give at least a flavor of what you were getting at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining a change made to a statement and acknowledging the potential understanding behind it.


Passage number 280.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact, without any conflicting views or opinions being presented.


Passage number 281.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Tarullo without giving any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 282.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, the April 17 staff memo provides very useful background for the paragraph 3.1 proposal in alternative A for a maturity extension program.  One thing that wasn’t addressed in that memo was the potential impact of the Treasury’s debt management policies.  And I ask about that because, although I think we all realize the direction in which those policies affected our maturity extension program, I have been surprised by a couple of recent papers about the possible magnitude of the impact of the Treasury maturity extension on the efficacy of the MEP. I wondered whether you or Brian or both hadany perspective on how the Treasury’s current debt management plans would offset the efficacy of the proposal in 3.1 of A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification and perspective on the potential impact of Treasury's debt management policies on a proposal.


Passage number 283.
 MR. ENGLISH.  You have to be a little careful in talking about “offsetting.” I think the issue there is that the Treasury has a plan; it is going to do whatever it is going to do.  As long as it doesn’t change that plan in response to your decision to do an MEP or not to do an MEP, then the marginal effect of what this Committee does is whatever it is. That’s what we have calculated in the memo. The question is, is there feedback.  As the Committee engages, say, in a new extended MEP, and that makes long rates lower than they would otherwise be, does the Treasury shift its issuance into those longer maturities in order to take advantage of those lower rates.  Our interactions with the Treasury suggest that is not true, and that it has a plan—it has had it for some time—to extend the average maturity of its outstandings.  It is implementing that plan. That plan is understood in the market, and there is no change to what it does because of what the Committee does. That would suggest that the effects of implementing a new MEP are exactly what we described in the memo.  Brian, do you have any further thoughts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining the Treasury's plan and addressing the question of whether the Committee's decision would change that plan. There is no clear disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 284.
 MR. SACK.  No.  I completely agree.  The Treasury’s debt management decisions have been lengthening the average maturity of the debt, but not in response to our programs or to yields.  In fact, the major debt innovation that is on the table today is to issue floating rate notes, which goes in exactly the other direction by putting less duration into the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is agreement. The speaker states that they completely agree and explains that the Treasury's debt management decisions have been lengthening the average maturity of the debt, which is not in response to their programs or yields. They also mention that the major debt innovation being discussed is to issue floating rate notes, which goes in the opposite direction by putting less duration into the market.


Passage number 285.
 MR. TARULLO. Regardless of what the preexisting plan was, it presumably had a non-trivial, and by some measures quite significant, effect in that the simultaneous extension of maturity of Treasury debt with our programs did offset one another to some degree, not perhaps in a responsive sense but in a market sense, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 286.
 MR. ENGLISH.  But the way to think about it is if the Committee, say, decided to not do an extension of the MEP, and the Treasury continues with its program of extending the average maturity of their debt, then that is going to push up longer-term rates a little bit because it is going to change the distribution of outstanding debt.  That is built into the pricing of assets today.  You can take your action and provide additional accommodation by pushing against that or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement as it is explaining a hypothetical scenario and its potential effects.


Passage number 287.
 MR. TARULLO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 288.
  No, I understand that, but— MR. SACK.  Yes. The Treasury’s decisions affect the duration in the market through the same mechanism that we have talked about in terms of the effects of our programs.  And, indeed, a lot of the empirical analysis, including the affine-term-structure model and a lot of the regression models, actually have a factor in there for overall debts supplied to the public, not just our balance sheet, so they find this effect more broadly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging the point made by the other person ("No, I understand that, but"), and then the speaker agrees and expands on that point.


Passage number 289.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no passage provided in the question, only the fragment "President Lacker." Without more context, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 290.
 MR. LACKER.  If I could just follow up.  This goes to the relationship of the Committee with the Treasury.  This is sort of a critical thing, and there is an open question in my mind.  Did we ever seek an understanding with the Treasury that it would not offset, in the sense you described, by adjusting its debt issuance policies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing doubt and uncertainty regarding whether the Committee sought an understanding with the Treasury regarding its debt issuance policies.


Passage number 291.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I wouldn’t say “we sought.”  We had conversations with them to see what the Treasury’s management plans were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. English about his actions without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 292.
 MR. LACKER.  Did we ask them before we did this what they would do, or at any time did you ask them, would you respond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply asking if a certain action was taken.


Passage number 293.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I had conversations with the Secretary, and he indicated that they had made plans based on debt management principles and consultations with the Treasury Borrowing Advisory Council, and so on, and that the Treasury did not intend to “take advantage” of the lower rate structure that the Fed was providing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the Secretary had conversations, made plans, and expressed the Treasury's intention not to "take advantage" of the lower rate structure provided by the Fed.


Passage number 294.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  So he volunteered that, in other words.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states an individual's statement or action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 295.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  There has been no issue of independence here.  Yes, he volunteered that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "he volunteered that" suggests that there is a contradiction or differing opinion implied after stating that there has been no issue of independence. The phrase implies that someone (possibly the person referred to as "he") has contradicted or provided a different perspective on the issue.


Passage number 296.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply shows the speaker expressing gratitude.


Passage number 297.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions for Bill. [No response] If not, we can begin our go-round, and I will start with Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply mentions that there are no questions for Bill, and suggests moving on to the next topic, which is Governor Yellen.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of thanks from President Lacker.


Passage number 299.
 It strikes me that it doesn’t belong in paragraph 2, which I think Dudley’s doctrine is that— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Paragraph 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement in Paragraph 1.


Passage number 300.
 MR. LACKER. What.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: is the passage you are referring to?


Passage number 301.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s paragraph 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in paragraph 1. It primarily provides background information and sets the context for the rest of the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 302.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, no, paragraph 1 is about the data.  Paragraph 2 is about our forecast, and paragraph 3 is about our policy.  That’s what I thought of as the structure we were gravitating to.  Plus it seems to race to take credit for a gradually improving recovery.  It seems to be a bit of patting ourselves on the back.  I don’t support this last clause here.  We should drop “supported by highly accommodative monetary policy.” I don’t think we want to double the forward-guidance language. If we slip it in there, then it’s going to be hard to take out without being viewed as sending some signal, and it just complicates our policy communication.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker disagrees with including the phrase "supported by highly accommodative monetary policy" in the text because he believes it complicates policy communication and could be misinterpreted as sending a signal.


Passage number 303.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Just the logic of it is that paragraph 2 is supposed to motivate the policy action in paragraph 3.  Without that, we’re sort of saying things are going to get better.  Then the question is, why are we maintaining policy so low for so long.  That’s the conditionality that is trying to be expressed there. But obviously we can talk about that phrase.   For the record, the median voter’s view of policy is 1 percent at the end of 2014, so it’s close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the logical connection between paragraph 2 and paragraph 3 and how it motivates the policy action. They also mention the median voter's view of policy at the end of 2014 for reference.


Passage number 304.
 MR. FISHER.  What was that, Mr. Chairman.  I’m sorry.  I couldn’t hear you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they couldn't hear the Chairman and apologizing for it.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The median voter’s SEP projection is for the funds rate to be 1 percent at the end of 2014.  Are you supportive, by the way, of the idea of separating the rotating and permanent members as Governor Yellen mentioned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the median voter's projection for the funds rate and asks a separate question about the idea of separating rotating and permanent members.


Passage number 306.
 MR. LACKER. It seems a little fussy to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply reflects the speaker's personal opinion or perspective.


Passage number 307.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fussy.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The words "Fussy. Okay. Thank you." do not contain any conflicting or contradictory statements. They simply express a response or acknowledgement.


Passage number 308.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to be arguing in favor of broken analogies.  [Laughter]  The Tealbook forecast has the unemployment rate above 7 percent and PCE inflation below 2 percent in 2014.  I agree with this forecast, which would imply to me that we should not be tightening until 2015.  I would also highlight that the SEP central tendency for real GDP in 2014 is lower than January, and the central tendency for unemployment in 2014 is 6.7 to 7.4 percent rather than the 6.7 to 7.6 in January, which I view as virtually identical.  With our forecast the same, there’s no reason to change our guidance.  Thus, I’m comfortable with option B. However, such weak economic growth does raise the issue of why we are not trying to do more to promote a faster recovery.  One potential reason is that monetary policy is not able to promote faster economic growth.  Yet, empirical work by my staff highlights that monetary policy currently operates similarly to previous periods, with the exception of residential investment.  Thus, it is broadly consistent with the staff memo on the attenuation of monetary policy.  So if monetary policy is still effective and if we have unemployment above 7 percent in 2014, should we do more. I think the answer is yes.  At this point, I would focus on using language to provide further stimulus, which has proven to be surprisingly effective.  As I highlighted yesterday, I view our language as not helpful to reducing uncertainty.  My preference would be to adopt language that employs so-called triggers.  That is, we will not consider raising rates until the unemployment rate hits 7 percent or the inflation rate is forecast to be persistently higher than our target.  That does not seem to have sufficient backing at present, so let me suggest an alternative. The alternative would be to adopt language similar to my analogy yesterday on military withdrawals, which conveys the date holds unless there is significant and  material change in the conditions on the ground.  For example, we could add a sentence after “2014” in paragraph 4 that says, “The Committee expects that only very significant revisions in its economic assessment will alter its forward guidance of exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate.” This would highlight that minor changes in our forecast would not alter our liftoff date.  Earlier liftoff dates would be viewed as a tightening, and because we rarely quickly reverse direction, it is likely to be viewed as the start of a series of tightenings, which will cause the market to tighten much more than we may wish to imply by our change of language.  Given the fragility of financial markets, the downside risk at the end of the year, and the forecast for a very slow recovery, we should be careful that our language does not inadvertently remove much-needed stimulus.  Perhaps the best way to do so at present is to use language similar to my suggested alternative that conveys a greater commitment to keeping rates at exceptionally low levels through 2014.  Also, I support the suggestions by Governor Yellen to look for further improvements in the SEP process.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with a forecast and highlighting their preference for certain language and actions.


Passage number 309.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply thanks President Plosser and does not present any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 310.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Although I don’t think today is the day to change our policy stance—in that sense, I think alternative B is the right direction to go—I do think it is very likely that economic conditions will warrant a change in policy considerably sooner than 2014.  Indeed, based on my forecast, I believe it will be appropriate to begin reducing the level of accommodation as soon as either late this year or early 2013.  Given the large error bands around our forecast, especially those two or three years out, I am concerned that our signaling that policy is likely to remain on hold for two or three years is potentially having more of a detrimental impact than a positive one on the real economy. As President Rosengren said yesterday, many business people come to me and say, “Does that mean you think   the world is going to be terrible for the next three years.  Why do I want to invest now.  I am going to wait.” There is still great confusion as our discussion continues about what the 2014 date means.  We need to get away from the calendar date language and move to more state-contingent language that better links the changes in economic conditions to the changes in our policy.  Clarifying for the public what factors guide our policy decisions would help keep inflation expectations well anchored and yield better economic outcomes. There are two views that seem to be expressed around this table in various degrees about the calendar date language.  One is that it is a commitment, and the commitment largely flows from models in which you are trying to target the price level as opposed to inflation.  The big challenge with that framework of course is, can we commit, and can we deliver on a credible commitment to do so.  Another interpretation is that it is a forecast, and if it is a forecast then the dates should be moving around as our forecast changes.  There is a variety of views around this table about which of those is in action here.  Our strategy seems to be a little bit of both of them.  That is difficult to sell to the public because it leaves them confused as to what we are doing and why. If we want to make a commitment to a price-level target, we should do that, and then explain that is what we are doing. If we want to make a forecast, then the date ought to change and we ought to tell the public what our forecast is, what it depends upon, and then what are the things that will change it. I am less enamored with optimal control solutions, particularly of FRB/US, and what they tell me.  What we know from our memo that we received before the March meeting about optimal control in different types of models is that optimal control solutions can vary a lot depending on the model you write down and can give you very different paths.  So I am dubious of relying too heavily on a particular model’s optimal control, which is why I prefer the more  robust rules that the Tealbook reports on, whether it be Taylor (1999), Taylor (1993), a first difference rule, or outcome-based rules. I think we need to move in that direction and move away from calendar dates. My suggestion, of course, would be, as I propose in the language, to split the difference and begin introducing the factors that actually go into our forecast and the things that we will consider as we try to move policy around. For some good reasons, the Committee has resisted the temptation in previous meetings to move to either a price-level target or a level of nominal GDP target.  And so, in my view, the “2014” language leaves us in kind of “Never Never Land.” We are neither fish nor fowl.  I think that is very confusing to the public, and it is something we need to move away from.  There is not an easy solution to this.  I proposed one to consider, but we need to move away from the calendar date language to a more contingent statement. I will just leave it at that, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the current policy stance and the use of calendar date language to communicate policy decisions. They argue for a more state-contingent approach and express skepticism towards optimal control solutions.


Passage number 311.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Staff corrected me, the median voter’s projection is 75 basis points at the end of 2014.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The statement is just a correction made by the staff regarding the projected median voter's projection for the end of 2014.


Passage number 312.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or expressions of disagreement or contention. It appears to be a simple introduction or response without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 313.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The median voter’s projection is 75 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply states the projection of the median voter as being 75 basis points.


Passage number 314.
 MR. LACKER.  I don’t see a dot there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they don't see a dot there.


Passage number 315.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, there are 10 votes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 316.
 MR. LACKER.  So it’s in between—I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements. It appears to be a simple statement or observation.


Passage number 317.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Between the fifth and the sixth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The question is incomplete as it does not include the specific passage for analysis. Please provide the passage in question so that a proper evaluation can be made.


Passage number 318.
 MR. LACKER. I just wanted to clarify that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments. It is simply a statement about wanting to clarify something.


Passage number 319.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I would need the specific passage you are referring to in order to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 320.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First off, I would like to say I agree with everything that Governor Yellen said. I thought that was a terrific statement of the situation. Ifavor a strongly accommodative monetary policy stance that reduces resource slack more quickly than our SEP and Tealbook projections.  The preponderance of macroeconomic analyses indicate that this can be done without generating inflation above a rate that would violate our agreed-upon balanced-approach consensus policy framework, and most likely inflation would not increase to anywhere near those upper thresholds.  That is evident from the Tealbook B, and the comments that Janet made. Displaying a greater commitment to the optimal control monetary policy makes a lot of sense to me—it would generate better outcomes.  The comments about how we should keep the funds rate lower longer—that would be excellent.  I agree with President Rosengren’s suggestion that the change to our calendar date language should meet a heavy burden before we undertake that. Now, recognizing that in fact alternative B is the front-runner today, I would like to argue for at least maintaining the status quo within our implementation of alternative B.  That is, unless a subtle policy tightening is intended today, how can the calendar date policy intentions from last August, January, and March be maintained in their effectiveness when we implement alternative B. I have in mind that we are facing a couple of dilemmas with our implementation along the lines of some things that President Kocherlakota and President Lacker have already mentioned.  First, we have to remember that back in August when we introduced the calendar date language, it came with three disagreements from the voting members.  In January, we picked up another disagreement, so there are differences of opinion clearly.  And according to our SEP submissions, and a very vocal public commentary as we go out and talk, there appear to be six participants who prefer much less accommodation with a federal funds liftoff in either 2012 or 2013. From this observation, it seems to follow immediately that the SEP projections cannot   impart the status quo forward guidance intended by the August, January, and March FOMC statements.  A different choice was made than was evident in the SEP. To recap, dilemma number one, SEPs don’t seem to work in clarifying our “late 2014” forward guidance.  That is a feature.  We just can’t point to the SEPs and hope that the public is going to figure it out.  So now what.  Second dilemma, describing “late 2014” as simply a forecast is incomplete, and I would say misleading.  And as Narayana mentioned, the public is confused over how we are talking about this.  Our scenario exercise yesterday and Govenor Yellen’s speech last week provide the explanation for why just a forecast is an incomplete explanation. A statement that conditions will likely lead the FOMC to keep the federal funds rate at zero “at least through late 2014” combines three features—one, an outlook for the economy; two, an assessment of inflation pressures; and, three, very importantly, a concrete view of how the FOMC will alter the federal funds rate when the economy and inflation outlooks change.  This last condition is a statement of the Committee’s, or at least the core of the Committee’s, monetary policy reaction function.  Now, yesterday President Kocherlakota was optimistic that we are not far from a common reaction function, and I would certainly delight in discovering that that is true, that we have such a thing, but the SEPs, at least, suggest differently.  Effective communication of our “late 2014” guidance requires, first, adequately describing the monetary policy response function that was intended by the August, January, and March decisions.  Then we assess whether the forecast is different, whether output is growing faster or slower, unemployment is improving, and what not.  But we have to give the public some idea of how we are responding.   Mr. Chairman, all of your research on monetary policy, VARs, empirical reaction functions, and the like make things like that abundantly clear.  An example would be to describe something like a Taylor (1999) reaction function.  Janet started this ball rolling in public.  We have started discussions today.  Various staff analyses have suggested that there is, in fact, a basis for that within so many of the things that we talk about.  But six SEP participants clearly have different views, so it strikes me that unanimous consent seems beyond our grasp on this issue, and, frankly, only your comments at the press conference can clarify what is really meant by alternative B guidance.  It is more than just a forecast.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement as the speaker agrees with Governor Yellen and expresses support for a strongly accommodative monetary policy stance.


Passage number 321.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is addressing someone as "Mr. Chairman," indicating a formal and respectful tone.


Passage number 322.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: There is no passage provided, therefore it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 323.
 MR. LACKER.  President Evans, I used “forecast” in a different way than you are using the word “forecast,” and I want to make sure we understand each other.  When I forecast the economy in late 2014, I can’t do that without thinking about what policy is going to be, and not only that, but even what policy is expected to be beyond late 2014.  I think of the word “forecast” as a joint exercise of forecasting us and the economy interacting over the next several years.  And yet you seem to distinguish the forecast for real output and inflation—I mean, you seem to be saying that this isn’t a forecast.  You seem to be using it in some more narrow sense that I don’t understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses confusion and seeks clarification about the different ways in which they and President Evans are using the word "forecast."


Passage number 324.
 MR. EVANS. It contains all three of those elements. It appears that we are in total agreement on what something like that means.  Whether or not we can carefully explain that to the public so they don’t get confused, that because GDP went up it must be the case that now the calendar date is going to move forward by X months.  Maybe it is going to be monotonic, and it is always going to move up.  But how big is X, and where are we starting from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker states that they are in total agreement on what something means, and they discuss the need to explain it to the public without causing confusion. They raise questions about specific details like the magnitude of change (X) and the starting point, but there is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 325.
   MR. LACKER.  Did you say the forward-guidance language isn’t a forecast.  Did I hear you right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 326.
 MR. EVANS.  I said it is a combination of all three of those elements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans simply states that the answer is a combination of all three elements.


Passage number 327.
 MR. LACKER.  You mean it is a combination of forecasts of all three of those things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the forecast is a combination of three things.


Passage number 328.
 MR. EVANS.  It is all simultaneous, sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is stating that everything is happening simultaneously, indicating agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 329.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay. We agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In the passage, Mr. Lacker states "Okay. We agree." This shows that there is no contention or disagreement in the conversation.


Passage number 330.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We differ on our projections of the rate for two reasons.  One is our forecast of the underlying forces of the economy.  Some people are more optimistic, some are more pessimistic.  And, secondly, because we have different reaction functions. If we all had the same reaction function, the problem would be solved because even if we differ on the economy, we could at least state the conditionality for our policy action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that they have differing projections due to their views on the underlying forces of the economy and their different reaction functions. However, they also mention that if they had the same reaction function, they would be able to at least agree on the conditionality for their policy action. This suggests a desire for consensus rather than contention.


Passage number 331.
 MR. LACKER.  That’s clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker's statement is straightforward and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 332.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s the problem we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a problem without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 333.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The word "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage, but without further context, it is unclear what the disagreement is about.


Passage number 334.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I want to reiterate that I take some blame for the problem we have here because I really did think that we would be able to come to some kind of conditionality, but we haven’t been able to do that yet.  But I have amazing optimism about the ability for us to figure this out sometime soon.  [Laughter]  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges taking some blame for the problem at hand and expresses optimism about finding a solution in the near future.


Passage number 335.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In the absence of any provided passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 336.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B based on the general tenor of recent data, improving forecasts particularly for the unemployment rate, and my own forecast that inflation will average close to 2 percent.  My preferred path for the funds rate recognizes that substantial policy accommodation may need to remain in place for some time as the unemployment rate remains elevated and improvements in the housing sector remain modest.  Even so, I believe it is important that we begin to lay the groundwork for our exit strategy in order to reduce the risk of unintended consequences related to the current stance of monetary policy. Turning to the statement, I generally agree with the description that modestly upgrades the characterization of current economic conditions and the outlook from the March meeting. In addition, the current SEP projections for the unemployment rate do show improvement since the January projections.  In my view, and consistent with the language in the statement, the forward   guidance embodied in the late 2014 date is a forecast by Committee members of when the federal funds rate is likely to be increased for the first time.  I do not believe it is, or should be, viewed as an unconditional commitment.  So in comparing conditions now with those during the January meeting when we moved the date from mid-2013 to late 2014, I think markets and the broader public may likely find it hard to understand why the late 2014 date has not been changed to reflect the firmer outlook.  Moreover, acknowledging that the outlook has improved by shifting the date could also have a positive effect through confidence and expectation channels. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker supports alternative B but disagrees with the decision to keep the late 2014 date for increasing the federal funds rate. The speaker believes that the outlook has improved and believes that shifting the date could have a positive effect.


Passage number 337.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 338.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not providing any information or making any claims that could lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 339.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In thinking about the monetary policy decision in the statement, I found myself referring to what I have found over the years to be the most useful resource, and that is the dictionary.  [Laughter] In the past, we have had to study what the word “considerable” meant, “measured,” “exigent,” and this time I found myself studying what the word “late” means.  Now, there are several definitions of the word “late,” and actually this difference in the definitions may explain some of the disagreement around the table about our language.  For example, one meaning of the word “late” is “occurring after the correct or usual time.” I think President Lacker is actually thinking that that is [laughter] the definition we are using. A synonym is “tardy,” by the way. But actually the definition of “late” that I think we are referring to does seem to fit with our statement.  It is “toward or near the end of a period.” With that somewhat loose definition in mind, I find that I do support alternative B in the statement as is. I am growing increasingly concerned that the “late 2014” language is reaching the end of its shelf life.  Indeed, I raised my projection for the funds rate for the end of 2014 to 1 percent, with liftoff occurring in the fall of 2014.  Nevertheless, the uncertainty around my projections and the meaning of the word “late” is great enough that I can continue to support the current statement language. Now, I am about to talk about Taylor rules, and I am a little concerned about Vice Chairman Dudley’s headache, so I did bring some aspirin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their interpretation of a word and expressing their support for a particular statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 340.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. It will cost you a buck, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker is stating that there is a cost involved in the transaction.


Passage number 341.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I’ll suffer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker will suffer without providing any conflicting perspectives or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 342.
  [Laughter] MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 343.
 WILLIAMS. My thinking about the appropriate future path of policy is informed by the analysis of simple monetary policy rules, appropriately adjusted for the effects of the zero lower bound and LSAPs. In terms of simple rules, regression analysis shows that the Taylor (1999) rule is a pretty good description of historical FOMC behavior since the mid-1980s, the period of well-anchored inflation expectations.  Various staff studies similarly find that the unemployment-based Taylor (1999) rule provides a decent description of a participant’s fed funds projections from the January SEP.  And, as reported in the Tealbook B, such a policy rule implies liftoff in the first quarter of 2014.  But that is not the end of the story.  One also needs to take into account the implications of unconventional monetary policy actions and the zero bound in considering the prescriptions of a historical policy rule. In terms of an LSAP adjustment to the policy rule, the memo by the staff of the Minneapolis Fed circulated by President Kocherlakota was very helpful to my thinking.  Tealbook B now reports term premium estimates from the LSAPs, so it is possible to implement that adjustment. But there are reasons to believe that this adjustment overstates the effectiveness of LSAPs.  Research on the effects of our LSAP and MEP programs suggests a portion of the term premium effect is idiosyncratic to Treasury markets and does not fully pass through to private rates.  That is, for a given reduction in the 10-year Treasury yield, reductions in the term premiums through LSAPs don’t stimulate the economy as much as reductions in the expected path of short rates.  As a rough attempt to take account of this partial pass-through to general financial conditions, I cut the policy rule adjustments suggested by the Minneapolis memo roughly in half. Now, even with this adjustment for unconventional monetary policies, we have not been adding as much monetary stimulus as the historical policy rule would call for because of the zero bound. Fortunately, research tells us how to correct for this shortfall.  The so-called Reifschneider–Williams adjustment at a zero lower bound argues it is optimal to deviate from the usual policy rule and keep the federal funds rate lower than otherwise for a longer period.  Namely, the Reifschneider–Williams adjustment keeps track of the monetary policy deficit that is a cumulative amount by which the funds rate was too high in every quarter because of the zero bound constraint.  Once the zero bound ceases to bind, it calls for reductions in the policy rule prescription until this accumulated policy deficit is unwound.  Relative to the historical policy rule, we have accumulated a large monetary policy deficit since 2008.  And using my forecast for the economy, and after adjustments for LSAPs, the MEP, and the Reifschneider–Williams adjustment, the historical policy rule has liftoff in the third quarter of 2014. I should note that this liftoff is a little earlier than would be implied from using the Tealbook projection, because my forecast has a bit less slack and slightly higher inflation than the Tealbook does. Let me conclude by commenting on the risks to the outlook, which I view as being mostly to the downside.  Alternative A lays out two options that would be appropriate if these significant downside risks to the outlook materialize.  Finally, in response to Governor Yellen’s questions, I am fine with associating names in our internal presentation of SEPs.  I am, in fact,  “Respondent 14.”  I wasn’t quite sure about the other idea in terms of what was proposed, but I am okay with voting versus nonvoting participants being distinguished in terms of the public SEPs.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing the author's analysis and adjustment of monetary policy rules.


Passage number 344.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage consists of a polite expression of gratitude and a mention of President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 345.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I get into my own remarks, I had a question for President Williams about the Reifschneider–Williams analysis. The purpose of offering a correction for the deficit is to stimulate activity during the periods when you are incurring the deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 346.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not stating any specific information or making any claims that could lead to contention or disagreement. It is simply providing the abbreviation "MR" without any context.


Passage number 347.
 WILLIAMS.  That is exactly right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the previous statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 348.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  So, people at the time—2008 and 2009—would have to know that the Committee was planning to make that correction for it to be helpful, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage suggests that there may be contention or disagreement because Mr. Kocherlakota is asking for clarification on a specific course of action. This indicates that there may be differing opinions or perspectives on whether people at the time should have known about the Committee's plans.


Passage number 349.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The abbreviation "MR" is not sufficient to determine the presence of contention or disagreement without further context or information.


Passage number 350.
 WILLIAMS.  Right.  In the model simulations, the way it works is that the public understands and anticipates that you will do this correction.  One way I interpret it, if I can go on a little about this, is that the forward language is an attempt to try to align expectations of the public with our policy strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Williams, is explaining how the model simulations work and his interpretation of the forward language.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 351.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me ask you one question—which I don’t know the answer to, because I am not a lawyer—about your LSAP analysis.  If you are looking at a standard Taylor rule, would it matter if the funds rate had been much lower two years earlier or not so much lower two years earlier. In other words, to what extent does your current setting of the interest rate based on a current Taylor rule depend on stimulative actions that have been taken, say, two years earlier.  I think the answer is it wouldn’t depend at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a question and suggests a potential disagreement regarding the influence of past actions on the current setting of the interest rate based on a Taylor rule. The speaker believes that past actions would not have any influence, but there may be differing opinions on this matter.


Passage number 352.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It wouldn’t depend at all, except through whatever the state of the economy is today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact without presenting any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 353.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Exactly.  So why doesn’t that apply to LSAPs.  The LSAP actions we took in March of 2009 presumably have spread to the economy.  They have had effects on output, inflation, and so on, in the same way that lagged interest rate movements have had their effects.  So why doesn’t the fact that we are taking into account on the right-hand side the projected value of output and inflation—maybe not entirely because there may be effects still to come, but at least the part of the effect that is already taking place—in some sense already account for that through that mechanism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply posing a question and discussing the potential effects of LSAPs on the economy.


Passage number 354.
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. It’s an interesting question.  I have to think about it more, Mr. Chairman.  My immediate reaction is that the Committee has taken a purposeful step to reduce the term premium, and that is providing accommodation to the economy, and it is going to continue providing accommodation to the economy.  Taylor (1999) is trying to guide us in terms of how to think about what that level of accommodation is.  My immediate answer is that we are doing it the right way in terms of treating it in this fashion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their initial reaction to the question and expressing their thoughts on the topic.


Passage number 355.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The excerpt provided only includes Mr. Lacker addressing the chairman, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 356.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 357.
 MR. LACKER.  At the risk of making Vice Chairman Dudley’s head hurt, LSAPs are another policy instrument.  They kind of belong on the left-hand side in combination.  In other words, what is on the right-hand side is an output gap and other stuff, and it drives the funds rate until it gets to zero, at which point the equation drives LSAPs.  See what I’m saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is just explaining how LSAPs (Large-Scale Asset Purchases) function as a policy instrument in relation to the output gap and funds rate.


Passage number 358.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You are just restating the Taylor rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a simple observation or clarification about the content being discussed. There is no expression of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 359.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.


Passage number 360.
  But from that point of view, I think he is right in that you don’t— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s not obvious to me because I think at least some of that effect is already captured in the growth and inflation numbers on the right-hand side, but let’s leave that to another time. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker acknowledges that there may be a point of disagreement, but they are not engaging in any contention or argument about it.


Passage number 361.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Those are good observations.  Of course, what I have to say will depend to some extent on the questions I get.  But I appreciate the input.  You were kind enough to warn me about “tentative,” so I looked it up as well.  The first meaning is “experimental,” as you say, but the second meaning in two different dictionaries is “unsure, uncertain, not definite or positive.” I think it would be linguistically acceptable, but there may be good aesthetic reasons for dropping it.  We will be happy to take that up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging and appreciating the input and observations provided by someone else. They mention that there are alternate meanings for the word "tentative" and discuss the possibility of dropping it for aesthetic reasons. However, there is no clear disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 362.
 MR. EVANS.  We must have used it before in previous statements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply indicates that the speaker believes that they have used something before in previous statements.


Passage number 363.
 MR. FISHER. But it is—and strike this, please, from the transcript—a bastardization of proper English.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is expressing his opinion about a certain matter, but there is no conflicting view or argument present.


Passage number 364.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Look, I am still fighting “hopefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their determination to continue fighting, using the word "hopefully" to convey their optimism.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 365.
”  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  You can leave it in if you wish, but I suggest we take it out, because it’s not necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests taking something out while another person suggests leaving it in.


Passage number 366.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I think that is the right argument.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of expressions of gratitude and agreement.


Passage number 367.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  As I noted yesterday, the incoming data have given me somewhat more confidence that the recovery is now on firmer footing.  Appropriate policy, in my outlook, has a federal funds rate liftoff in the second quarter of 2014, and I am one of the dots at 1 percent in 2014.  In January, my projection called for a fed funds rate of 75 basis points at the end of 2014.  Following the March FOMC meeting, my staff worked to enhance our forecasting framework to include a policy rule that adjusts more cautiously than the implementation of the Taylor (1999) rule that we had been using as a guidepost.  The Taylor (1999) rule did not include enough caution in its reaction to incoming data, particularly for the first federal funds rate increase.  We chose another policy reaction function, which includes an inertial component.  This function worked well when we examined past decision points; it also worked well in the alternative scenario exercise that we discussed yesterday. I view this function as a useful guidepost for appropriate policy, not a rule that needs to be adhered to.  Subsequently, it has turned out that this reaction function matches up well with the version of the Taylor rule that Board staff have fit to the Committee’s January projections. Changes in my forecast since January have resulted in some adjustment of the liftoff guidance, even with this improved guidepost for appropriate policy.  As of January, my forecast for GDP growth, employment, and inflation, using the new guidepost, was consistent with a late 2014 liftoff of the fed funds rate.  But since then, my projections for economic growth and inflation have moved up while my projection for the unemployment rate has moved down.  Now the new policy guide suggests a liftoff in the first or second quarter of 2014, and the fed funds rate reaches 1 percent by the end of 2014.So why am I supporting maintaining the late 2014 date. Well, I recognize that there are important differences in our outlooks, our reaction functions, and in our views of the long-run unemployment rate.  I would prefer, as others have noted today, to use data thresholds to find a greater sense of agreement, but as of yet we have not been able to agree on language describing data-driven thresholds.  That leaves us with a date, but it is hard for me to be dogmatic about any particular date, given the implications of normal levels of forecast uncertainty on policy rules.  We all routinely acknowledge in our SEP submissions that uncertainty is large, and even that it might be larger than typical. Uncertainty about output, unemployment, and inflation has implications for policy uncertainty.  My staff used a model simulation to estimate how uncertain policy is even if a rule is followed mechanically.  In their calculations, typical levels of uncertainty surrounding forecasts of GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation implied a 70 percent confidence interval that spans early 2013 through the end of 2015. In addition to this uncertainty, another reason that I am willing to support no change in the date today is that policy has acted gradually in the past, particularly around turning points, and I support this cautious approach.  I also think that there should be a higher hurdle to making changes to the stance of policy, and I am not confident enough about the outlook for economic growth and inflation over the next few quarters to begin tightening policy today.  And yet another reason that I support no change in the date language today is that we are constrained by the zero lower bound.  As others have noted, if the recovery strengthens, and inflation worsens, we can readily tighten policyTaylor, but we cannot readily ease if further accommodation is necessary.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, is expressing her support for maintaining the late 2014 date for liftoff of the federal funds rate. She provides reasoning for her support, acknowledging differences in outlooks and views among the committee members. She also mentions uncertainty and the need for a cautious approach in policy decisions. Overall, she is not arguing against any particular viewpoint but rather explaining her own position.


Passage number 368.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Lockhart. There is no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 369.
   MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, including for this meeting, the “late 2014” language, but I would like to register some reservations.  First, I think the best course of action for this meeting is minimal change.  That said, I’m comfortable with a growing disconnect between the 2014 date language in the statement and my expectation of the policy liftoff date.  Even with the conditionality of the guidance emphasized, I’m seeing the “late 2014” language as increasingly untenable.  My forecast is similar to the Tealbook forecast, including my baseline assumptions about appropriate policy, and it has been noted by others that the Tealbook has brought forward the liftoff date by three quarters since the “late 2014” language was originally published. At the last meeting, I was comfortable supporting the “late 2014” language because at that time my forecast showed something closer to mid-2014—this is very similar to what President Pianalto just related.  Given the imprecision of forecasting that far out, I didn’t see a material difference versus later in 2014.  Since then, however, the mismatch between my projected liftoff date and late 2014 has become more pronounced.  I still think one way to resolve some of this conflict is to introduce economic conditionality into the statement.  President Plosser referred to a state-contingent approach, and President Rosengren mentioned triggers.  These are all thematically the same idea. This is not on the table at this meeting, so I’ll just register my continued support for moving in the direction of expressing forward guidance in terms of some form of economic thresholds.  A move in that direction might allow, in time, dropping the date language.  In my view, we need to move the conversation to economic conditionality.  This is an appeal to keep trying.  Further on that point, my staff did a review of our forecast against various Taylor rule specifications, and we concluded that the liftoff date is highly sensitive to very small differences in economic assumptions in forecasts.  Even when weuse the outcome-based 1999 version of the Taylor rule described in the Tealbook, we get liftoff dates that vary substantially when plugging in forecasts that, to my mind, are not very different one from the other. I’d like to also make a couple of points about the draft statement language, and this is in line with what I believe President Lacker said. It’s best not to change the language unless required to address some perceived change in circumstances and outlook.  The March statement read, “The Committee expects moderate economic growth over coming quarters.” I think this characterization is still correct, and I don’t see the gain from the proposed new verbiage that distinguishes between coming quarters and the medium term and lengthens, in effect, the horizon of the outlook.  As the staff notes, the inclusion of this language may have the effect of sending members of the public to the SEPs for clarification.  If this is the case, it would only promote the view that the FOMC statement should be interpreted through the SEPs.  Many in the room have questioned whether that really does provide much clarification.  I’m not very comfortable with that approach, particularly considering the divergent forecasts of liftoff opposite the “late 2014” guidance, and for that reason I would not make the changes contemplated in the current draft of alternative B.  I would simply stick to the March version.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage expresses disagreement and reservations about the proposed changes to the statement language. The speaker argues that the "late 2014" language is increasingly untenable and suggests introducing economic conditionality into the statement instead. They also express discomfort with interpreting the FOMC statement through the SEPs. The speaker ultimately concludes that they would not make the changes contemplated in the current draft of alternative B.


Passage number 370.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit or implicit statement that suggests contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 371.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to talk about the SEP first and then I’ll turn to policy.  As a reminder, I was not a fan of publishing the individual fed funds assessments.  I think of it as the recording of the dot votes, and I agree with President Kocherlakota’s comments about communicating through the SEP.  If we’re going to go down the road of separating voters from nonvoters in the fed funds assessments, then it would also seem appropriate to separate out the voters from the nonvoters in the outlook items, and I hope we think long and carefully before we go to a voter versus a nonvoter SEP.  Finally, if I compare the various dot charts and scattergrams of the fed funds projections with the results of the alternative simulation exercise, I get more information out of the results of the alternative simulation exercise than I actually get out of the dot charts. Nevertheless, in January we published our individual assessments of the appropriate fed funds target, along with projections of economic results, and so for the first time markets could compare the participants’ individual assessments of appropriate policy with the statement of the Committee’s collective judgment. Then in March, immediately following the statement issuance, even without an SEP, markets seemed to intuit that the upgrade of the outlook that was contained in the statement would correspond to a liftoff two quarters earlier than the January statement had indicated, a conclusion that was eerily close to the March Tealbook.  Now we’re adding a third piece of information, the change in the individual views on the appropriate path of interest rates.  This will allow markets to triangulate the way that changes in the outlook and changes in individual views about appropriate policy will influence policy actions of the Committee and, in particular, the date and the forward guidance of the statement. It’s not a single opportunity but an ongoing one, and I believe that markets will come to understand it even better than we could express it today, in part because markets are simply focused on understanding and predicting, while each of us is also formulating and articulating our own ideas about how it should work and trying to influence the outcome. In preparing for this meeting, I spent most of my energy trying to think about how to think about the date in the forward guidance in light of changes in the outlook.  My own sense is that the building economic momentum will allow us to begin raising the fed funds target before the end of 2014, but that sense is not yet a conviction, and I have some reluctance to move in onedirection and then reverse.  Furthermore, a pulling forward of the date could also be interpreted as a reduction or even an extinguishment of the likelihood of further accommodation and, thus, have an even stronger-than-expected market reaction.  I know I don’t have that level of conviction in my forecast. So if the data are coming in mixed as they have, it makes sense to wait and watch for convincing evidence that the economy is either losing steam, as some expect, or as I believe, sturdy enough to withstand potential shocks.  If economic performance does appear to be faltering or if another shock knocks it off course, I would favor additional balance sheet measures rather than moving out the date in the statement.  If the economy starts to show more strength or if some of the data puzzles resolve in the direction of more strength than we realized, then I’d be tempted to pull forward the date.  However, while I think the intervals of movement might be important, I view a change of direction as especially important, and we should think about pulling forward the date as a first step in the exit strategy.  For the moment I’m happy with the language in alternative B.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing their opinions and thoughts on various topics, but there is no indication of disagreement or argument with anyone else.


Passage number 372.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.   Governor Tarullo is showing gratitude with the phrase "Thank you", indicating agreement or acknowledgement rather than contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 373.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can go along with alternative B.  I find the changes in the second sentence of paragraph 2 a little bit less than felicitous, but I have confidence that at your press conference you can make any necessary explanation to put those in context. I think it is useful that the staff has produced some memos on potential additional measures if those are called for. I hope that the expectation that by two months from now things are clarified one way or another proves correct, but it seems to me not inconceivable that we’re going to have somewhat differently moving data between now and then as well, at which point   we’re going to have to start thinking about whether in a situation of continued mixed information and uncertainty, the current monetary policy stance is appropriate. On the SEP—first, I want to say I thought Jeff made a lot of very important points.  The only thing in his affirmative presentation that I would have slightly disagreed with was that he talked only about pulling the date forward, and it’s at least conceivable that it could go further back at some moment. But I thought everything else he said really posed important questions for us to think about, and I would say much of the gravamen of what he was saying was that there is a disconnect between what is going on in the statement and what is going on in the SEP.  I guess a corollary was that there’s an instability in the statement itself one way or another because of the date. I was a proponent of trying to move toward the use of projections, and I still am, but I am even more impressed now with the difficulties of doing so in the peculiar institutional framework that we have got relative to other central banks around the world.  I thought it at the time, and I raised some of the issues. I thought we might be able to modify the SEP once in place.  I do think it’s adding to transparency but not to effective communication, and because the goal is effective communication, it does seem to me we’re going to have to think pretty hard about both it and paragraph 3 language in the June meeting. When I say the idiosyncrasies—we have no real connection now between the SEP and the collective process.  We all do our projections as a single matter.  Those of us on the Board in splendid isolation—it’s just us and our computers.  Those of you in the Reserve Banks with your armies of support staffs [laughter] in your offices—but they’re all done individually, and then they’re just aggregated. As several of us were talking about in the period preceding our adoption of the SEP, every other central bank that has a projection process has some kind of collective or collaborative element to that process before the projection is published.  I don’t think that the models that exist in Sweden or, for that matter, in Britain, are likely to be effective in this Committee, which is way larger than others and geographically dispersed.  But there needs to be some institutional mechanism that ties a collective judgment together with the individual exercises of making projections, because right now we leave it to the Chairman to have to explain that the statement is a collective exercise and the projections are individual exercises.  But they’re both hanging out there, and it does exacerbate communications difficulties. On the specific ideas, I go both ways on identifying current and noncurrent voters.  On the one hand, I don’t think it quite solves the problem.  It’s still a scatterpoint presentation, which is a problem.  On the other hand, ironically, if you’re saying 2014 is your current date, then the public should be more interested in who’s voting in late 2013 and early 2014 than who’s voting in 2012.  So in an odd way, by identifying the current nonpermanent voters, you’re saying, “Ah, these guys, you know, they’re not going to be voting a couple of years from now,” again an idiosyncrasy of the Federal Reserve. I’m ambivalent on that one, but I do think something that gets us out of scatterpoints and into a format that has more of a collective element to it is going to be critical so this thing doesn’t end up being at best neutral and at worst confusing.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement or ambivalence towards several points in the passage, including the changes in the second sentence of paragraph 2, the use of projections in the SEP, and the idea of identifying current and noncurrent voters. The speaker also suggests that the current communication methods of the Federal Reserve are not effective.


Passage number 374.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 375.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman, can I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 376.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 377.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I find myself agreeing with almost everything Dan said, and I’m wanting people to consider two things:  One, rather than thinking there’s something wrong with the SEP—because it’s just data—part of the problem we’re having is because we’ve got the datein the statement.  Getting the date out of the statement and talking about economic conditions would make the conflict between the statement and the SEPs less onerous. The second step, the way I see it, would be—President Bullard brought this up yesterday, I brought it up on several occasions—the notion of a monetary policy report where you could then combine the strengths and information from the SEPs, the statements, and the frameworks and have a fuller discussion, where you might agree that there is a modal outlook from the SEPs that would point you toward a consensus of the Committee.  There are opportunities between getting the date out of the statement and doing a monetary policy report that can take us forward to resolve the kind of conflicts that we’re all struggling with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, agrees with the points made by someone named Dan and suggests two ideas for resolving conflicts related to the statement and SEPs (Summary of Economic Projections): getting the date out of the statement and creating a monetary policy report that combines information from the SEPs, statements, and frameworks. There is no disagreement or opposition expressed in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 378.
 MR. TARULLO.  But I would only say that I’m a little less sanguine on the monetary policy report serving as an anchoring device for that collective judgment.  At best, though, it would take time to do that.  I wouldn’t want to give up—and to a considerable extent it would be giving up—the use of forward guidance both by removing the date or any substitute for the date in paragraph 3, on the one hand, while maintaining a confusing scatterpoint presentation, on the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing disagreement or contention with the notion that the monetary policy report can serve as an anchoring device for collective judgment. They also disagree with removing the date or any substitute for the date in paragraph 3 while maintaining a confusing scatter point presentation.


Passage number 379.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is too short and provides very little information for there to be contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 380.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B, but not without a vague sense that the actions taken today, i.e., no action, could be eventually interpreted by markets as being contractionary, an interpretation that could eventually effectively make them contractionary. In my view, we’re still dealing with large shortfalls in aggregate demand, and unlike most other recoveries, fiscal policy isn’t helping.  Rather, contractionary fiscal policy is worsening the aggregate demand shortfall.  Accordingly, the policy action in this recovery sits squarely on our shoulders.  We have done quite a bit, but the economy continues its slow slog. I recognize that there’s uncertainty about how effective monetary policy can be at the moment. I read with interest the staff’s memo on the attenuation of the effects of monetary policy.  I took from this memo that there is some evidence that various parts of the monetary transmission mechanism have been impaired.  But I did not conclude that all of the channels are inoperable.  Rather, I concluded that the transmission mechanism is only partially impaired.  In that case, it’s entirely possible that our usual measures of whether monetary policy is highly accommodative, that is, that rates are very low, may be misleading.  When some channels of transmission are clogged, it may be that the current stance of monetary policy is just not sufficient for the magnitude of the crisis. While we may not be prepared to do more at this point, I am concerned about the signal we send by communicating doing nothing.  For those of us who believe the economy is still in slog mode, there is the concern that the longer we do nothing, the greater is the chance that we are unintentionally communicating that we are satisfied.  “Mission accomplished” should not be the message of the day. If we are perceived as being satisfied, and many on this Committee will talk publicly about being satisfied, then markets will interpret us as having done the best we can.  Financial conditions will tighten.  The economy will visibly contract and slow down. We’ve done nothing today to counteract what will be a growing sense that we are finished and that we are satisfied waiting for many more years in order to get us close to our statutory mandate.  This message strikes me as the exact opposite of one we have discussed in the past.  We’ve discussed that sending a clear message to markets that we are committed to do everything necessary to meet our mandate could all by itself have a salutary effect on markets   and have an easing effect.  Analogously, if our statement today sends a signal that we are content with the current path of the economy, this could work like contractionary policy—the last thing we need right now in my view.  I hope that is not the message the public takes from our meeting today.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Raskin, expresses concern about the lack of action and suggests that it could be interpreted as contractionary by the markets. She argues that fiscal policy is not helping and that contractionary fiscal policy is worsening the aggregate demand shortfall. She also questions the effectiveness of monetary policy and suggests that the current stance may not be sufficient for the magnitude of the crisis. She is concerned that by doing nothing, the Committee may be unintentionally communicating that they are satisfied, which could lead to tightening financial conditions and a slowdown in the economy. Overall, she disagrees with the idea of communicating satisfaction and argues for more proactive measures.


Passage number 381.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude from the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 382.
  The improvement in the outlook has been very modest in my mind, both actually— MR. FISHER. Alternative A or alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 383.
 MR. TARULLO.  You said A.  Did you mean it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. It contains a response and a clarification request.


Passage number 384.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Alternative B, I favor alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their preference for alternative B.


Passage number 385.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  You were just confusing your previous statement with where you want to go and where we are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not appear to contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is referring to a previous statement and clarifying the confusion caused by it, without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 386.
  Thank you for revealing your— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just created a little more drama here. In terms of what’s happened since January, the economy is mostly evolving along the lines of our expectations.  In other words, we’ve gotten some improvement in the economy, and the deviation of the economy from our forecast is actually extraordinarily modest.  Not only that, it has virtually no implications for the outlook in 2013 and 2014 because as we went around the table, I don’t think any of us think that the downside risks to the economy, be it Europe or be it the fiscal cliff, have really lessened significantly.  So marginally stronger growth in the very near term, but no change in terms of the sort of downside risk, means that it really shouldn’t have much implication for your outlook in 2013 and 2014. In terms of the language in B, “supported by highly accommodative monetary policy,” that makes sense to be in there, and the reason why it makes sense is that we’re saying that we think that for the economy to follow the growth projection that we have, it needs a stimulative monetary policy in place. It’s not as if the economy is going to get better on its own; it needs monetary policy.  Accommodative monetary policy is a necessary condition for this growth outlook, so I’m actually comfortable with keeping that in. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the inclusion of the phrase "supported by highly accommodative monetary policy" and explaining their reasoning.


Passage number 387.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 388.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Fisher without providing any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 389.
 MR. FISHER.  Just for the sake of the minutes since President Dudley made an extensive argument about the MEP, I’d like to note that I would not be in favor of an MEP program as described.  I listened carefully to Brian’s very thoughtful presentation yesterday, and especially to the citations in that one particular box.  I have serious doubts about the efficacy of an MEP.  I don’t want to get into that right now.  We can argue it later. There are enormous risks involved, and there are costs involved that offset the benefits that President Dudley elucidated.  But only for the sake of the minutes, if we’re going to say that an argument was made in favor of considering an MEP, I would like to also make it clear that a counterargument was made not in favor of an MEP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, explicitly states that he is not in favor of an MEP program and expresses doubts about its efficacy. He also mentions that there is a counterargument against an MEP program.


Passage number 390.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I’m not arguing to do it now, but in terms of contingency planning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their position or suggesting an idea without opposing or debating any other viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 391.
 MR. FISHER.  No, no, no.  If we included it in the minutes, I would just say that there would be a difference of opinion about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "difference of opinion" suggests that there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 392.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So would you rule it out categorically regardless of how the economy evolves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and expressing their curiosity about ruling something out.


Passage number 393.
 MR. FISHER.  Not categorically, but you seem to be headed in that direction, and I just want to make sure that we examine further the efficacy of an MEP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is simply expressing a concern and requesting further examination.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 394.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It’s not on the table.  The scenario analysis suggested that many, but not all of the participants would be prepared in principle if circumstances warranted to undertake further balance sheet actions.  Perhaps that’s the appropriate way to indicate it.  Okay.  Thank you all very much. There’s broad support for alternative B. I do think that maintaining the “late 2014” language is still appropriate.  Bill English gave some good arguments for the particular timing, noting specifically that Taylor (1999) applied to the SEP projections still gives us something below 1 percent at the end of 2014.  Like Governor Yellen, I take some input from the optimal control exercise because unlike the Taylor rules, it does take into account the zero lower bound concerns and the commitment possibility.  But even the optimal control exercise doesn’t take into account downside risks, which I think are greater than the upside risks, nor the asymmetry of the risks in terms of the ability to respond to those risks. From a communications perspective, there are going to be some problems.  I agree with with Governor Raskin that this entire package will be slightly contractionary, given both the SEP and the fact that we’re not acting on the MEP today, but it would be very hard to understand a shift in policy from the March meeting as opposed to January because of the lack of change in the outlook since March. What we are looking at is a great deal of uncertainty about how this recovery is going to proceed.  We can always look ahead and say, “We’ll get more information between this meeting and the next one.”  There is, in fact, a good deal of information that we’ll be getting, and we need a better conviction about which way the economy is going to go before we take further action. I take very seriously President Lacker’s points about this being a forecast, and in fact, I have said similar things myself.  I do think that this would be interpreted first as a reversal, which would be overinterpreted by the markets notwithstanding the rationality of President Lacker’s position.  But I also agree with a number of people around the table that we need to move forward to both better communication and better state contingency if we can.  In that respect, I would support the view that a lot of people had that we need to do better on the SEP and maybe ask Governor Yellen and her subcommittee to look not only at the points that she raised about the use of these projections internally and about various ways of changing the disclosure process, but more broadly at what improvements that we can make to the SEP that we can put before the Committee for further consideration. I’d also like the staff as we look toward the next meeting—at which we’ll be talking about rules, and we’ll be looking and reviewing the SEPs from both January and March—to consider if not principal statements at least alternative hypothetical statements that might allow for some state-contingent approach but would be broad enough in some sense to capture the   broad center of the Committee. I’m a bit concerned at this point of going to a strictly qualitative approach, but I understand the arguments behind that.  Perhaps there’s an intermediate thing, which can be a little bit more specific without necessarily giving two-digit accuracy to the criteria that we use for easing or tightening. That’s something I think the staff should continue to look at. On the language, there wasn’t a great deal of consistency in theme. I’m perfectly happy to drop “tentative” if everyone is okay with that. Signs are sort of implicitly tentative, I suppose. The only other thing that received significant attention was the language in paragraph 2.  I would summarize President Lacker’s and President Lockhart’s views as going back to the March language in the second sentence, and I think Vice Chairman Dudley opposed that.  I don’t have strong views about it. Is there anyone who would like to comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that there wasn't a great deal of consistency in theme and summarizes President Lacker's and President Lockhart's views as going back to the March language in the second sentence, while Vice Chairman Dudley opposed that.


Passage number 395.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I support President Lacker’s suggestion of eliminating that clause.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The speaker is expressing agreement and support for President Lacker's suggestion. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 396.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So there are really three suggestions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states that there are three suggestions without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 397.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Right, or going back to the March language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply refers to Mr. Plosser's statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 398.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Or going back, yes.  Any other. [No response] I do understand the logic.  It isn’t simply another way of trying to have forward guidance.  It is an attempt to explain why we are maintaining an accommodative policy, which is that progress is contingent on our expectation of the policy.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The mention of "any other" and the lack of response suggest that there may be disagreement or alternative opinions being discussed. The subsequent statement about understanding the logic and clarifying the intention of the accommodative policy could indicate a possible contention or disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 399.
 MR. BULLARD. I guess I like the phrase because it reminds people that we’ve already done a lot and we already have an aggressive policy, and that sometimes is lost in the discussion.  And so we’re balancing the degree of our aggressiveness on monetary policy against bad outcomes that we’ve seen over the past several years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses a personal preference and a consideration of balancing between aggressive monetary policy and avoiding negative outcomes.


Passage number 400.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that’s a good point.  Anyone else want to comment.  [No response]  Maybe we could just put this as the current versus the March status quo.  Is that a good first cut. I’m proposing to ask the Committee whether we want to leave it as it is or go back to the March status quo.  How many want to go back to the status quo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking input and consensus from the others.


Passage number 401.
 MR. FISHER. The March statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a statement made by Mr. Fisher in March.


Passage number 402.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How many participants want to go back to the status quo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is simply asking for a number - how many participants want to go back to the status quo. There is no disagreement or contention implied in this statement.


Passage number 403.
 [Show of hands] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I see three, four.  Okay.  Would it be okay, President Lacker, if we maintained the “highly accommodative stance for monetary policy” on the grounds that I described, namely—President Bullard’s point—that this is as much a description of what we’ve already done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking agreement or permission from President Lacker to maintain a certain stance on monetary policy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 404.
 MR. LACKER.  I worry about the consequences of linking policy to this pickup and what happens as time plays out with that phrase.  When do we drop it.  Are we going to be afraid to drop it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Lacker expresses his worry and raises questions about the consequences of linking policy to the pickup and the uncertainty surrounding when or if the pickup phrase should be dropped.


Passage number 405.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I don’t think we’ll be afraid to drop it.  President Bullard says it has as much a descriptive as opposed to a forward-looking component.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 406.
 MR. LACKER.  I’d prefer not to, but I’ll yield to the Committee’s view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing his preference but is willing to yield to the Committee's view.


Passage number 407.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Lockhart without stating any information or discussion about him that could lead to contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 408.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I’d like to pose a question to the Vice Chairman.  At the beginning of your statement you said it is possible policy isn’t so exceptionally accommodative as we thought, and that if it’s highly accommodative, why are we not growing faster.  And then you turned around and supported keeping it in.  I was interpreting what you said as there’s a lot of confusion around words that you’re supporting keeping in the statement, and we may be leading people to aconclusion that we’re very certain about it being highly accommodative.  Can you help me sort that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage between Mr. Lockhart and the Vice Chairman. Mr. Lockhart questions the Vice Chairman's statement about the level of policy accommodation and expresses confusion regarding the Vice Chairman's support for keeping it in.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 409.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We may not be following as highly accommodative a monetary policy as we think, but we are intending to follow a highly accommodative monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that there may be a difference between the perceived level of accommodative monetary policy and the intended level of accommodative monetary policy. This implies a potential disagreement or discrepancy between the two.


Passage number 410.
 MR. LOCKHART.  This is forward looking.  This is intentional as opposed to the state of policy now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the topic being discussed is forward-looking and intentional, in contrast to the current state of policy.


Passage number 411.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think the SEP and the statement, as well as the fact that we’re keeping the rates exceptionally low through late 2014, implies that we think we’re going to be keeping policy very accommodative through that period.  All I’m saying is it might not be quite as accommodative as we think it is.  That’s all. Our intention is certainly to follow an accommodative monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their interpretation of a statement and their view that the accommodative monetary policy might not be as strong as initially believed, but they affirm that the intention is still to follow an accommodative policy.


Passage number 412.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I’d simply make the point that I think inclusion of this can be interpreted in a lot of different ways, and we may open a Pandora’s box of interpretation that we don’t intend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Lockhart is expressing his opinion and raising a concern about potential misinterpretation.


Passage number 413.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m prepared to take a straw poll on this, President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply expressing their readiness to conduct a straw poll. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 414.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’d just make one other point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement. "I’d just make one other point" suggests that Mr. Plosser wants to add something to the discussion but does not indicate any disagreement or contention with the existing ideas or opinions.


Passage number 415.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage because there is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 416.
 MR. PLOSSER.  In the very next paragraph, Mr. Chairman, paragraph 3, we say that “to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy.”  We say it in the next paragraph.  What do we gain by saying it in the previous paragraph. It seems like it’s conveying the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply questioning the repetition of a statement and asking for clarification on why it is repeated. This does not imply any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 417.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Only the logic that paragraph 2 is supposed to provide the rationale for the action of paragraph 3, and this is essentially saying that our forecast of pickup is conditional on accommodative monetary.  I think it’s logical, but there may be other reasons to oppose it.  I’m happy to take a straw poll on this, but any other comments on that issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that paragraph 2 provides the rationale for the action in paragraph 3 and acknowledges that there may be other reasons to oppose it. The suggestion to take a straw poll and invite other comments shows a willingness to consider different perspectives, but there is no active disagreement or contention present in the passage itself.


Passage number 418.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, that goes for everything in paragraph 2.  It’s not more accommodative policy, which is why inflation is only going to be affected temporarily. You can draw that line linked to anything in paragraph 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 419.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. Let me ask how many participants would like to drop the “supported by highly accommodative monetary policy” part. [Show of hands] One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing information and does not indicate any disagreement or contention among the participants.


Passage number 420.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Nine to eight, curious.  How many are in favor of keeping it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply mentions that there are nine in favor of keeping "it" and eight opposing it. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 421.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, may I ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 422.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without being provided with the passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 423.
 MR. FISHER.  What do we gain by putting it in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification or justification for including something in a particular place.


Passage number 424.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it’s logical, but why don’t we drop it just so we don’t have a statement that eight people are—I know, it goes both ways.  You can always argue for the status quo, right. I mean, we always give weight to the status quo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any clear contention or explicit disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that their suggestion is logical but suggests dropping it to avoid a potentially controversial statement. They then mention that the argument can go both ways, indicating an understanding of differing perspectives. Finally, they mention the option of arguing for the status quo, which does not necessarily indicate a disagreement but rather a recognition of it as a possible viewpoint. Overall, there is no clear contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 425.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s fair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply expresses a fair or just opinion without any conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 426.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. Bear with me on that. Let’s drop the “supported by highly accommodative monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage because the speaker is acknowledging that the audience may not agree with dropping the "supported by highly accommodative monetary policy", hence asking them to bear with him.


Passage number 427.
”  MR. TARULLO.  I’m sorry.  But, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a normal conversation without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 428.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, Governor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 429.
 MR. TARULLO. You’re going to revert back to the March language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a direct statement and does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 430.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  Do you want to revert back to the March language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. There is a straight question being asked without any opposing statements or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 431.
 MR. TARULLO. My issue is that I see the ambiguity in the “highly accommodative monetary policy,” but I actually saw ambiguity in the “remain moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up gradually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 432.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s kind of in the SEP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a general statement without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 433.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 434.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think maybe we have gone beyond diminishing returns on this. If there are no further comments, I’d like to go ahead and take a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their personal opinion and then making a request for a vote.


Passage number 435.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you’re going to go back to the March language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 436.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, I was going to just drop the clause.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their intention to drop a clause, without expressing any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 437.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just drop that one clause.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Just drop that one clause" is a directive suggesting to remove a specific clause, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas being presented.


Passage number 438.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. The only changes are to drop the word “tentative” and to drop the phrase “supported by highly accommodative monetary policy.” Will you call the roll please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for the roll to be called with two suggested changes.


Passage number 439.
 MS. DANKER.  This vote is for the statement alternative B, and the associated directive in the handout with the amendments just mentioned by the Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they are voting for alternative B and the associated directive mentioned by the Chairman.


Passage number 440.
   Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke Yes President Lacker No President Lockhart Yes President Pianalto Yes Governor Raskin Yes Governor Tarullo Yes President Williams Yes Governor Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Two items.  First, the next meeting is Tuesday– Wednesday, June 19–20.  Today there will be a press conference at 2:15.  For those who are interested, there will be a screen set up in the Special Library.  We’ll have coffee available when we’re done here in a minute, and then lunch as well for those who are hanging around. Let me make one more business comment here. We sent out a calendar. We received some comments on that.  The main feature of this calendar is that it is now strictly quarterly. We’re dropping the concern about trying to match it up to the Humphrey–Hawkins testimonies, and that has the advantage of more regular meetings, but also, in particular, the four SEPs and four press conferences will be strictly quarterly, and I think that’s advantageous. The calendar that was sent out had four two-day meetings—ones corresponding to the SEP—and four one-day meetings.  A couple of participants have asked whether we could consider having all eight meetings be two days to allow for additional discussion and leave more time for deliberation and perhaps assure that every meeting is an “active meeting” where policy actions could be taken if needed.  I don’t know if discussion of this now is appropriate, but we would certainly be interested in getting views on that subject.  Is that all right.  Let me bring this up as a possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing logistical details and potential changes to meeting structure.


Passage number 441.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  So you don’t want my enthusiastic endorsement right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the given passage, there is no explicit contention or disagreement. The statement simply implies that the speaker's endorsement is not currently desired.


Passage number 442.
 [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  An enthusiastic endorsement.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple conversation or statement that does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 443.
 MR. FISHER.  I was going to ask who they are so we could be take them out and shoot them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests taking someone out and shooting them, implying hostility or disagreement.


Passage number 444.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Just for my interest—and recognizing this is unfair, you can change your minds—we will poll you.  You haven’t had any time to think about it.  How many people would like to have eight two-day meetings.  [Show of hands] So—3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.  All right. It looks like that is at least a promising direction, let’s say.  We will ask you for more considered opinions, and we’ll try to resolve this soon.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a polling exercise conducted by President Bullard.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 445.
 MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman, the revised schedule for this year conflicted with boards of directors’ meetings. If we’re going to do this, I’d prefer to start in a calendar year where we can make all of those adjustments in a normal way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement as Mr. Bullard prefers to start in a calendar year where adjustments can be made in a normal way, suggesting that there is contention regarding the current revised schedule.


