Passage number 1.
 Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on September 12–13, 2012 September 12 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Our first item is a staff report on the potential effects of large-scale asset purchases.  Seth Carpenter will lead, but Vice Chairman Dudley would like to introduce the other presenter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides an overview of the agenda for the meeting.


Passage number 2.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would like to introduce Michelle Ezer from the Markets Group.  Michelle and I actually had the interesting experience of writing a paper on the case for TIPS, right in the heart of the financial crisis, along with Jennifer Roush. I am not really sure how I managed to do that during that period, but, obviously, Jennifer and Michelle did most of the work.  So she is a coauthor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply introduces Michelle Ezer and mentions their shared experience of writing a paper on the case for TIPS during the financial crisis. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay, thank you.  Seth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 4.
 MR. CARPENTER.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the material that’s labeled “Potential Effects of a Large-Scale Asset Purchase Program.”  The Committee received three memos from the staff discussing various aspects of potential new large-scale asset purchase (LSAP) programs.  I will discuss some considerations about how LSAP programs might be structured, and Michelle will discuss the balance sheet and income implications, along with the associated exit issues. When considering the financial and economic effects of LSAPs, the staff analysis starts from a term structure model that embeds Treasury and MBS supply factors as determinants of the yield curve.  These effects depend on market participants’ beliefs about the entire trajectory of the SOMA portfolio’s holdings of securities and the types of those securities.  The FRB/US model assumes that declines in the 10-year Treasury yield pass through roughly one-for-one to other market rates. In addition, the lower Treasury rate reduces the discount factor in pricing equities, boosting stock prices.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar falls as well.  For LSAPs that include purchases of MBS, there is an additional assumed reduction in MBS and mortgage rates.  Finally, the changes in these market variables are used to simulate the macroeconomic effects of these purchases using the FRB/US model. Of course, the results depend critically on the models used and a wide set of assumptions, any of which could be challenged.  First, in the staff models, the one-1 The materials used by Mr. Carpenter and Ms. Ezer are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).  for-one pass-through from the 10-year Treasury yield to other market rates could misstate the connection among these rates.  For example, frictions like capacity restrictions for originations may prevent mortgage rates from fully adjusting, at least in the short run.  Another source of uncertainty concerns the embedded effects on equity prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  Some event studies of previous unconventional balance sheet actions point to smaller effects than incorporated into staff analysis.  Finally, the macroeconomic effects of the changes in asset prices are calculated using the FRB/US model, and other models would of course yield results that could be larger or smaller. In short, while the projections represent the staff’s best assessment, the effects are clearly subject to considerable uncertainty. Buying either longer-term Treasury securities or MBS should, in principle, put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and, so, stimulate the economy. Although staff models suggest that purchases of MBS have a somewhat smaller effect than Treasury purchases on most longer-term interest rates, they have somewhat larger effects on mortgage rates, and when translated into estimated macroeconomic outcomes, the differences are fairly small, especially relative to the substantial uncertainty that surrounds such estimates.  As a result, the staff memos did not provide clear guidance regarding the allocation of LSAPs between purchases of longer-term Treasury securities and purchases of MBS. Looking at your first exhibit, to illustrate the macroeconomic effects that are implied by the staff models, we compare a projection in which the MEP, the Maturity Extension Program, is continued as planned—the solid, dark blue line—to a projection that assumes that the Committee instead ends the MEP and purchases $600 billion in Treasury securities and $400 billion in MBS by late next year.  That’s labeled option 1 as in the staff memo and it’s the dotted blue line.  In addition to lowering term premiums from LSAPs, this option is also assumed to put downward pressure on longer-term rates by pushing off the first increase in the federal funds rate by about six months.  This LSAP program is projected to boost real GDP, lower the unemployment rate, and increase the inflation rate somewhat.  As a consequence, more rapid progress toward both of the Committee’s goals is made.  The staff memorandum provided prior to your last meeting concluded that the purchases under such a program would not likely lead to a deterioration in market functioning.  Michelle will later discuss some of the anticipated effects of the program on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and income. As I noted before, the estimated interest rate effect of an LSAP depends on the public’s understanding of the FOMC’s intended plans for purchases and exit.  This consideration is particularly important for a flow-based or open-ended program that continues until a certain economic outcome is achieved.  If the public understands the FOMC’s stopping rule and has the same forecast for the economy as the Committee, and the economy evolves according to those projections, then our models would suggest that the flow-based LSAP is roughly equivalent to a stock-based LSAP of the same ultimate size.  Of course, the economy would likely not proceed exactly in line with expectations, so under a flow-based LSAP, the anticipated total amount of assetpurchases would likely be more state dependent and evolve as the economy evolves.  Option 4 in the memo entitled “Options for an Additional LSAP Program”— presented here as the dashed red line—was intended to correspond roughly to such a program when the economy faces an adverse shock, and, as a result, purchases end up at a level that is higher than originally assumed. If the ultimate size of purchases in this case is $2 trillion, our models suggest that the net effect would be somewhat smaller than if, from the beginning, a $2 trillion LSAP had been implemented.  However, a flow-based approach, if communicated clearly to the public, also could boost business and consumer confidence by reducing the odds of adverse tail outcomes and limiting the expected variance of economic outcomes.  This confidence effect is not captured in the staff projections but could be important.  Alternatively, if the stopping rule is not clear, and the public believed that the Committee might stop purchases somewhat earlier than the Committee actually intended, then the interest rate effect could be reduced relative to what our models suggest.  However, as the public came to understand the Committee’s stopping rule, the expected size of the SOMA portfolio would revise up, and the interest rate effects would become larger.  Michelle is now going to discuss the balance sheet projections and some of the issues related to the exit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information and discussing various aspects of potential large-scale asset purchase (LSAP) programs.


Passage number 5.
 MS. EZER. Thanks, Seth.  As Seth mentioned, I will be discussing the balance sheet and income projections described in the LSAP options memo and associated exit issues.  I plan to focus on the same two LSAP options Seth discussed, though the memo presented several options.  Turning to the top-left panel of exhibit 2, you can see the path of the portfolio under a baseline scenario in which MEP is completed and options 1 and 4 from the memo.  Under the latter two options, the portfolio grows significantly as a result of the asset purchases. Consistent with the exit principles, we assume that 6 months prior to the first increase in the target federal funds rate, securities are allowed to mature without reinvestment, and 6 months after that first increase, sales of agency securities begin. These actions normalize the size of the portfolio through time.  The addition of a new LSAP program extends the period of time between the start of asset sales and when the portfolio normalizes in size. For example, under option 1 it takes 41 months for the portfolio size to normalize after the initiation of MBS sales.  This is 6 months longer compared with the MEP scenario. In terms of Federal Reserve income, cumulative remittances to the Treasury over the projection period are lower than in a scenario with no additional LSAP.  The lower remittances reflect higher interest expense and the larger capital losses from MBS sales. Looking at the top-right panel, until 2016, remittances are higher under the LSAP scenarios, because of the higher interest income from the larger portfolio and minimal additional interest expense.  Thereafter, income is lower as a result of higher interest expense and larger capital losses. Under option 1, annual remittances are projected to bottom out near zero.  By contrast, under option 4, remittances fall to zero for more than 5 years, and a deferred asset is created. Of course, income and balance sheet projections can be sensitive to interest rate projections, and those projections are subject to uncertainty.  One gauge of theinterest rate risk in the portfolio is presented in the middle-left panel. Here, we present the projections of Federal Reserve remittances under an assumption that 1 year after federal funds liftoff, the federal funds rate and 10-year Treasury yield are 100 basis points above the baseline levels, and these higher levels persist for the remainder of the projection period.  Under all of the LSAP options shown, the higher interest rate paths result in a period of no remittances to the Treasury and the creation of a deferred asset, as shown in the middle-right panel.  Under option 4, remittances to the Treasury would cease for a considerable number of years, and a substantial deferred asset would be created. The portfolio projections highlight two implications that an LSAP may have on the exit strategy.  First, as shown in the bottom panel, the level of reserves would be higher at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate.  Second, in order to remain consistent with the existing exit principles, MBS sales would need to take place over a shorter period than 5 years—the period currently assumed in the projections.  Absent a shorter MBS sales period, or other changes to the exit strategy, the size of the portfolio would not normalize within 2 to 3 years of the initiation of asset sales as anticipated by the exit strategy principles. Starting with the first point, under option 1, reserve balances will be about $2.3 trillion at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate—about $1 trillion larger than expected under the current policy, and also $1 trillion larger than assumed in June 2011.  While increasing the IOER rate will raise short-term market rates by itself, reserve-draining tools can help to ensure a closer connection between the rates, and greater use of these tools may be needed, given the increased quantity of reserves.  The memo entitled “The Effect of an Additional $1 Trillion LSAP on the Exit Strategy” discussed the status of each of the different draining tools.  However, it is too early to provide specific details of a draining plan, because such a plan will depend on how markets evolve and the lessons learned once these tools are used in large scale. Turning to the second point, the exit strategy principles themselves will not have to change as a result of a new LSAP. The expectation, however, that the size of the balance sheet would be normalized within 2 to 3 years of assets sales might not hold, depending on the size of the asset purchase program.  Under option 1, by reducing the period of asset sales to 3½ years from the 5 years assumed in making the projections, the portfolio size would normalize within the assumed 2 to 3 years. The staff currently believes that the faster average pace of MBS sales would likely be manageable from a market-functioning perspective.  That said, reducing the sales period would concentrate capital losses and result in Federal Reserve remittances declining to zero for a few years and create a deferred asset. In contrast, assumptions associated with the exit strategy principles would need to be altered under a $2 trillion LSAP like that under option 4.  Agency sales alone would not be enough to normalize the size of the balance sheet within 2 to 3 years of the initiation of asset sales in this case. Moreover, sales of securities in the volume envisioned under option 4 over a three-year period may cause market disruptions.In any event, the Committee may wish to review its exit principles periodically, particularly if the Committee implemented a flow-based LSAP program, where the ultimate size of purchases would be unknown.  Adjustments to the principles could include more heavily relying on asset sales as a tool to drain reserves, for example, by expanding it to include a moderate pace of Treasury security sales. Asset sales could also occur sooner.  On balance, although the current exit strategy principles remain valid, additional analysis will be useful to determine whether alternate strategies might prove more helpful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Seth and I will be happy to answer any questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the balance sheet and income projections and offering some options and considerations for the exit strategy.


Passage number 6.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Of course, this is just a summary of a lot of work that the staff has been doing on all aspects of asset purchases.  You have received a number of memos.  Also, let me just mention that a little bit later this morning we will talk about the consensus forecast, which gives, in more detail, the staff projections of the effects of programs of different sizes on the economy.  Let me now open the floor in case there are any questions for staff.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a statement of thanks and a brief overview of the staff's work and upcoming discussions.


Passage number 7.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  I appreciate all of the work that went into this.  It has been quite helpful to me in thinking about what is going on.  Seth has made a good summary of the uncertainties and the range and assumptions that are needed to get the point estimates. I want to focus on two things. One has to do with the assumptions about market segmentation and pass-through.  In some sense, the FRB/US assumes—as you mentioned, Seth—that the pass-through from the reduction of Treasuries to corporate and mortgage-backed securities is one-for-one, which suggests, as you alluded to, that there is more segmentation across duration than there is across asset classes, in the case of the models.  So one question I have would be, suppose that actually there was more segmentation across asset classes than across the term structure.  In other words, if 5-year Treasuries were a better substitute for 10-year Treasuries than mortgage-backed securities or corporate bonds are for 10-year securities—which is the way it is kind of structured in the model—how would that change your analysis of these effects.  That is one question.  And the second question is, you talked about the assumptions that are made and the uncertainties, and yet what we really got, at the end of the day, were some point estimates. So if I had to push you and I wanted to think about standard errors on these point estimates, how big do you think they are truly likely to be.  Can we tell the difference, given the uncertainties among these different strategies.  What is your assessment of that. So those are the two questions I have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not appear to contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser is simply asking two questions for clarification and further analysis.


Passage number 8.
 MR. CARPENTER.  Okay. The first question, what if there were more segmentation across asset types than across maturities. I think pretty clearly what you would see in that case is that we might have an effect on Treasury yields if we are buying Treasuries, and that would tend to push down Treasury yields and widen the spread relative to other asset types.  And to the extent that it’s other interest rates that have a direct effect on economic activity, you would get a smaller effect.  So I think, in principle, that’s the way it would go. The hard part there, I think, is there has clearly got to be a little bit of that going on.  And the previous memo about market functioning that we sent around said we might get to the point where you are buying so much that you are dislocating the Treasury curve from the rest of market interest rates. I think we are very sensitive to that possibility, and I think the staff conclusion so far is that we haven’t gotten to that point.  And I think some of the other studies of LSAPs and how they work also point to pretty substantial spillovers to other asset classes—some Fed studies and some academic studies.  So I think that’s a reasonable hypothesis to maintain—I think it’s something that we will want to worry a lot about, especially if the purchases were so large that they were to somehow disrupt market functioning.  But my reading so far is that we are not there yet, for some of those reasons. Another reason is—especially if you go back to some of the previous LSAPs—as the Desk has made clear what segment of the market we are buying, there have been some pretty clear adjustments in interest rates at different points along the curve.  This suggests that the maintained hypothesis that we have, that the maturity matters a lot, is coming through in some of the event studies.  When the Desk helped the market understand exactly what the maturity distribution of purchases was going to be, we saw some movements of yields at the long end relative to the belly of the curve that suggest that people see this sort of segmentation across maturities.  In addition, I think some of the reaction to the MEP caused us to feel a little bit better about that assumption.  The movement in the short rate relative to the long rate, once you control for expectations, seemed to conform reasonably well with some of the interest rate models that we have. So I think the short answer is you would get a widening of spreads, and to the extent that Treasuries aren’t the thing that matters for economic activity, you would get less of an effect.  On the other hand, if you were to do mortgage-backed securities purchases, and the same hypothesis came up, then presumably you’d get a bigger effect just on the MBS rate, and presumably mortgages as well.  And so the scenario you bring up might be an argument for having both asset classes—an argument that we didn’t cover in the memo.  If there is this segmentation across asset types, then buying both Treasuries and MBS may be a good thing to do, because then you will be able to affect both of those rates, instead of relying on the purchases of Treasuries to also push down mortgage and MBS yields along with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential effects of segmentation across asset types and maturities, and shares their own perspective and reading of the situation. There is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement presented in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 9.
 MR. PLOSSER.  To interrupt just a second on that point, though, that begs the question about buying MBS—let’s say, even if it might help the mortgage market.  You don’t have any evidence on whether that pass-through to corporate and other asset classes is either differential or  the same or less than it would be with Treasuries. Are you assuming that other asset classes would follow the same amount then, in that kind of story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is questioning whether buying Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS) would have the same impact on other asset classes as buying Treasuries. He is suggesting that there is a lack of evidence to support the assumption that other asset classes would be affected in the same way.


Passage number 10.
 MR. CARPENTER.  Right.  So I was trying to go into the counterfactual world where we are assuming this asset segmentation.  And so there, there are lots of other hypotheses.  Our models sort of—and they are empirical models, where we get the results based on actual data— suggest that the purchases of MBS do have the same general effect on longer-term interest rates by pulling out the longer-term assets and pushing things down.  If we had a different model, we would have to confront all of those same questions that you asked, including, if there is a segmentation, what sort of pass-through would there be.  But the models that we have, and the estimation that we have done, suggest that we are getting more or less the same effect on longer-term rates of MBS and Treasuries.  I was just saying, in the alternate version of the world, where there is a segmentation, it might be an argument for buying two different types of assets that we didn’t discuss in the memo. Your second question about standard errors is a really good one, and it is hard.  There are lots of different models that we have coming together, and I think Dave can probably speak really knowledgeably about the standard errors, especially from the FRB/US model.  But there is layering, model upon model, to try to get these effects. I think we feel pretty good that we know for sure the sign of the first derivative, which is in what direction these things would happen.  We presented a lot of results, though, for different-sized LSAPs in the memos, as Michelle pointed out—$750 billion, $1 trillion, $2 trillion. I think we can’t say with any confidence that we know the difference between a $750 billion LSAP and a $1 trillion LSAP.  We are pretty sure we know that the $1 trillion one does more, but those are so close to each other that I don’t havemuch confidence in being able to differentiate.  It’s that sort of uncertainty I see, but I don’t know if you want to talk about the macro effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different hypotheses and models and acknowledging the uncertainty and limitations in their analysis.


Passage number 11.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’m sorry.  Just to push it just a little bit.  So rather than the difference between $750 billion and $1 trillion, let’s just take one of them, the $1 trillion one.  And you estimate, what was it, 62 basis points on the unemployment rate after two years.  Was that it.  I can’t remember the exact number.  Whatever that number was, can you give me a standard error on that point estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 12.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I’m going to come to that directly.  First, just to reiterate what Seth said, your logic is correct.  To the extent that you think that the pass-through from buying Treasuries into corporate bond yields, stock market prices, the exchange rate, and things like that, are less than in the model simulations, you are going to get smaller results. Second, I agree with Seth that the pass-through effects that we have in there—as we have been saying right from the start back in 2008, early 2009—are highly uncertain.  And as time has gone on, I think the one source of uncertainty that has gone down is the concern about whether purchases would have any effect.  At least we now think they have an effect. But having said that, there is still much uncertainty around these estimates. In terms of actually coming up with a confidence interval, I can’t do that, but I can say the following qualitative things that I think are helpful. First, take the model that Min Wei and Canlin Li developed that we are mainly using for pricing the effects on Treasuries and MBS.  Now, that model kicks out a standard error.  I don’t know what it is, but it does not have tight error bands.  There is considerable width to the confidence intervals.  That said, we think the number is reasonable.  But could the number be somewhat smaller or somewhat bigger.  Yes. One point on why it could be bigger is, if you go back to the first LSAP, the event studies  suggested the LSAP might have lowered Treasury yields by 100 basis points.  In the analysis that Min and Canlin are doing, it’s 50.  So that’s an example, where they are not necessarily taking the highest-side estimates. There are other studies that suggest that we could be getting lower effects on financial markets than in the FRB/US analysis.  On the other hand, FRB/US ignores some things, such as the potential pass-through to house prices; it has no effect in the simulations.  And, there are confidence effects that Seth alluded to.  Even if you knew what the financial effects would be, there would still be a substantial confidence interval for the economic effects.  I don’t have them off the top of my head, but we have generated confidence bands for FRB/US impulse responses over the years.  They are a lot like those in other models.  They are fairly significant around what the unemployment rate effect would be.  The effect could be considerably closer to zero, or it could be bigger.  Let’s say that, for a given LSAP, the point estimate is a half a percentage point on the unemployment rate after three years—that’s true for the way we are scoring alternative B. Could it be a quarter.  Yes.  A quarter is certainly inside the 70 percent confidence interval.  Could it be three-quarters of a percentage point. Yes.  That would be inside the 70 percent.  So that’s just saying what, I think, everyone agrees upon: there are very wide confidence intervals on these effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is uncertainty and wide confidence intervals around the estimates of the effects of purchasing Treasuries on various financial markets. They mention different studies that suggest different effects, and they also mention that the FRB/US analysis ignores some factors that could potentially have an effect. Therefore, there is contention and disagreement about the specific effects and their magnitudes.


Passage number 13.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a thank you message from someone to President Fisher. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 14.
 MR. FISHER.  While I was listening to Seth’s disclaimers at the beginning, it sort of sounds like an Allegra ad on television [laughter]: These are the risks, et cetera.  And the papers actually were quite good.  The paper you particularly referenced had a lot of disclaimers in it.  And what I am interested in seeing vetted more thoroughly is the degree to which this compounds the complexity of an exit when we decide to exit.  It seems to me one of the virtues of, particularly, “The Effect of an Additional $1 Trillion LSAP on the Exit Strategy” was the discussion of substantial uncertainty.  There are lots of quotes in there that are qualified. It seems to me that the proponents of an extended LSAP would take a view from a signaling channel perspective that one of its benefits is that it is effective precisely because it makes it more difficult to either raise short-term interest rates or shrink the balance sheet for some time.  And in a way, what I am concerned about—and I am interested in learning more—is the degree to which we tie the hands of our successors, or if not tie—maybe that is too strong a word—we tangle their hands, and how much more difficult the exit strategy becomes. It strikes me that the stronger the recovery—that is, the more rapidly we achieve equilibrium interest rates—the harder it is going to be for us to exit.  And I would like to see that vetted a little bit more. I thought the papers touched on that, particularly the paper you referred to, but I think it would be helpful, Mr. Chairman, if we got a better sense of what complexities this imposes upon exit at the right time. Just a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, expresses concern and disagreement with the idea of an extended LSAP (Large Scale Asset Purchase) and how it may complicate the exit strategy. He questions the potential drawbacks and complexities imposed by this policy, suggesting that it may hinder future decision-making and make it harder to exit.


Passage number 15.
 MR. CARPENTER.  No, that’s really helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Carpenter, expresses that the previous statement was helpful, indicating agreement or appreciation for the information provided.


Passage number 16.
 MR. FISHER.  I don’t know what your take is on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. Fisher does not know the person's opinion on the topic being discussed. There is no contention or disagreement implied.


Passage number 17.
 MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely.  We clearly have a lot of details to write down.  So if the Committee wanted to exit next week, or something like that, we would have lots and lots and lots and lots of details to write down, none of which are we prepared to give you right now, because the world presumably, between now and exit, is going to change.  And so it is going to take some time. That said, I just want to leave you with one thought.  When we were writing these memos, one of the first points that we wanted to have clear in our heads before writing them—all of the staff who were working on this, including staff at the Desk who are experts on bothfinancial markets as well as the execution of things and the staff at the Board—was, does anybody think that if we were to do another LSAP as envisioned in these memos, that when the Committee wants to tighten monetary policy, the staff would not be able to follow through on that.  Because I wanted to make sure that everybody was able to look in their heart of hearts and say, “We think that the Committee will be able to tighten policy appropriately to hit its dual mandate,” and everybody said, “Yes, we think we are in that situation.” How we do it is not perfectly clear yet, for a variety of reasons.  But we would have had to write a very, very different memo, I think, if we really thought there was some risk to the conduct of monetary policy in terms of our ability to execute the exit strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses the need for detailed planning and preparation for an exit strategy, and the importance of ensuring that the staff is confident in their ability to execute the exit and tighten monetary policy. There is no evident disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 18.
 MR. FISHER.  You point out in the memo that there is a learning process here, in terms of the different tools that might be used.  But I still think we should press this in our discussion before proceeding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and suggesting further discussion before making a decision.


Passage number 19.
 MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, Mr. Carpenter is expressing certainty or agreement about something, indicated by the use of the word "absolutely." There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 20.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The phrase "Yes, sir" indicates agreement or affirmation rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 21.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I want to follow up on one point because it also relates to what President Plosser was talking about.  I think, whether it is connected to fear that we won’t be able to exit or whether it is a signaling that the Committee is willing to be more accommodative persistently out in the future, those policy expectations can have a big effect on some of the results.  Often, the way we score things—and I think I threw out a half a percentage point a second ago—doesn’t take into account this additional signaling effect about the future path of the funds rate that you potentially can get.  There is some evidence from the event studies that you did get it with the first two LSAP programs—that by announcing a program, you are also sending the signal that you are going to be more willing to keep rates lower for longer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 22.
MR. FISHER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "MR. FISHER" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 23.
  That’s what I was— MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right. At least as far as the model scores it, if that’s fully credible, if the expected funds rate path the market has really flattens out, in principle, you get a nontrivial kick from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is a statement about a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 24.
 MR. CARPENTER. The only thing to highlight, though, is the difference between a willingness to keep the interest rate lower for longer versus an ability to raise them.  And we don’t currently worry about the second part—we don’t worry about the ability to raise interest rates.  But what the Committee decides to do, obviously, is about the willingness to keep interest rates lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the difference between the willingness to keep interest rates lower for longer and the ability to raise them. They state that they currently do not worry about the ability to raise interest rates, implying that there is no disagreement on this point.


Passage number 25.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude.


Passage number 26.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 27.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Does the FRB/US model allow you to isolate the kind of intermediate estimates—that might be credit aggregates or asset price index levels—that fit between lower interest rates and GDP growth, so that you could actually get a sense of the transmission mechanism working through the model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 28.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. You can snip certain transmission mechanisms and see what it does to the total effect if you just zero it out.  We have done experiments like that, and what it shows is, roughly speaking, changing Treasury yields, if it doesn’t go out into any other asset prices, doesn’t do anything in the model, to a first approximation.  What matters is that it goes into private long-term interest rates, like MBS and corporates; second, that it goes into the stock market; and, third, that it goes into exchange rates.  So you can think of it as three channels: cost of capital, wealth effects, and exchange rate.  The model says each of those is worth roughly a third of the overall effect.  So if you didn’t believe one of the channels was operating, or you   thought it was operating only half as effectively as it usually does, you could then scale the numbers down with that rough math.  And that would be approximately correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement explaining the different transmission mechanisms and their relative importance in the model.


Passage number 29.
  But in terms of what it implies for bank lending, or something like that, no, the model doesn’t— MR. LOCKHART.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides an answer to a question without any opposing views or contradictions.


Passage number 30.
 It doesn’t explicitly estimate the— MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It doesn’t have any explicit predictions about what happens to bank lending or anything like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are no explicit predictions about what happens to bank lending in the given context.


Passage number 31.
 MR. LOCKHART.  So to simplify, for my purposes, the exercise assumes some kind of historical correlation between lower interest rates and economic activity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by Mr. Lockhart is a simplification that assumes a correlation between lower interest rates and economic activity.


Passage number 32.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage indicated by Mr. Reifschneider's response.


Passage number 33.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Which may or may not prevail in this current situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting a statement without expressing any assertion or disagreement. It states that a certain outcome may or may not occur in a current situation, leaving it open to different possibilities.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 34.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Which may or may not prevail, with one very important caveat.  Because housing is at such an extraordinarily low percentage of GDP, in essence, that historical correlation has been marked down in these analyses.  Ordinarily housing is a big source of a kick.  In these scenarios, the direct channel on housing construction activity is worth hardly anything.  It’s a little bit, but it’s very small.  That could be right or wrong, but in the results that Seth was showing and that were in all the other analysis we’ve sent you, there is, in that very important sense, an attenuation of the effectiveness of monetary policy, whether it’s conventional or unconventional right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that the traditional relationship between housing construction activity and the effectiveness of monetary policy has been diminished in the current scenario. They acknowledge that this viewpoint could be right or wrong, indicating a level of disagreement or uncertainty.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Okay. President Bullard" does not indicate any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to follow up on this issue about confidence intervals.  In figure 1, there would be data uncertainty; there would be uncertainty about transmission channels; there would be uncertainty about models.  If you layered all of that together, you are going to get very wide confidence intervals.  But onexhibit 2, where we are looking at the SOMA holdings, there we can sort of mechanically map out, more or less, what is going to happen.  There is some uncertainty based on interest rates, and so on, but I just want to be clear on this: This is much more solid, I would say, than page 1, which is very uncertain and very speculative about what the effects might be. Is that a fair assessment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is stating that exhibit 2 is more solid and reliable compared to figure 1, which he describes as uncertain and speculative. This implies a difference in opinion regarding the level of confidence and reliability of the information presented in both exhibits.


Passage number 37.
 MS. EZER. Our portfolio projections depend importantly on the interest rate assumptions that were provided, so those confidence intervals will feed through into our projections when it comes to things like Federal Reserve income over time.  When it comes to, say, the top-left panel, the path of the portfolio over time, the confidence interval is probably a little bit smaller, provided that the assumptions that we made about the timing of liftoff and the strategy used for exit remain constant.  There the confidence band would be in your projections for prepayments on your MBS portfolio.  But since you are assuming that you are going to get rid of your holdings of agency securities over a set period of time, it is just going to change kind of the wiggles in how MBS declines over that period.  But we would still eliminate it over a five-year period with confidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining how various assumptions and projections will impact the portfolio and confidence intervals.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
 MR. BULLARD.  Just one other comment, Mr. Chairman.  On exhibit 2, panel 4, “Deferred Asset.”  That is kind of a nice term, “deferred asset.” As far as I know, the Committee has never used the deferred asset.  It strikes me as a possible political firefight to bring that into play.  All of the scenarios here, other than option 1, if I’m reading this correctly, would bring the deferred asset into play, with possible repercussions, I think, for the Federal Reserve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is expressing his disagreement with the use of the term "deferred asset" and suggests that introducing it could lead to a political conflict. He implies that using the deferred asset option could have negative repercussions for the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 39.
 MR. CARPENTER. Just a small bit of clarification:  It has never been the case that we have had, for the Federal Reserve System as a whole, a deferred asset.  It has been the case on several occasions that there has been a deferred asset for a given Reserve Bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact from Mr. Carpenter clarifying the historical situation regarding deferred assets in the Federal Reserve System.


Passage number 40.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think the defense in that case would be that the total, which was including the very high remittances early in the period, still would be higher than historical norms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a personal opinion about the defense strategy in a case, noting that the total, even with the inclusion of high remittances, would still be higher than historical norms.


Passage number 41.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this statement. It is a simple agreement or acknowledgement of correctness.


Passage number 42.
 MR. BULLARD.  That might be a hard story to tell when the time comes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement expressing a potential difficulty in telling a specific story in the future.


Passage number 43.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman, you have a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply refers to the Vice Chairman having two things to handle or address in a two-handed manner.


Passage number 44.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  I think the confidence intervals on interest rates are going to be almost proportionate to the confidence intervals on the real economy variables, because you are not going to know what the trajectory of short-term rates is going to be or the shape of the yield curve. And, in fact, you are probably even more uncertain about the shape of the yield curve because you have never gone from purchasing all of these assets to selling all of these assets.  So we don’t really know how the market is going to react to that. The second thing I just want to note very briefly is a lot of this also depends on what monetary framework you are actually going back to.  And the presumption of the staff memo is that we are going back to a corridor system.  But you might decide, as you go through this, that maybe IOER works pretty well. And you might actually want to go back to a floor system that would allow you quite a bit more discretion in terms of how your exit actually works.  And that would feed into a lot of these projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of the speaker providing information and discussing different possible scenarios.


Passage number 45.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Again, I want to thank the staff for all of the work you did to help prepare us for this meeting, including the work on LSAPs, but also work on other tools like IOER.  So we appreciate it very much.  Let me turn to item 2 and call on Simon Potter to discuss financial developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards the staff for their work and is then transitioning to the next topic.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions for Simon.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude followed by a request for questions addressed to Simon, and the mention of President Lacker does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 47.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Two questions for Mr. Potter.  The first has to do with the duration of our holdings of agency MBS.  The graph indicates the average duration of our current holdings is around two.  Now, would our average duration of purchases under what we’re going to talk about later today or tomorrow, would that be substantially larger. Do you have a sense of what that would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 48.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  Somewhere between four and six.  Is that right, Nate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The exchange between Mr. Potter and Nate appears to be a simple question and answer without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 49.
 MR. WUERFFEL. That’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is simply a statement clarifying that something is correct.


Passage number 50.
 MR. LACKER.  Four and six.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the numbers "four and six."


Passage number 51.
 MR. POTTER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no evidence or indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. POTTER. Yes" simply acknowledges and confirms the previous statement or question.


Passage number 52.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  So the other question I have—I was at a conference a couple of weeks ago.  I believe I saw you there, Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the presence of two individuals at a conference.


Passage number 53.
 Potter, and— MR. POTTER. Symposium, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions two names, "Potter" and "Symposium", without any indication of conflict or disagreement between them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 54.
 MR. LACKER.  An economist there was arguing that the effect of our forward guidance occurred more via revisions in investors’ expectations about future economic conditions rather than a change in their views about our future reaction function, and because you folks have such rich interactions with the dealer community and you talk to them about this forward guidance, I wondered if you guys had a view as to the economist’s assertion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is a disagreement or contention between the economist mentioned and the individuals being addressed (presumably members of the Federal Reserve) regarding the effectiveness of forward guidance and its impact on investors' expectations.


Passage number 55.
 MR. POTTER. Those dealer economists also read about Jackson Hole.  Some of them were there, so I think they viewed that with quite a lot of interest.  In the dealer survey, some  people thought that the change in rate guidance might be not just a calendar type, but trying to distinguish it from just a pure expectation of where you expected the economy to be.  I don’t think it’s possible to get a very clear answer from these respondents, because I don’t think the FOMC’s been completely clear on this either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and stating that both the dealer economists and the FOMC have not made their positions completely clear.


Passage number 56.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage mentioning "President Fisher."


Passage number 57.
 MR. FISHER.  Simon, I think I heard you correctly.  So we’ve been purchasing about a third of the eligible TBAs, and you also mentioned that there’s a planned increase in the rate of GSE wind-downs to 15 percent from the 10 percent level earlier.  Is that likely to change. If we were to proceed with just $30 or $40 billion, as outlined in alternative B, would that change our percentage of the eligible TBA purchases, given the contraction that’s occurring among the agencies. If my memory is correct, they had about $1.4 trillion.  It goes back to last March. I can’t remember the last time I looked at the numbers.  So that’s about $15 billion; 15 percent translates to about $15 billion, I think, in the contraction.  I’m just curious if it affects the percentage of eligible TBA that we’d be holding if we were to proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and asking for information.


Passage number 58.
 MR. POTTER.  No, I don’t think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, expresses his opinion without any conflicting or opposing views being presented.


Passage number 59.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude, indicating a positive attitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
 MS. LOGAN. We’re currently purchasing about a third of gross issuance.  That number is going to go up to 60 to 75 percent, depending on which option the Committee chooses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions two different percentages (60 to 75 percent and a third of gross issuance) that the Committee is considering, indicating that there is disagreement or contention about which option to choose.


Passage number 61.
 MR. FISHER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: We cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context.


Passage number 62.
  Right, so that is not affected by— MS. LOGAN.  The reduction that the GSEs are doing is happening in more than just TBAs; they’re reducing in other types of securities as well.  So I would think that number is probably fairly small.  In terms of the total amount outstanding, we’re currently going to have about 18 percent of the MBS, and that would move to about 25 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is informational and does not involve any disagreement or contention. The speaker is providing additional information about the reduction being done by the GSEs in securities other than TBAs and speculating on the potential size of that reduction.


Passage number 63.
   MR. FISHER.  Okay, thank you.  And just an observation, if you look at your panel 5 and, particularly, the high-yield spread on panel 6, things obviously are going our way.  This is what we would like to see, as well as the equity price response.  What doesn’t seem to be going our way—and I only point it out as an offset, even though it’s a short time horizon—is it seems that the breakeven inflation rates—whether it’s the 5-year, 5-year forward; the 5-year; the 10-year, which is not on this chart—bottomed in the spring of this year, and the slope is upward.  We can talk, perhaps, later.  I don’t know if we’ve done an LSAP-type program in a context of rising inflation expectations or not. I think there was at least a chart in the Tealbook that would indicate we haven’t done one yet under those circumstances. But I just point out, Mr. Chairman, that if you draw a line from the bottom of the 5-year rate, it really bottomed out in the summer of 2011 and has been on the rise. I’m not saying it’s dangerous, and it may be something that we would like to encourage, or some at this table would like to encourage, but we do have rising inflation expectations.  And to say inflation expectations are contained—we might think about how we want to phrase that as we get down to the policy statement of tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 64.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m not sure I take the same inference.  The 5-by-5 is pretty flat and is lower than it was last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and comparing the current state of the 5-by-5 to the previous year.


Passage number 65.
 MR. FISHER.  And the 5-year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The quoted text does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 66.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  At the margin, and the 5-year is obviously being affected by the oil price movements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "the 5-year is obviously being affected by the oil price movements" suggests that there is disagreement or debate about the impact of oil price movements on the 5-year. Some may believe that oil price movements have a direct impact on the 5-year, while others may disagree and argue that other factors are more influential.


Passage number 67.
 MR. FISHER.  And the 10-year also is not on this chart, and then gold prices, of course, have increased significantly, for those who care about that ancient relic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents information about the absence of the 10-year on a chart and the increase in gold prices for those interested in it. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 68.
  MR. POTTER. It is true that the deflation risk we can calculate is lower than it was in 2010.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a factual claim about a lower deflation risk calculation compared to 2010.


Passage number 69.
 MR. FISHER.  Right.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement indicated in this passage. The speaker expresses gratitude after the previous speaker's statement.


Passage number 70.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions for Simon. [No response] Okay.  Seeing none, we need to vote to ratify domestic open market operations since August.  Without objection.  Okay.  Our next item is the economic and financial situation, and David Wilcox and his colleagues will make that presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The lack of response to the questions and the absence of objection suggest consensus among the individuals present.


Passage number 71.
 MR. WILCOX.3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think there should be a single summary exhibit. You all may be relieved to know that my prepared text includes 1,192 words, and I do not plan to ad lib an additional 2,000 words into my delivery.  [Laughter] As you can see from the upper-left panel of the forecast summary exhibit, the near-term outlook for real GDP growth in last week’s edition of the Tealbook is broadly similar to the one that we sent you in July.  To be sure, the July gain in real PCE was better than we had expected.  However, consumer sentiment—shown in the lower-left panel—has remained downbeat, job gains have been modest, and the price of gasoline has moved back up, all of which caused us to largely discount the favorable spending news.  Similarly, July shipments of capital goods were stronger than we had expected, but forward-looking indicators, including the continued decline in the capital goods orders data, as well as the subdued responses to various surveys on capital spending plans and business conditions, are consistent with only subdued near-term increases in business outlays.  If you squint hard at the upper-left panel, you will detect that we shifted a little GDP growth from the second half of this year into the first half of next, reflecting our assessment that the drought will depress farm output in the second half of this year by more than we had predicted in July. The one component of aggregate demand that has seemed to have been on a somewhat stronger trajectory relative to our expectation in the July Tealbook was net exports.  Even so, last week’s forecast called for GDP growth to average just 1.8 percent through the middle of next year, about in line with our prediction for the growth of potential over this period. Since the Tealbook closed, the main piece of economic news was last Friday’s employment report.  In a seeming exception to Dave Stockton’s famous description of the usual shelf-life of the staff economic forecast, our jar of mayonnaise survived its first 48 hours in the Mojave Desert with only relatively minor signs of spoilage.  [Laughter]  The red line in the bottom-right panel summarizes our effort to combine 3 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).   the signals from the establishment and household surveys (the latter of which is not shown on the chart because it is so noisy compared with the establishment results), and to control for weather effects and recession-related seasonal adjustment distortions.  As you can see from the downward tilt toward the end of that line, the estimated underlying pace of private payroll employment growth has trended lower over the course of this year and now is at the low end of the range that it has occupied during the past 2½ years.  The unemployment rate unexpectedly declined 0.2 percentage point, but like many other analysts, we have been inclined to see more weakness than strength in the totality of the results from the household survey, given that the employment measure from that survey and the participation rate both declined.  Based on our projected path for real GDP over the next several quarters, we continue to expect the unemployment rate to average around 8¼ percent through the first half of next year.  I should also note that the workweek was lower than we had expected, and average hourly earnings were flat, rather than increasing slightly as we had expected.  In combination, these results suggest a modestly weaker trajectory for compensation and, therefore, household spending than we had factored into the Tealbook. Two other key pieces of information released since the Tealbook were also weaker than expected.  In particular, vehicle assembly plans now point to a slower pace of motor vehicle production in the third and fourth quarters than we had projected in the Tealbook, while—as Steve will discuss shortly—the latest foreign trade data were slightly to the soft side of our expectations in terms of their implications for GDP growth. In all, these bits of information would cause us to shave about ¼ percentage point off our forecast for the pace of real GDP growth during the second half of this year, leaving our forecasted average growth rate for this quarter and next at an anemic 1¼ percent. Turning to the medium term, we upgraded our outlook slightly relative to our July projection.  As Steve will discuss, the improvement, such as it is, partly reflects a somewhat less worrisome situation in Europe than we had previously believed.  As we described in the Tealbook, even after factoring in the disappointment that we think would ensue from an announcement of no change in the stance of monetary policy at the conclusion of this meeting, we judge that stock prices would remain on a slightly higher trajectory and the dollar would be slightly weaker than we assumed in the previous projection.  These small positive influences are only partly offset by the increase in oil prices, part of which may itself reflect the improvement in sentiment related to the crisis in Europe. The small upward revision to real GDP over the medium term led us to shave a little off of our projected path for the unemployment rate, which is shown in the top-right panel of the exhibit.  Even by the end of next year, however, we expect no significant reduction in the unemployment rate. As real GDP accelerates more into 2014, the unemployment rate declines about ½ percentage point, ending that year at about 7½ percent.Aside from the crisis in Europe, the other main concern that continues to loom over the domestic outlook is the fiscal cliff.  On this front, there have been no major developments recently, and we continue to expect none, at least through the November elections.  At this stage, I can only assure you that our decision to stand pat on our fiscal policy assumptions reflects no lack of concern or uncertainty on our part:  The fiscal cliff continues to figure prominently in our thinking as a serious threat to the still-anemic recovery. Turning to the inflation outlook, the incoming data on core PCE price inflation— the middle-right panel—have been close to our expectations.  We continue to project that core inflation will hold steady at about 1½ percent through the end of 2014, reflecting anchored inflation expectations, a persistent margin of labor and product market slack, and modest gains in imported goods prices. In response to the upward move in spot prices for crude oil since the July Tealbook, we have marked up our near-term projection for headline PCE inflation— the middle-left panel.  We have, however, made only small revisions to our near-term food price forecast.  Although we now expect the quantity effects of the drought to be worse than we had forecast in July, the futures prices that we used in preparing our July food price projection had apparently already incorporated almost all of the price effects.  Despite the upward pressure from food prices that we think will begin to show through around the end of this year, we expect headline inflation to step down slightly in the first part of next year, as the anticipated reduction in crude oil prices implied by futures markets pushes down retail energy prices.  Steve will now continue our presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 72.
 MR. NELSON.5 I will be referring to the packet labeled “Material for Briefing on the Summary of Economic Projections.” As shown in the top panel of exhibit 1, under your individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, you see real GDP expanding only moderately this year, but you expect the pace of the recovery to pick up next year and that economic growth in 2014 and 2015 will be somewhat above its longer-run value.  Correspondingly, you expect the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, to stay near recent readings for the rest of the year, before gradually declining over the subsequent three years.  All of you expect that the unemployment rate at the end of 2015 will be appreciably below its present rate; nevertheless, almost all of you expect it to be above what you judge to be its longer-run normal level.  Turning to the bottom two panels, you generally expect total PCE inflation of around 1¾ percent over the four quarters of 2012.  For 2013 through 2015, you generally see core and overall inflation staying close to or slightly below your 2 percent inflation objective. Exhibit 2 tabulates the ranges and the central tendencies of your projections, along with comparisons to the June SEP and the current staff forecast.  Compared with your June projections, you now anticipate a slightly stronger recovery and a somewhat larger decline in the unemployment rate over the projection period.  Your inflation outlook is little changed.  The Tealbook forecast—which embeds the assumption of no additional accommodation—puts economic growth in 2013 and 2014 at the lower end of your central tendency, and the unemployment rate above it; the 2015 forecasts, however, are within the central tendency.  The Tealbook forecast for inflation runs consistently below your central tendencies for 2013 to 2015. 5 The materials used by Mr. Nelson are appended to this transcript (appendix 5).   Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, most of you think that it will not be appropriate to begin raising the funds rate until 2014 or later.  About two-thirds of you now see firming only beginning in 2015 or 2016, compared with about one-third of you in June.  Four of you—two fewer than in June—now believe that economic conditions will warrant increasing the federal funds rate before 2014.  Two of you favoring a funds rate increase before 2014 cited the need to tighten policy relatively soon in order to prevent inflation from exceeding the Committee’s 2 percent objective, and two pointed to the need to forestall financial imbalances.  Many of those who would not raise the funds rate until 2014 or later cited sizable output or unemployment gaps alongside an inflation profile unlikely to exceed 2 percent over the medium run. The bottom two panels of the exhibit provide your assessments of the appropriate target for the federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over the longer run.  For the 6 participants who see the funds rate leaving the effective lower bound in 2014 or earlier, the median value for the funds rate at the end of 2014 is 1.75 percent.  The 12 participants who expect that the funds rate will not leave the lower bound until 2015 judge that the appropriate funds rate at the end of that year will be 1.6 percent or less, while the 1 participant who sees the start of firming in 2016 sees the funds rate at 75 basis points at the end of that year (not shown). Fourteen of you now judge that “appropriate monetary policy” calls for a more accommodative path for the federal funds rate than in your June SEP, involving either a lower target for the funds rate at the end of the initial year of firming or a shift out in the first year of firming.  Moreover, 11 of you indicated that appropriate policy calls for additional asset purchases, at this meeting or before long. Exhibit 4 depicts the economic conditions that you anticipate for the year in which you expect the first funds rate increase. Your projected unemployment rates range from about 5¾ to 8 percent, with a median of 6½ percent, while your inflation projections are in a narrow range of roughly 1¾ to 2¼ percent, with a median rate of 2 percent.  Generally, participants who expect the first funds rate increase in 2012 or 2013 (shown by the blue triangle and white diamonds) see a higher level of unemployment at the time of the first funds rate increase than do those reporting later firming dates (shown by the gray circles, dark blue squares, and the gray triangle). The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the uncertainty and risks surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the top two panels in the column on the left, almost all of you continue to indicate that you judge the current level of uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment to be higher than the average level over the past 20 years.  The corresponding panels to the right indicate that you continue to view the risks to GDP growth as weighted toward the downside and, accordingly, the risks to unemployment as weighted to the upside.  Many of you attributed your continued emphasis on downside growth risks to concerns about Europe and U.S. fiscal policy; other factors cited included uncertainty about the level and growth rate of potential output and the possibility of a hard landing in China. Turning to the bottom two panels, 8 of you assess the uncertainty attending your projections for total PCE inflation as higher, and another 10 of you see the uncertainty as broadly similar to the average level of uncertainty over the past two decades.  Most of you continue to see the risks to inflation, shown to the right, as broadly balanced.  Thank you.  That concludes the staff presentations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and summarizing the views of different participants.


Passage number 73.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much for your presentation.  The floor is open for questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the floor is open for questions after a presentation.


Passage number 74.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Wilcox, the lower right-hand panel displays a model estimate, and I was wondering what it’s an estimate of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply a query for clarification.


Passage number 75.
 MR. WILCOX. It’s a statistical exercise that tries to combine several different sources of information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a fact about a statistical exercise.


Passage number 76.
  First and most broadly, it combines the payroll survey estimate of job gain with an adjusted measure from the household survey, where the adjustments— MR. LACKER.  Have been comparable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply provides information about combining the payroll survey estimate with an adjusted measure from the household survey, without any conflicting opinions or statements.


Passage number 77.
 MR. WILCOX.  —try to take the household measure and do about a dozen or 15 adjustments that put it on, as conceptually as possible, an apples-to-apples basis with the establishment survey. The second category of information that it builds in is that we had one of our seasonal adjustment experts, Charlie Gilbert, take a close look at this series, specifically with a question in mind of trying to discern effects on seasonal factors that stem from the timing of the sharp downdraft in employment in 2008 and 2009, and to advise us on the extent to which those timing effects may have bled into seasonal factors, causing published estimates of seasonally adjusted job growth around the turn of the year to be systematically higher than they should actually be. The third type of information that’s built in is a regression-based analysis of weather effects.  It seems like a dim memory at this point, but we had, as you will recall, an extraordinarily warm winter this year, and there was some speculation that that may have shifted the timing of employment.  Those weather-related effects are pretty small, but they’re included   here, as well, for the sake of completeness.  And then around all of that, what we do is just apply a simple Kalman filter to the resulting series in an effort to extract for you where we think all this statistical evidence would point in terms of what’s the best available estimate of job gain, taking account of all that information that’s available to us. So it’s, at some level, nothing more than a statistical exercise to try to extract signal from noise.  On the other hand, it packs in a tremendous amount of information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing an explanation of the process used to calculate job gain estimates, without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 78.
 MR. LACKER.  Those all sound like very useful and constructive statistical initiatives.  I just wondered what the target you were aiming at trying to estimate is. I mean, is it the trend or the current value.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. Mr. Lacker acknowledges the usefulness of the statistical initiatives mentioned and simply seeks clarification on what specific target or goal they are aiming to estimate.


Passage number 79.
 MR. WILCOX. It’s essentially a smoothed trend that takes account of both the information in the establishment survey and the household survey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply explains that the trend takes into account information from both the establishment survey and the household survey.


Passage number 80.
  I mean, I could reiterate: It takes account of that; it tries to adjust for weather and seasonal— MR. LACKER.  You’re aiming at a true measure of the current gain, or a true measure of the trend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers are discussing the same concept of aiming for a true measure of current gain or trend.


Passage number 81.
 MR. WILCOX.  True measure of the current gain, smoothing through a variety of sources of noise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple assertion about the measure of current gain and the process of smoothing through sources of noise.


Passage number 82.
 MR. LACKER.  A smooth measure of the current gain.  I’m less confused now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, expresses that he is less confused now regarding a smooth measure of the current gain.


Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You’re confused at a higher level. President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing the reader's confusion without any indication of argument or disagreement with President Plosser.


Passage number 84.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I actually drove back from our western symposium this year with two geriatric dogs and other things, but I want to comment on the fact that driving across the state of Nebraska, what struck me was the drought and the corn crops and just how dead the entire state of Nebraska looked, at least from Interstate 80. You made some reference to the drought and the corn crop, and I remember reading somewhere—I couldn’t find it in my searching—about your estimated effects of the drought on GDP this quarter and next.  And I’d like to hear you talk a little more about what you think those effects were; the ramifications of those effects, of how they bleed, in some sense, through in your forecast to your employment forecast, for example, through an Okun’s law measure because GDP is lower; how much impact you thought it had on the gap in the near term; and how that dissipates through your forecast.  Can you just walk me through those linkages—this is clearly a classic supply shock of a drought—and how much then it feeds into other things that matter that we look at a lot for monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 85.
 MR. WILCOX.  So I’ll take a first crack at it and invite my other colleagues to jump in with additional information.  We thought in July we had built in some quantity-related effects— about $10 billion is my recollection—on farm output.  This time, based on USDA assessments of field conditions—people may be doing something a little more systematic, out walking in the fields with their clipboard and so forth to look at corn yields; corn is one of the crops that is most affected—we think that it’s about a $30 billion hit to real farm output this time, so substantially bigger than what we had built into the July projection. We think that that’s likely to show up mostly in a decumulation of inventories in the third and fourth quarters.  The way that inventory arithmetic works, the hit to GDP growth is going to be concentrated in the third quarter.  We’ve got the same rate of inventory decumulation built into the fourth quarter, but because it’s the same rate of decumulation in both quarters, the effect on GDP growth we’ve penciled in is zero in the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing additional information based on USDA assessments.


Passage number 86.
  We also think there will be a small additional negative effect on agricultural exports as well, so that’s where in terms of the GDP accounting—  MR. PLOSSER.  And that led to how much of a decrease in your estimate of GDP growth for the third quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their belief about a potential negative effect on agricultural exports and discussing its impact on GDP growth without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 87.
 MR. WILCOX.  About 0.8 percentage point on GDP growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states a numerical value of 0.8 percentage point on GDP growth without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information presented.


Passage number 88.
 MR. PLOSSER. Yes, 0.8 percentage point.  That’s what I thought I remembered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of someone recalling a specific piece of information.


Passage number 89.
 MR. WILCOX.  We think—we hope—that’s going to be a transitory supply shock and that next year, our planning assumption has been, crop yields are going to come back to normal.  Now, there’s sort of a philosophical question about when that actually occurs.  If we were operating in annual data, it would be perfectly clear that it would happen in 2013.  However, the way that the BEA does it, and we’ve been in very close contact with them, is to smooth that through the four quarters of the calendar year, so that snap back to normal crop yields, basically at this point, of course, by assumption, occurs in the first quarter. So we’re mimicking the BEA’s algorithm in packing in the return to a normal level of GDP in the first quarter of 2013.  That’s not based on any pretense that anybody actually knows that that’s the way the corn plants are going to grow in 2013.  That’s just the BEA methodology.  I wouldn’t have anything better to suggest to them if I were in their shoes. Now, farm proprietors’ income actually sees a much smaller effect because prices are up and there’s crop insurance, and so the implications for nominal farm income are much less severe than they are for real output. We think that there’s likely to be very little effect on employment because we’ve made the assumption that employers are going to smooth through this transitory effect.  I wouldn’t be surprised, of course, if there was some effect on things like farm equipment manufacturers and that sort of thing, but I think that’s going to be lost in the noise in terms of our ability to actually estimate it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is explaining the methodology and assumptions used by the BEA and their own organization in regards to crop yields and their impact on GDP, farm income, and employment. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 90.
 MR. PLOSSER.  So this wouldn’t show up in any sense on your estimates of the magnitude of your output gap over the next two quarters. Would you raise that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 91.
 MR. WILCOX.  Mechanically, I suspect our output gap will be a little wider over the second half of this year, and then it will just come back in the first quarter of 2013.  Is that right, Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their belief about a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 92.
 MR. WASCHER.  Yes, that’s right.  Because we tend to set potential growth on an annual basis, we didn’t make an explicit adjustment to the gap measures you see in the Tealbook for the effects of the drought.  I would say that in terms of when we look at Okun’s law relationships and thinking about the path of the unemployment rate, we did take out the effect of the drought from potential in that equation.  So we didn’t want the drought to affect the unemployment rate forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply explaining how they handled the effects of drought in their analysis.


Passage number 93.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes, that’s kind of what I was trying to get at.  Okay.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude for the information provided by another person.


Passage number 94.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  One minor place it might show up, because we didn’t do the adjustment, would be in the Tealbook B rules thing. It’s pretty small, but the rules would respond to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions a potential area where an adjustment was not made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 95.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. It is indicated by the phrase "Mr. Lacker" which suggests that two people, Mr. Lacker and the Chairman, hold different views or have conflicting opinions.


Passage number 96.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage because only the name "President Lacker" is mentioned, without any additional context or information to suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 97.
 MR. LACKER.  Did I just understand correctly that you removed the effect of the drought on the gap, the unemployment rate gap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is simply a clarification question asked by Mr. Lacker to confirm his understanding of the information provided.


Passage number 98.
 MR. WILCOX.  In our Okun’s law analysis, in setting the unemployment rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions the analysis of Okun's law in relation to the unemployment rate without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 99.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It will bounce right back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement "It will bounce right back" does not express any form of disagreement or contention. It simply suggests that something will quickly recover or return to its previous state.


Passage number 100.
 MR. WILCOX.  I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox simply expresses his apologies.


Passage number 101.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The effects are just going to go away in two quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 102.
 MR. WILCOX. It is a transitory effect.  The funds rate is constrained at zero.  So it doesn’t have any implication for the funds rate.  And in terms of calibrating the response of the unemployment rate to the GDP gap, we sterilized the GDP gap from transitory drought-related effects on GDP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining the reasons behind certain decisions.


Passage number 103.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  So let me just ask the question for which this is most germane— do inflation dynamics depend on this adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a question and does not show any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 104.
 MR. WILCOX.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the full passage.


Passage number 105.
 I think we’re talking about splitting a micron here, but— MR. LACKER.  Yes, but I’m just very curious about the principle here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers are expressing curiosity and seeking clarification on a specific principle.


Passage number 106.
 MR. WILCOX.  The methodology is intended precisely to seal off the implications for core inflation.  I should say, of course, the first-order implication for inflation is through food prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply explains that the methodology is designed to separate the implications for core inflation and mentions that the first-order implication for inflation is related to food prices.


Passage number 107.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, right, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 108.
 MR. WILCOX.  That has been allowed to feed through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about something that has been allowed to happen.


Passage number 109.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  But in terms of the gap’s effect on inflation, you want to sterilize it from the effect that the drought is going to have on real output and employment in a year or two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the impact of a gap and the drought on inflation while acknowledging that the effects on real output and employment might take place in the future.


Passage number 110.
 MR. WILCOX.  Correct, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 111.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement, not a conversation or a debate.


Passage number 112.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "Vice Chairman" is a title or position, and does not convey any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 113.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question for Andreas.  On exhibit 2, you have this chart that looks at nonfinancial sector credit to GDP.  I keep staring at it, and I am still trying to figure out what implications I’m supposed to draw from it.  The secular uptrend from 1956, at best, flattens out for a while.  So the first question is what implication do you think we were supposed to draw from this.  And, second, if you looked at a chart of nonfinancial sector assets to GDP, would that also show mostly a secular uptrend.  And then, how do you put those two together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of questions seeking clarification on a specific topic.


Passage number 114.
 MR. LEHNERT.  I think there are key macro questions that are implicated by your question, which I’m not going to touch, but just from a financial stability perspective, at the very highest level, in some sense, financial stability concerns in a low-rate environment arise when you see people and businesses borrowing more.  This picture was just supposed to be an easy way to portray the fact that we’re not seeing households and businesses borrowing more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their perspective on financial stability in a low-rate environment.


Passage number 115.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Right.  We could also interpret it as, gee, credit to GDP is still really, really high, and, therefore, that means bad things.  That is what I was sort of getting at. So you don’t take a negative signal away at all from the total level of credit to GDP is still high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is agreeing with the previous statement and providing additional information or interpretation.


Passage number 116.
 MR. LEHNERT.  Yes, okay.  I treated that as a separate question.  So then there’s a question, are we approaching some kind of fiscal moment, some sort of Sargent−Wallace moment, where the global carrying capacity for U.S. sovereign obligations is being reached. That’s something that we highlighted in our report as a potential risk.  If there’s a material worsening in the fiscal outlook, or if there’s some really ugly resolution to the debt ceiling negotiations in January and so forth, all those things could have negative implications for future stability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing a potential risk and highlighting factors that could have negative implications. There is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 117.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But the total level here, if you add household, business, and government together, that’s not a good sign.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage states a fact about the total level of household, business, and government when combined, and suggests that this is not a good sign. However, there is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 118.
 MR. LEHNERT.  If you look across countries, you would see a lot of different levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that if you compare different countries, you will find varying levels.


Passage number 119.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. They’re all over the place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "They're all over the place" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply means that something or someone is present or found in many different locations.


Passage number 120.
 MR. LEHNERT.  Exactly.  So I don’t know why Denmark is one and Japan is a different one, but we can just judge the United States by its own history.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing confusion about why Denmark and Japan are treated differently but suggests that the United States should be judged based on its own history.


Passage number 121.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Thank you." This statement is simply expressing gratitude and does not involve any conflicting perspectives or opposing views.


Passage number 122.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 123.
 MR. FISHER.  First, I wanted to thank Andreas for a very good summary, very helpful graphics, and so on.  We’re in the middle of doing our SABR analysis for banks, and one of the positive attributes we have noticed is that we seem to be seeing a brighter picture for the average bank.  For example, the ones that we rate one or two probably are performing the best that we’ve seen in terms of the percentage of potential downgrades since December of 2006.  So I think that’s one positive aspect that wasn’t included.  I’m not being critical, but when you look at your second panel of long-term securities held by commercial banks and so on, there seems to be a healthier tenor, and we’re not done with the analysis yet, but I just wanted to point that out. With regard to seasonality, I wanted to ask Dave Wilcox about the August employment numbers; I think I’m correct in saying that that is a number that gets revised more frequently than others.  I think 17 of the last 22 years, it’s been revised, and if I remember correctly, last year it went from zero to 44,000 to 104,000, and I assume we’re taking account of the fact that that is often a highly unreliable number.  Am I correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is mainly giving compliments and expressing positive observations about the analysis being done. They also ask a clarifying question and share some additional information.


Passage number 124.
 MR. WILCOX.  We’re taking account of the fact that it is the best possible information, and we don’t confuse it with truth, absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wilcox is simply stating that they are considering the information they have as the best possible information, without confusing it with absolute truth.


Passage number 125.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  So we assume it gets revised more often than not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating an assumption without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 126.
 MR. WILCOX. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is likely contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker responds with a brief and affirmative answer "Yes".


Passage number 127.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. The BLS has a confidence interval—the 90 percent confidence interval is plus or minus 100,000.  So that gives you an idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is stating a factual information about the BLS confidence interval without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 128.
 MR. WILCOX.  It’s a sample-based estimate. It is based on a very large sample of employers. It’s a universal sample of large employers and a statistically drawn probability sample of medium and smaller employers, but there are a host of issues associated with constructing that number, including the fact that not everybody that ultimately will report, reports in the first wave of responses and that seasonal adjustment, as my remarks described earlier, involves a great deal of science but some art as well.  So I don’t have any specific reason for doubting or casting aspersions on the August number, but you’re absolutely correct that month in and month out, that’s a number that is subject to two-sided revision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wilcox is simply explaining the process and potential issues associated with constructing the sample-based estimate of employment numbers.


Passage number 129.
 MR. FISHER.  And then lastly, just listening to Steve Kamin, this is perplexing about oil and gas prices, and particularly prices at the pump.  There may be some seasonality in terms of the switchover that occurs, but given the weaker economy, which I think almost all of our forecasts have envisioned, and given the production that’s taking place stateside, even accounting for the storm that took place in the Gulf, it just seems odd that we might expect oil prices to increase rather than hold level or decrease.  And for what it’s worth, the “oilies” that I speak to—from the independents to Tillerson at Exxon and so on—their expectation is that this has been a bit of a bulge, and that it’s more likely to settle down and actually decrease somewhat.  For what it’s worth—and I always emphasize that because Mr. Tarullo insists that I do so when I talk about my anecdotal evidence—I just wanted to pass that on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 130.
 MR. KAMIN.  Thank you. Just to be clear, our baseline forecast for crude oil prices in the markets is, indeed, to decline over time from the current level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about their baseline forecast for crude oil prices.


Passage number 131.
 MR. FISHER.  It wasn’t clear the way you presented it.  So I wanted to add that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher's statement indicates that he wanted to clarify or provide more information because the previous presentation was not clear. However, there is no indication of any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 132.
  MR. KAMIN.  Yes.  So just to clarify, what I was alluding to was future upside risks that could take place if geopolitical problems in the Middle East became more pronounced than they are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply clarifying a point made earlier.


Passage number 133.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a form of addressing someone politely and respectfully. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 134.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no information provided in the passage to indicate any contention or disagreement involving President Bullard.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 135.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to come back to the financial stability handout, exhibit 2, chart 1, which is “Nonfinancial Sector Credit-to-GDP Ratio.” In answer to the earlier question, you said that the cross-country evidence on this was all over the map, and that does not gibe with what I understood the cross-country evidence to be, which was that this line is basically trending up across the developed economies.  So it looks very similar actually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard disagrees with the earlier statement regarding the cross-country evidence on the Nonfinancial Sector Credit-to-GDP Ratio.


Passage number 136.
 MR. LEHNERT.  Sorry. I meant the cross-country evidence on the level.  I thought that Vice Chairman Dudley was asking, is 2.5 a magic number. I mean, this number is much bigger in some countries and much smaller in other countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is clarifying a question and explaining that the number in question varies across different countries.


Passage number 137.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay, but the picture would look the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply agrees with the previous statement and states that the picture would look the same.


Passage number 138.
 MR. LEHNERT. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any content or language that indicates a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 139.
 MR. BULLARD. It has always been trending up, I guess.  The developed world has always been trending up, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The response given by Mr. Bullard simply acknowledges that the trend in the developed world has been generally upward.


Passage number 140.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. The tricky part about this is if you have a secular trend of more intermediation, then this is going to be an upward-trending number, and so the degree of intermediation in a financial system really is important in terms of what number you get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact about the relationship between intermediation in a financial system and the resulting number.


Passage number 141.
 MR. BULLARD.  When people showed this picture to me over the years, I always said, well, this was financial market deepening, and good things are happening in the intermediation sector.  It didn’t pan out so well later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Bullard about his previous beliefs regarding the picture and how they did not turn out to be true in the end.


Passage number 142.
 MR. LEHNERT.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only provides the name "MR. LEHNERT" without any context or indication of a disagreement.


Passage number 143.
  Well, and presumably by analogy, then, the fact that it’s now falling for the household and business sectors is— MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  Okay, thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker affirms their agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 144.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any controversy, disagreement, or opposing views.


Passage number 145.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to make a comment on the financial stability report. I continue to find a lot of value in this, and I think particularly as we look at these trends in a low interest rate environment, I would take no exception to the conclusion that right now imbalances are not obvious.  But just thinking back to how we thought about land values in the 1980s, in the late 1990s and early 2000s, as we watched banks begin to concentrate in commercial real estate and even some of the subprime exposures, the point at which to know when to take signal from some of those things is very difficult, notwithstanding supervisors and others looking at them.  So I think as you continue to monitor this, as we get into December and beyond, looking at where these trends are going will be very important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker, Ms. George, agrees with the value of the financial stability report and acknowledges the difficulty in identifying imbalances in the current low-interest rate environment. She mentions past experiences with land values and bank concentrations in commercial real estate and subprime exposures as examples of the challenges in identifying signals of potential imbalances.


Passage number 146.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any other questions for our colleagues. [No response]  Okay.  Seeing none, on the agenda, we have an opportunity for participants who want to raise questions or issues related to financial stability.  And Vice Chairman, if you’d like to start off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 147.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen and I were in Basel over the weekend, and I have to say that there was a pretty strong sense of unanimity that what the ECB did was essentially the best that they could accomplish, given the various constraints under  which they were operating.  The fact that the purchases could be unlimited means that the program has the potential for actually being an effective backstop, and the fact that the ECB will be pari passu with other bondholders is important because it really will reduce the pressures on private holders.  So in effect, there may be private holders, if they view this as credible, who will actually want to invest in these sovereign instruments for a carry trade because the yield curves in these countries, of course, are very, very steep. There’s also a bit of carrot now to incent proper actions by the government.  So if you do the right thing, we will intervene and we will hold down your debt service cost.  And I don’t think there was that carrot before, so I think that’s pretty significant.  I think that the ECB has essentially put on the table something that could take the risk of an interest rate-debt service-fiscal deficit spiral a bit off the table as long as the countries do the right thing.  And in addition, if these purchases do, in fact, materialize, I think this does push you in the direction toward further fiscal union.  After all, the ECB is backstopped by the entire euro zone, so such purchases will increase the joint and several nature of the union.  And finally, I thought the other thing that was noteworthy about the ECB action was that it was a 22 to 1 vote, with only Weidmann of the Bundesbank dissenting.  Given the fact that the German political leadership, at least for now, seems to be supporting the ECB actions, this means that the Bundesbank’s opposition is somewhat marginalized at this point. So that’s the good news. Despite this, I don’t think we should kid ourselves.  I think the situation remains very tenuous despite the ECB’s supports.  I’d be, probably, slightly darker than Steve’s comments on this.  Several issues worth highlighting: First, the ECB program would only activate if the countries actually negotiate an MOU with the euro group, and already we’re hearing signs that Spain seems to be reluctant or slow in terms of pursuing it.  In fact, the Spanish may decide thatthe backstop might be effective even if they don’t seek an MOU.  That seems like a highly risky strategy, but it is something that they might decide to do.  Second, the program obviously will only continue if they stay on the program. And, third, it’s going to take a while for this all to be implemented because the MOU has to be negotiated with the euro group, and all of the finance ministers have to agree, and several parliaments actually have to approve the MOU.  So this idea that this is going to be happening very, very quickly—I think the market is probably a little bit ahead of itself in terms of how quickly this will come into play. Other issues—the ECB program will not necessarily crowd in investors, because it’s not clear how long this is going to last.  So you might buy things, but you still have quite a bit of risk.  You still have a very bad feedback loop from the austerity programs to the economy, to fiscal performance, and the state of the banking system.  This doesn’t take any of that off the table, and there’s still no road map as to where we’re actually going in terms of the ultimate destination:  What does greater fiscal union in Europe look like. So this is a very important thing that the ECB has done.  I think they did the best that they could possibly do, and the good thing is they put the problem back in the lap of the governments, where it belongs.  They have done what they can do now, and now it’s up to the governments to decide, both in the core and in the periphery, if they’re going to go along. The basic model, though, of this whole situation hasn’t changed.  Countries have to show they’re on a sustainable path to regain market access.  The core countries are unwilling to be explicit about the level of support because of fears that this will undermine the effort.  The constitutional court decision in Germany today, which was actually mostly positive, affirmed that the German commitment is limited to €190 billion—that’s it, and so that’s sort of significant. I think the unwillingness of the German Constitutional Court to be explicit does create uncertainty that makes progress more difficult.  So we do still have a long way to go, and we don’t have big, solid backstops to absorb shocks or support confidence.  The ESM–EFSF resources are still very much too small to credibly backstop Spain and Italy, and the ECB support may be too uncertain as to its sustainability.  So it’s progress, but there are still a lot of questions on the table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains both agreement and disagreement. The speaker agrees that the ECB's actions are the best they could do given the constraints, and believes that the ECB's program has the potential to be effective. However, the speaker also disagrees with the idea that the situation has significantly improved, highlighting several issues and uncertainties that still remain.


Passage number 148.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement given by President Rosengren.


Passage number 149.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you for the financial stability report.  Like President George, I do appreciate the monitoring that you’re doing in this area.  I just had two quick questions.  They both relate to money market funds.  We’ve had an SEC proposal that wasn’t proposed, and I was wondering about your perspective looking at Europe, where there’s more than $1 trillion of money market funds and they have a mix of floating and fixed NAVs.  I don’t know how much time you spent looking at the European money market funds, but I’d be interested in your perspective on the industry’s concern with the floating NAV, which seems to have been successful in stopping forward movement.  And then the second question is, given that they have both floating and fixed NAVs in Europe, and the deposit rate went down to zero, is there anything to infer about interest on excess reserves from the European money market fund experience with the deposit rate going to zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 150.
 MR. LEHNERT. Are those questions you’d like me to answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking if there are questions they should answer.


Passage number 151.
 [Laughter] MR. ROSENGREN.  If not here, at another time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions laughter and then transitions to a different topic.


Passage number 152.
 MR. LEHNERT.  Very, very briefly, and I certainly don’t approach your expertise in this area, we’ve long maintained that the redemption of par, what you call the fixed NAV, is useful in certain circumstances.  There are certain elements of the U.S. tax code and other things that make it useful.  But basically, at the end of the day, it’s just a safe place to put your money, and if it floats up and down a bit, it’s not the end of the world.  And, of course, the European experience highlights that, although presumably their tax treatment might be slightly different. Then what’s happened to European money markets since the deposit rate went to zero. It’s maybe still a little early to tell what the long-run effects are, but the initial wave of reports is that there hasn’t been an implosion of the money markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any apparent contention or disagreement. The speaker simply provides their perspective on the usefulness and safety of the redemption of par or fixed NAV in certain circumstances. They also mention that the European experience with money markets since the deposit rate went to zero has not led to an implosion, although it may be too early to determine the long-term effects.


Passage number 153.
 MR. POTTER.  One fund closed.  The Bank of America–Merrill Lynch fund closed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact, without any indication of contention or disagreement. It mentions that a fund closed, specifically the Bank of America-Merrill Lynch fund.


Passage number 154.
 MS. LIANG.  I guess I would just add that even at current rates, the proportion of U.S. funds that are waiving fees is really quite high, so the implications of further reductions in money fund rates could have effects.  Some ballpark estimates—they are not precise—is that about 70 percent of U.S. funds are waiving their fees at this point—that’s a pretty big number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Liang is simply stating a fact about the high proportion of U.S. funds that are currently waiving fees and suggesting that further reductions in money fund rates could have implications based on this information.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we take a break for lunch.  When we come back, I’ll talk briefly about the experimental consensus forecast, and then we’ll go to the economic go-round.  Why don’t we reconvene at 1 o’clock.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests taking a break for lunch and suggests reconvening at 1 o'clock without any objection or disagreement.


Passage number 156.
 [Lunch recess] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.6 Why don’t we re-commence.  Please feel free to finish your fruit or your cookie. I’ll provide the entertainment here.  [Laughter] I’d like to talk for just a few minutes about the latest iteration of the experimental consensus forecast.  You have a handout with that title. It proceeded in the same way as in previous iterations:  The staff sent out a preliminary Tealbook forecast about a week in advance and received your comments. We also had the benefit this time of having the SEP.  So using all that, we came up with the forecast that’s shown in table 1 on page 1, and which is diagrammed in exhibit 1 on page 4. 6 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 6).Like the Tealbook, this forecast or projection is conditioned on no change in policy.  That is, it’s conditioned on the August policies of continuing the MEP and late 2014 guidance.  Generally speaking, the data are quite similar to the July–August consensus, which is shown immediately below.  One exception is the 2013 real GDP forecast on the very first line, 2.2 percent, which is a little bit weaker.  That was not inconsistent with the comments that came on the first draft; most people either saw the near term as being a bit weaker or about the same.  But I want to come back to that number in a moment.  The unemployment and inflation numbers are pretty similar, and if you care to look at the figure, you’ll see that the trajectories are very similar obviously, particularly relative to the standard errors. Like last time, we also looked at the consensus forecast under alternative policy assumptions, and that’s given in table 3 on page 3.  Under each variable, the first line, the status quo is, again, the same as the consensus forecast in table 1.  That’s the forecast assuming the August policies continue.  The subsequent lines include, first, a change in the guidance to mid-2015, so simply a mechanical moving out of the interest rate path to mid-2015, and then subsequent additions of a $750 billion or $1 trillion LSAP program.  So that gives the alternatives.  The differences are consistent with the FRB/US analysis; I’ll come back to that point as well.  And exhibit 2 shows the paths for the federal funds rate, the unemployment rate, and inflation under optimal control, under the no-policy-change consensus forecast in red, and then the alternative policies provided in table 3. Now, this time an issue came up, which was less of a concern last time, but it raises an important question that I think the subcommittee is going to have to look at, which is that, of course, the SEP is conditional on each person’s view of optimal monetary policy.  And in this case, if you turn to table 2, which shows median forecasts in the September SEP, you’ll see the  SEP is broken into two categories: all participants and participants who assume further easing. A majority of people submitted a forecast in which they assumed that the guidance would be advanced to 2015 and that we would undertake additional asset purchases. So the SEP submissions actually assume that change in policy.  So then the question is, how do you get from those SEP projections back to the no-policy-change baseline.  And what the staff proposed, and what they did, was basically they took these policy differentials that are in table 3, and they subtracted from the SEP results to get the baseline.  And to the extent that those differentials are not accurate or are different from what people expect, then that will, of course, create some noise in the baseline forecast. So I raise this for a couple of reasons.  The first is that we need to think about—and we talked about this last time—whether the consensus forecast we would want to release would be the pre-meeting status quo policy forecast—I think President Lockhart suggested that last time— or the postmeeting inclusive-of-the-action forecast, or both.  We could consider both; I think we need to discuss that.  If we do both, then we will have to figure out how to make sure people are comfortable with both the before and the after, if you see what I’m saying. For this meeting, I think it will not be very much of a problem.  What I had proposed to do is, as was given to you earlier on, in item 5 after the policy decision tomorrow, I will ask you whether you are comfortable with the consensus forecast inclusive of the policy action.  And if we do take policy action, then this whole issue will be irrelevant because we’ll be looking at the policies assuming the further easing—at least for those participants who submitted that. But I just want to flag this point and note that we are planning a discussion in October of this whole project, and certainly one of the issues we’ll want to discuss is whether or not we want to look at ex ante, ex post, or both forecasts, and how we would best extract that information.  So, again,tomorrow after the policy decision, I’ll ask you if you are comfortable with the consensus forecast, including whatever policy decisions we make; are comfortable, with reservations; or have a very different view.  And I’ll ask you, if you have a different view, to briefly state what that difference is.  Any questions or comments. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the consensus forecast and discussing the process used to create it. There are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 157.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. You have this issue that the SEP has some people who have no change in policy; others have changes in policy.  That’s going to still be an outstanding issue going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence suggests that there are differing views within the SEP regarding changes in policy, which could be a source of ongoing disagreement in the future.


Passage number 158.
  Do you have any thoughts on how we would— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that’s what I’m raising—we have to figure out how to deal with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for thoughts or suggestions on how to deal with a certain issue or problem.


Passage number 159.
  One possibility would be to specify— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  A, B, and C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage states a possible solution without any mention of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 160.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, yes—I suppose.  If we’re going to do the ex ante, before-meeting projection, then everybody would be asked to make a projection conditional on the policy prior to the meeting, and the forecast could be used to say, “We thought this was unsatisfactory.  That’s why we took the action we did today.”  Alternatively, we could ask for a forecast conditional on one or more policy actions.  But that’s an issue that this particular exercise has made clear, and I’m just flagging it for discussion by the subcommittee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 161.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It’s interesting to see the difference that people submit in terms of the policy, because you actually find out what people think about how efficacious the policy is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses curiosity about people's differing opinions on the policy and their thoughts on its effectiveness.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, of course.  That’s right.  That’s certainly one of the benefits of doing that.  But everything that we are considering here also has the cost of multiplying the number of projections and forecasts we’re asking people to do, and that’s something we need to take into account.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage. The statements are mainly agreeing with each other or acknowledging different aspects of the same topic.


Passage number 163.
MR. LACKER.  You mentioned parts of the consensus forecast process.  We’re asked to provide a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, and I’d urge the staff and all of us to give some thought to what that ought to mean.  As I read the instructions, I thought of four different interpretations of that.  You take as a given that what we’re trying to do in writing down a forecast is to write down the mean of a joint distribution of the economy and policy.  Well, if you ask us to submit a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, are you asking us to replace our reaction function with one that’s fixed at that path unchangingly, and averaging over that. What do all of the shocks have to be. What’s the most likely outcome that delivers that as the policy reaction—what economy is weak enough to justify that policy.  That’s a different question.  Or, do we take our reaction function and add-factor it so that it delivers that policy as a mean. There’s a bunch of different ways you can think of doing that, but we ought to be precise about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Lacker, expressing his thoughts and concerns about the interpretation of a certain policy path in the forecasting process.


Passage number 164.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course—we’ll have to be precise.  These are complexities. One possibility would be to have everybody, again, assume appropriate monetary policy and deliver that joint distribution that you’re describing; and then, try to see if there’s a center of gravity of that, which looks like the consensus; describe that consensus; and then describe those who differ and qualitatively how they differ.  So that would be one approach.  Another approach could be, for example, to ask people to use a specific reaction function or to specify their own reaction function.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes two different approaches but does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 165.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Yes—thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I like the idea, in principle, of having a consensus forecast based on status quo policy and then a consensus forecast based on the policy action.  I think, though, that in practice, the latter is going to be very challenging, because you could easily imagine that the Committee could come up with a choice of a policy action that they had not considered ex ante.  And then it becomes very difficult to know how the timing would work and to get the logistics to work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, believes that while the idea of having a consensus forecast based on policy action is good in principle, it would be challenging in practice because the Committee may come up with a policy action that was not considered beforehand, making it difficult to determine timing and logistics.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, absolutely.  And again, I think Governor Yellen’s subcommittee will solve these problems for us [laughter] and bring that to us in October.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and confidence in Governor Yellen's subcommittee to solve certain problems.


Passage number 167.
 MR. BULLARD. Let me just reiterate on this. I do think that the market expectation of the Committee’s policy as of a certain date, which encompasses all aspects of monetary policy, is a fixed point that we could rally around.  Everyone can give their prognostication based on that.  That would give us just one exercise to do.  Usually the market expectation is not a long way off.  It might be somewhat off, but it’s not a long way off, and it would simplify the exercise in my mind and would keep it clearer what we’re doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s, of course, what the British and some others do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states an action that the British and some others engage in.


Passage number 169.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. The presence of the word "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the actual passage provided, it is difficult to determine the context or subject of the contention.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 171.
 MR. EVANS.  Does that address President Lacker’s concerns.  I wouldn’t have thought so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement of opinion and uncertainty rather than a direct disagreement or confrontation.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not exactly.  Only if it’s approximately right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 173.
 MR. EVANS. Yes—right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply includes an affirmation of agreement by Mr. Evans.


Passage number 174.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anybody else.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Anybody else" is a standalone statement and does not express disagreement or contention towards President Fisher. It suggests an open invitation for others to express their opinion or viewpoint.


Passage number 175.
 MR. FISHER.  Narayana made the point I was going to make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Fisher and Narayana seem to be in agreement on the point being made.


Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments or questions. Again, we will be discussing this at the next meeting.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are other comments or questions and mentions that the topic will be discussed at the next meeting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 177.
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a question that’s a little bit different. It was triggered by some comments that President Fisher made earlier in asking questions, where he alluded to the fact that some people around the table would be, however you put it, more accepting of a higher inflation rate than others, or whatever.  And in exhibit 2 on page 5, this question comes to my mind, which is, there is an optimal control path that is shown that has inflation rising to—I think it’s 2.3 percent, if it’s consistent with previous Tealbook-style analyses. I personally don’t see anything in this path that’s inconsistent with our longer-run strategic approach that we adopted in January, and I just wonder if that’s the sense of the Committee or if there’s an important divergence of opinion there, which seems to be one of the points that President Fisher might have been raising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is questioning whether there is a divergence of opinion within the Committee regarding the optimal control path for inflation. He suggests that the path shown in Exhibit 2 is consistent with their longer-run strategic approach, but wonders if there is disagreement on this point.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we are clear that our objectives are—think of a quadratic objective function.  They’re symmetrical.  There is an increasing marginal cost of being away from each objective. We have a balanced approach, but people will have different models of the economy, and they’ll have different weights in their objective functions.  So this is obviously not a purely value-fee projection.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the nature of objective functions and acknowledges that people may have different models and weights for their objectives, indicating a balanced approach but not a purely value-free projection. President Bullard's statement does not introduce any disagreement either.


Passage number 179.
 MR. BULLARD. Is exhibit 2 something that would be distributed as part of the consensus forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. It is simply asking about the distribution of exhibit 2 as part of the consensus forecast.


Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, nothing has been decided, but I wouldn’t imagine we would want to do all of those things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and stating that they would not imagine wanting to do all of those things.


Passage number 181.
 MR. BULLARD.  So this is just an internal document, like the ones we always use.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple clarification that the document being referred to is an internal one, which is a common practice.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage did not provide any specific information or arguments about which there could be contention or disagreement. Without more context, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 183.
 MR. EVANS.  I wasn’t asking a question about communications.  I was asking more a question about how we interpret our longer-run strategic document, because at various times, we   make different comments about these types of outcomes, and it strikes me that there’s less agreement on that particular observation than sometimes is given by the words that we use.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is suggesting that there is less agreement on the interpretation of longer-run strategic documents than what is implied by the language typically used.


Passage number 184.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’ve said in press conferences that it’s a symmetric objective and we have a balanced approach, and so on.  Anyone else. [No response] All right. Now we come to the main event. Let’s start our economic go-round with President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. The lack of response from others also suggests that there is no disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 185.
 MR. LACKER. New York.  I forgot New York.  And there are others around the System.  I know that Atlanta operates a pretty elaborate model as well.  So each of these taken to the data would give you a different estimate of the gap, and they’d give you a different decomposition of what the gap was about.  We’d be able to look at those, if we had them in front of us, and say, “Well, attributing the gap to this is persuasive to me.  It matches up with what I think is out there,” or, “This reason for the gap to be large isn’t persuasive to me.”  And we could have a discussion that goes beyond, “I think the gap is big.” “No, I think the gap is small.”  “No, I think the gap is big.” “No, I think the gap is small.” I think we could make progress by putting the cards on the table, by putting some more-explicit analysis on the table. So that’s my suggestion for improving our discussion of the gap going forward.  As I said, the estimates of the 3 percent gap in EDO seem implausible to me compared with factors that I’ve talked about that are likely to affect the natural rate rather than the gap—things like the labor market, skill problems, the housing overhang, and policy uncertainty, which aren’t captured by the models.  We could have a debate then about what is in the model or not.  This is what goes into my thinking—that we shouldn’t expect much from monetary policy now.   Moreover, we might be pretty close to where the policy-relevant natural rate is right now.  Thank you—I took some extra time here.  I appreciate it.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that the estimates of the 3 percent gap in EDO seem implausible to them, compared to factors they have mentioned. They go on to say that there should be a debate about what is included in the model and express their belief that monetary policy may not have much impact at the moment. This is a disagreement with the idea that the 3 percent gap in EDO is accurate and that monetary policy is effective.


Passage number 186.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 187.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don’t really understand why the DSGE model should be particularly relevant to the current set of circumstances, given that this is a financial shock, a huge financial shock, and my understanding is that DGSE models are very rudimentary, if they have anything, in terms of the financial sector.  To go to the DSGE models as a source of determining the natural rate versus the NAIRU and the size of the gap seems a little bit “off the reservation” relative to the source of the shock.  So I’m just curious what your reaction is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement about the relevance and effectiveness of DSGE models in the current financial shock. The speaker questions the relevance of DSGE models and their ability to accurately capture the role of the financial sector. They express skepticism towards using DSGE models to determine the natural rate versus the NAIRU and the size of the gap in the current circumstances.


Passage number 188.
 MR. LACKER.  Sure.  Let me say two things to that.  The first is that progress has been made in putting the rudiments of a financial sector in these models.  The New York model is a leader on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 189.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But we’re still in elementary school.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a simple fact and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 190.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  The second thing I’d point out, though, is that if we’re going to think about the data we see, draw conclusions, and act on it, we’re using either an explicit model or an implicit model.  There’s no avoiding that.  Otherwise, what we’re doing is gibberish.  An explicit model has the advantage of exposing all sides of the reasoning process to scrutiny by others.  You can say, and it’s perfectly legitimate to think, “All right—yes, this factor that I think is important is not in this model,” and I just did that with EDO.  I just said, “Look, it doesn’t have a very articulate labor sector”—but we can debate that, and we can look at the magnitudes and talk about that.  So I think it’s a vehicle for analysis and discussion that crystallizes our thinking, that pins things down, but I don’t think it’s constructive to say, “X isn’t in the model.  I  have a free pass to say whatever I want.” I just don’t think that’s constructive.  I know that’s not what you were advocating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is explaining the advantages of using an explicit model in analyzing and discussing data, rather than relying on an implicit or unclear model. There is no disagreement or disagreement being expressed in the passage.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or details about President Lockhart that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 192.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, President Lacker.  You’re a perfect straight man for me because I’m going to be rather brief [laughter] to preserve time for the main event. Reports from my District contacts were very little changed from August. Economic expansion remains positive but very modest.  Just a couple of comments from contacts.  First, housing-sector contacts and several of my banking directors reported that residential real estate activity in general is clearly improving.  Prices have firmed in many areas, sales volume has increased, and permitting is rising.  Purchase mortgage applications have increased recently, and refinance activity remains positive. I have also seen data suggesting that the recent increase in purchases is being driven primarily by mortgage-financed homebuyers rather than cash investors.  Second, a director from a large management consulting firm offered the view that a number of his firms, very large corporate clients, have resigned themselves to a 2 percent growth world, and that major actions these businesses might take to accelerate their growth are largely on hold.  We heard a similar theme from several contacts.  And, third, inflation and rising business costs are not much of a concern among our contacts.  My director from the country’s largest home-improvement retailer reported that suppliers are not asking for price increases in this environment. Let me shift to my Bank’s assessment of the national economy and outlook.  It has become pretty difficult, in my view, to reject the view that the economy has been on a roughly 2 percent growth trend for most of the recovery.  Maybe I’m a little slow, but the recognition has gelled in my thinking, just in the last few weeks, that this is the prevailing reality.  Based on recent estimates, this may even overstate the immediate reality.  My outlook for GDP growth continues to show only modest improvement on this trend over the forecast horizon.  In particular, beyond this year and next, I remain less optimistic about the pace of GDP growth than the Tealbook.  With respect to employment, my baseline outlook has been a continuation of the trend of roughly 150,000 per month that has prevailed over the past two years.  This pace would be sufficient at current participation rates to make continuing but modest progress on the unemployment rate. However, last week’s job report makes it pretty clear that employment growth has fallen short of the 150,000 trend over the past four months.  Even though four months amount to a small sliver of time, I am concerned about the lack of any sustained progress on the unemployment rate since the beginning of the year.  It is getting harder to rule out the possibility that returning to the scenario of 150,000 jobs a month is at risk.  My perception is that the well-known uncertainty factors, including those associated with various downside risks, are contributing to some of the recent softness in the data.  I have no argument with the SEP bias that GDP growth risks are weighted to the downside, but I don’t rule out that these uncertainty drags could dissipate and that there is some upside potential.  For instance, some of the incoming information around housing and Europe has been mildly encouraging, and it’s plausible that if the major sources of uncertainty—notably, the fiscal cliff and European situation—are resolved favorably, or more or less favorably, in a few months, the outlook actually could be brighter.  So it strikes me that this environment is not as clear-cut as the situations that we faced on the cusp of LSAP1 and LSAP2. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Mr. Wilcox, did you want to add to the conversation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply implies that Mr. Wilcox has the opportunity to contribute to the conversation if he wishes to do so.


Passage number 194.
MR. WILCOX.  Yes. I don’t have a detailed response to President Lacker’s comments, but I thought I might just offer a few observations.  Sometimes I’m in sympathy with many of the points that President Lacker makes.  I think it’s important, though, to state that we take it as our remit to advise the Committee to the limit of our ability to measure the economy, to estimate and understand the economy, to observe economic processes.  We think it’s critically important not to do more than that, and we’re profoundly aware of the extent of our ignorance and the ignorance of the macroeconomic profession at large, regarding key questions about how the macroeconomy works. I’m reminded of a comment that Larry Summers once made in quite a different situation, in which he said, “You know, economics is an interesting field.  I doubt that when astrophysicists get together, they debate the fundamental validity of the laws of gravity.  And yet what we as economists do is, we have profound uncertainty about questions that are as fundamental as the laws of gravity.”  We on the staff do make every effort to distinguish short-run influences that we can identify.  For example, we have adjusted our reference level of the unemployment rate in light of influences that we can identify and estimate, stemming from emergency unemployment benefits and from the quality of functioning of the labor market.  We have adjusted our measure of the gap between the actual unemployment rate and the reference, or natural, rate of unemployment for those kinds of things.  But beyond that, we confront the real world in which data are imperfect, theory is deficient, policymaker and staff bandwidth is limited, and there are a lot of profound and fundamental debates to be resolved. With regard to EDO, it is a state-of-the-art DSGE model coming directly out of the intellectual tradition that President Lacker refers to. It’s part, but only part, of the intellectual base that we consult in the course of putting together our analysis that we provide to the Committee.  Now, whether the empirical properties of that model are plausible or implausible is a little difficult for me to say.  They are what they are, and they’re derived by an effort to work directly in that intellectual tradition.  We have pursued a diversified, multimodel strategy, which we think provides our analysis with a greater robustness than would be the case if we had a single model or a single-intellectual-tradition strategy. So I’m in sympathy with many of the points that President Lacker raises, but I think we need to recognize that the macroeconomic profession has a long way to go before we can deliver the kind of clarity and certainty that it seems to me is implicit in much of your remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly a statement of agreement with some points made by President Lacker and an acknowledgment of the limitations and uncertainties in the field of macroeconomics.


Passage number 195.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only mentions "President Bullard" without providing any context to suggest any conflicting views or differing opinions.


Passage number 196.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate Dave Wilcox’s comments there, and I’ll have a few comments on the slack memo at the end here. Let me talk for a minute about the Eighth District economy, which continues to expand at a modest pace.  The drought in the District has been especially severe and is having an important effect on agriculturally based businesses.  I generally agree with the Tealbook analysis of the effect of the drought on the macroeconomy over the next couple of quarters. District labor markets are improving slowly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and expressing agreement with a previous analysis.


Passage number 197.
 The District unemployment rate, based on 16 District MSAs, has continued to decline this year and is, according to the most recent data, about 7.5 percent, noticeably below the national unemployment rate.  Employment growth in the District has been slow, just a touch better than the national data, according to the most recent observations.  District real estate markets have improved during 2012.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states information about the District unemployment rate, employment growth, and real estate markets without any conflicting viewpoints or disagreements.


Passage number 198.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 199.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The past nine months remind me a bit of Samuel Beckett’s play Waiting for Godot. Rather than waiting for Godot, we are waiting for the labor market recovery.  And like Godot, the recovery in the labor market continues to elude us.  In the Beckett play, the characters seriously consider suicide as their best solution to the seemingly endless wait.  I do hope that tomorrow we arrive at a better solution.  [Laughter] Unfortunately, last month’s labor market report was quite consistent with my submission for the experimental consensus forecast.  I had a more pessimistic outlook for the next 18 months than the consensus forecast, and it assumed that we would not see robust employment growth or a significant change in the unemployment rate by the end of the year—or, for that matter, the end of next year—without further accommodation.  The modest employment growth did not surprise me, although I may not have sufficiently considered the possibility of the further declines in the labor force participation rate that were a striking feature of last Friday’s employment report, reducing the unemployment rate but for the wrong reason.  One of the distinctive features of this recession and recovery has been the percentage of the unemployed who remain unemployed for greater than 26 weeks.  Unlike the deep recession in 1982, in which there was a quick recovery and, as a result, a relatively small increase in long-duration unemployment, this recession has had a weak recovery, resulting in more long-duration unemployment.  Work being done by the staff in Boston that decomposes the Beveridge curve by duration of unemployment finds that the shift in the curve is primarily generated by workers who suffer long-duration unemployment.  Faster growth in the economy would likely mitigate some of this problem. While some have attributed the slow recovery to a deleveraging process, I would put less weight on that argument.  Consumption and business investment have not been the laggards in this recovery.  Rather, government spending and housing account for much of the unusual weakness.  In fact, if you exclude housing and government spending from GDP for this recovery, it looks much like the previous two recoveries.  The unusually weak government spending is, in part, a result of the state and local governments pulling back in response to greatly diminished revenues, a direct consequence of the depth of the recession and the weakness of the recovery.  Many were prepared for a revenue shortfall, with funds accumulated in their rainy day funds, but this recession quickly put most rainy day funds underwater.  Housing is usually a driver of most recoveries but has been absent for much of this recovery.  However, since the onset of the housing bust, the population has grown, per capita income has grown, interest rates are low, and prices are more affordable, resulting in tentative signs of a housing recovery.  This is a propitious time for considering additional stimulus to housing. If homebuyers feel that house prices are on the rise—as many indicators suggest and the Tealbook forecasts—and that mortgage rates will remain this low only temporarily, we may start to get new homebuyers to commit before rates and prices rise. It is important to note the significant downside risks we are still facing.  While there have been some positive announcements about financial support out of Europe, the underlyingsolutions still require political support.  Domestically, while most are aware of the dangers of a fiscal cliff, the positive solutions still require political action.  Should either of these risks materialize, we will need to consider a further array of tools:  possibly expanding QE even further, using asset purchases to target long rates, or providing more commitment in our guidance.  An important addition to these tools might also be an expanded set of discount window actions.  The staff memo on this provides a good road map to possible ways forward.  They include a variant of the Bank of England program, a mortgage program that would provide low-cost funding for banks to finance mortgage loans—particularly to those parts of the mortgage market that have been slow to recover, and programs that might require Treasury support to reduce the credit risk entailed on certain types of lending.  While some of these tools are likely to be most useful during a crisis where lending markets are disrupted, some could be implemented even in the current rate environment. I would encourage the staff to continue to search for creative ways that we can support those areas of the economy that are still troubled.  As further progress is made, it may be worth discussing, either as an additional tool if the recovery continues to be quite slow or as a contingency plan should some of the tail risks materialize.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing his analysis of the labor market recovery and discussing potential solutions and tools that could be used to support the economy.


Passage number 200.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Williams.


Passage number 201.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot determine the answer without the passage you are referring to. Can you please provide the passage for me to analyze?


Passage number 202.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Thank you. President Pianalto" simply expresses gratitude towards President Pianalto without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 203.
  MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like President Lockhart, I’m going to keep my remarks on economic conditions particularly brief today because I believe that we have more agreement on the outlook than we have on the policy implications of the outlook, which means that I’m not going to be as brief in my comments on policy tomorrow. My District business contacts remain concerned about the risks to the outlook, yet they are generally reporting only small changes in activity levels in their own businesses.  A few of my business contacts point to either a coming slowdown or a coming acceleration in their sales.  Their comments are consistent with the holding pattern around today’s 2 percent growth rate.  In my current outlook, I expect the recovery to remain in this holding pattern for the rest of this year and then generally pick up to a GDP growth rate of a little more than 2½ percent in 2013 and a little more than 3 percent in 2014.  In order to achieve these projected growth rates, I assume that we provide further policy accommodation by extending the period of very low rates into 2015. Among the data released since our last meeting, the August employment report stands out.  It was particularly disappointing in that the BLS confirmed that the economy had made very little progress in labor markets over the summer. While the month-to-month swings in the household survey make the progress on the unemployment rate difficult to interpret, the decline in the employment-to-population ratio to essentially its post-recession trough makes it clear that there has been little sustained progress in labor markets.  Nonetheless, as GDP growth picks up over the next two years, I am expecting that we will make gradual progress on unemployment.  As mentioned in the memo on economic slack, the Cleveland staff has taken a close look at the flows into and out of unemployment to examine the natural rate of unemployment.  This research finds that the trends of flows into and out of unemployment, often referred to as labor market churning, have been falling for several years.  This decline in labor market churning implies that   the current path to full employment will likely be slower than in past cycles. Some commentators treat the slow progress on reducing unemployment as evidence that the natural rate is far higher.  However, in the Cleveland Fed model, a faster pace of GDP growth does lower the unemployment rate more quickly.  While this result is supportive of monetary policy accommodation, it doesn’t answer the question of the effectiveness of our nontraditional monetary policy tools. Turning to inflation, I have made only small changes to my outlook for inflation.  I agree with the Board staff that we’re likely to see more disinflation in core PCE rates, but my forecast doesn’t get quite as far away from the 2 percent rate as the Tealbook anticipates. The risks to my economic outlook remain primarily to the downside for GDP growth.  Although market participants seem to be taking a more optimistic view that Europeans will solve their problems, a crisis in Europe remains a large risk to the recovery in the United States.  In addition, the fiscal cliff poses a significant risk of a dramatic slowing of the U.S. economy.  These risks to growth imply that unemployment could end up higher than anticipated.  On inflation, I continue to see the risks tilted toward the downside, given the significant downside risks to economic activity and the low levels of some measures of inflation expectations.  In my view, these risks to growth, unemployment, and inflation make the outlook more uncertain than normal.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, briefly discusses economic conditions and acknowledges the risks to the outlook, but does not express any disagreements or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 204.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply consists of a polite expression of gratitude and an identification of the speaker as "President Evans."


Passage number 205.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude by someone named President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 206.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 207.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 10th District economy continues to expand at a moderate pace. Our retail, restaurant, and auto contacts reported higher sales and expect gains in coming months, particularly those in the auto sector.  Energy activity expanded further as gains in oil drilling outpaced declines in natural gas drilling.  Housing market conditions continued to improve, and construction activity increased for both residential and nonresidential sectors.  Manufacturing activity in the District expanded at a slightly faster pace in August.  The number of contacts in our manufacturing survey who were expecting higher levels of production and shipments in six months moved notably higher, and expectations of employment gains remained in positive territory. One component of our survey that has softened over the past several months is the expected level of new export orders.  The number of contacts reporting higher levels has been declining but still outweighs those expecting an outright decline.  So far this year, total District exports remain above their level a year ago, though exports to Europe have been decreasing. In terms of the District labor market, initial claims for unemployment insurance have declined notably over the past few months, and layoff announcements have been modest.  Still, employers remain quite cautious about expanding their payrolls.  In terms of agricultural conditions, U.S. net farm incomes are projected to reach their second-highest level in history despite the worst drought in three decades. Farm incomes are being supported by higher crop prices and crop insurance payments, which are offsetting declines in production and livestock profits.  In addition, the persistent, strong demand from the ethanol and export sectors continues to strain low crop inventories and could place upward pressure on prices heading into 2013 as reflected in futures markets. Turning to the national outlook, the recovery has been progressing mostly in line with my expectations.  Overall, I take a similar view as the Tealbook in that incoming data since the last meeting have not materially affected my outlook for economic growth.  For the second half of this year, I anticipate that firms will remain reluctant to undertake large expansion projects or aggressively add to payrolls because of the near-term risk.  In particular, I noted in the most recent NFIB survey that small businesses cite taxes and the regulatory landscape as their most pressing problems, with poor sales third on the list.  These issues are reaffirmed when I talk with my business contacts, and suggest that monetary policy may find it particularly challenging to offset headwinds of this nature.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 208.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Thank you. President Plosser" does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention. It is a polite expression of gratitude towards President Plosser.


Passage number 209.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any content or information that can indicate contention or disagreement. It consists of a simple expression of gratitude and the mention of President Fisher without any further context.


Passage number 210.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, just as President Lacker was a straight man for President Lockhart, in a way, President Plosser has been a straight man for me.  Like President Pianalto, I will interlocutate [laughter] more tomorrow than I plan to do today. President Williams made a very important point. He talked about how uncertainty has paralyzed most businesses and how uncertainty acts as an aggregate demand shock.  I agree with that analysis. I hear that from my contacts.  The question is, is monetary policy effective in offsetting this form of uncertainty.  President George mentioned the National Federation of Independent Business.  She cited some data.  What she did not cite was that 93 percent of that sample makes clear that they do not wish to borrow, either because of uncertainty or because they have access to capital that’s abundant and cheap.  In my own surveys as preparation for this meeting, I asked a simple question: If the actions we were to take at this upcoming meeting were to reduce your cost of capital by 25 basis points or more, what would it do in terms of your investment plans. I deliberately sampled larger companies because that’s where cap-ex comes from.  Employment comes from small and medium-sized businesses.  We assume that, just by sheer weight of numbers, significant cap-ex comes from large corporations.  And I would say that 9 out of 10 said it would not change their investment plans, even if we took action that led to a reduction of 1 percent or more in their cost of capital.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It includes statements of agreement, references to previous speakers' points, and sharing of survey results.


Passage number 211.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude from the speaker to the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 212.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  First, I want to make a comment on President Fisher’s last remark.  My understanding is that capital spending has never been particularly interest rate sensitive.  It’s really driven by demand and capacity utilization, things of that nature.  So I wouldn’t expect that to be a really strong channel by which monetary policy stimulates the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing their understanding of the topic, without contradicting President Fisher's remark.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 213.
 MR. FISHER.  Can I just make a point to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there may be contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrase "Can I just make a point to that," which suggests that Mr. Fisher has a differing or opposing viewpoint to something previously discussed.


Passage number 214.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Sure" implies agreement or affirmation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 215.
 MR. FISHER.  At least in the drafts of our statement, we were saying that business fixed investment was weak.  The question is, are we affecting business fixed investment.  And, more important than that, are we affecting employment. My point is that in the responses I’m getting to anecdotal inquiry—not systematically organized, although the systematic surveys that we see, through the NFIB and others, show that it is questionable whether or not we are actually affecting employment.  The question is, are we affecting employment over the short term or the long term.  We have a wealth effect.  The Chairman has made that a very strong argument, including at the last meeting. If you’re advising a corporation about what to do with the savings that they can achieve through cheaper capital, they can invest it in greater plant or equipment expansion, they can buy back their stock, or they can increase their dividends.  And I would argue that the former would have a more immediate impact on employment creation than the latter. Excuse me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that systematic surveys show it is questionable whether or not they are affecting employment, while the Chairman argues that there is a wealth effect. This suggests a difference in opinion on the impact of their actions on employment.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anybody for coffee.  Coffee is available.  Why don’t we take 20 minutes and return at 3:10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The first statement is an invitation for coffee, the second statement confirms the availability of coffee, and the third statement suggests taking a break and returning at a specific time. There is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 217.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  This is a prompt group.  I like this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that this is a prompt group and the speaker likes it. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 218.
 MR. LACKER.  Thanks to Debbie.  Thanks to the Deputy Secretary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply expresses gratitude towards someone named Debbie and the Deputy Secretary. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 219.
 MS. DANKER.  Happy to help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention.  The speaker is expressing their willingness to assist, which suggests a cooperative and friendly attitude.


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  All right.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Okay. All right. Governor Yellen" does not contain any conflicting or contrasting information.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage expresses gratitude and addresses Governor Duke respectfully.


Passage number 222.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was going to make comments about my forecast compared with the consensus, but I’m not entirely sure which one of the consensus forecasts to compare it with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses uncertainty about which consensus forecast to compare with.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You pick.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you did not provide a passage for me to analyze. Could you please restate your question with the relevant passage?


Passage number 224.
 [Laughter]  MS. DUKE. I’ll just say that I think it’s not inconsistent, but there are four assumptions that are a little bit different in my forecast than in the Tealbook and, maybe, in the forecasts of some of you.  The first one is that there is an underlying strength in the fundamentals of the economy—such as balance sheet strength, debt service capacity, and credit supply—and that this strength is being masked by low levels of business and consumer confidence as well as concern about risks posed by Europe and the fiscal cliff, but that whenever loan demand picks up, the credit supply will be fully available to meet it. The second one is that it’ll be especially difficult to interpret data over the second half of this year and the first half of next year, as investment and purchase decisionmaking is increasingly either paralyzed or distorted by uncertainty about federal tax and spending policies, and that, on balance, the uncertainty itself will depress activity and lead to weaker outcomes for 2012 and 2013.  Third, the one place I do still see a potential for an upside surprise is in housing, and I believe purchasing mortgages might be helpful here, but not necessarily in the ways that you might think.  And, finally, I have assumed that we choose alternative B today.  Furthermore, in light of my assumptions about the fiscal cliff, we’re more likely to face deteriorating conditions than simply unsatisfactory progress as we approach the end of the year; and that the deterioration will lead us to continue asset purchases well into 2013. In recent meetings, I’ve talked at length about my belief in the first assumption, and I’m not going to repeat that today.  But I’d like to discuss assumptions 2 and 3 in this round and reserve comments about assumption 4 for the policy round.  Beginning with my pessimism about the rest of this year and the first part of next, almost every conversation that I’ve had with a business person or a banker recently has had the same theme: Things seem pretty much the same—slow, steady improvement in business fundamentals, but with a new tendency to put all long-term investment or expansion decisions off until after the election.  Oddly enough, these businesses have the luxury of postponing decisionmaking precisely because things have improved.  They’ve strengthened their balance sheets and found ways to grow the bottom line even in the face of sluggish top-line growth. In fact, their profitability-improvement efforts are likely at least partly responsible for the slow improvement in labor markets.  Indeed, the business investments that do get the green light are mostly directed at saving labor, and no one mentions any plans for hiring.  I believe the marked slowdown in business spending that we’re already seeing is a direct result of a wait-and-see attitude. As we get closer to the end of the year and the expiration of tax cuts, implementation of expense sequestration, and expiration of fixes for doctors and alternative minimum taxes, businesses and individuals will have to start making adjustments for what could happen, whether or not it actually does.  For example, contractors who expect that they’ll have to cut staffing if their contracts are affected by sequestration are legally required to issue layoff notices in advance, even if the spending is not ultimately cut and the layoffs don’t actually happen.  Those who receive the notices will surely adjust their spending accordingly, and this potential pall on holiday spending has to be making retailers nervous about their inventories.  Those same retailers are having to pull the trigger now on their inventory decisions in the face of a potential shutdown of East Coast ports by a longshoremen’s strike.  So who could blame them if they decide to shave a bit off their purchases just to be sure. Health-care companies are especially cautious as they plan for both sequestration and implementation of health-care reform.  Simple operational changes, like tax withholding tables, have to be put in place for all businesses.  For individuals, asset sales decisions, especially for sales of businesses, will have to be made soon to ensure the current capital gains tax rate. I had the personal experience of doing a new will recently, and my lawyer explained to me that things would be very different if I died this year orin January [laughter].  For these reasons, I believe that the fourth quarter is going to be affected by the fiscal cliff regardless of its ultimate resolution as businesses, in particular, hit the brakes. And I can’t convince myself that a lame-duck Congress will somehow resolve all of the fiscal issues by the end of the year, no matter how the election turns out.  In fact, the best case I can construct is a temporary extension that pushes the political wrangling well into the first quarter of next year.  And after the debt ceiling brinkmanship we saw last time, I think a perfectly plausible scenario is a plunge off the fiscal cliff, on the assumption that some sort of deal will be easier to construct after the damage becomes more obvious.  So I think we have to make contingency plans for how we can shore up confidence in the face of a really bad outcome, rather than thinking just about how we react if the recovery stays unsatisfactorily slow.  For these reasons, I’ve taken on board a bit of a lean toward the “Fiscal Cliff” scenario in the near-term portion of my forecast. In contrast, my continued optimism about housing and the underlying strength in the economy shows through in my medium-term forecast.  I think that the inventory factors that began to emerge early in the year are now taking full hold in house price movements, and that the momentum arrow is pointing up.  This makes a difference.  The staff estimates that roughly 3 million households, almost one-fourth of underwater households, moved from a negative to a positive equity position in the second quarter.  The Tealbook baseline forecast assumes a 5 percent increase in house prices this year that’s already pretty much baked in, followed by a leveling-off.  But some models are predicting continued strong gains in house prices.  Staff forecasts of house prices and residential investment are on the conservative side, tempered by concern about foreclosure pipelines, the elevated level of vacant houses, weak household formation, and the tepid pace of the housing recovery so far.   Here I think there’s reason for more optimism. Foreclosure pipelines are full because the exits are still clogged, but the pace of new delinquencies has slowed markedly.  The exits are no longer clogged by national moratoriums or retooling for new modification programs.  The current backlog is more closely tied to state-specific or operational issues that seem to me unlikely to suddenly clear and release a flood of foreclosures onto the market.  As for the vacant inventory, a large portion of the vacant homes not listed for sale is outside of bank REO inventory.  Because we don’t know why they’re held off the market, I’m not sure we can make assumptions about their sudden return to the market.  I view the potential for pent-up demand to show through in faster household formation and put upward pressure on house prices as even more likely than the potential for a surge in foreclosures to hold prices down.  At some point, demographics win.  Those kids now living at home with their parents will not stay there until they’re 40.  [Laughter] And when they do form households, they’re going to require housing units, whether rental or owner occupied.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.    This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion of the author's assumptions and forecasts.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 225.
 MR. FISHER.  We’re going to hold you to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The phrase "We're going to hold you to that" suggests that there may be disagreement or doubt about the statement being made.


Passage number 226.
 MS. RASKIN.  Ship them to Betsy’s house.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement present in the passage. It simply states the action of shipping something to Betsy's house without any opposing or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 227.
  [Laughter] MS. DUKE.  To me, this represents the one area of dry tinder in the economy that could be lit with a spark of confidence.  To be sure, mortgage lending conditions are still extremely tight, but some recent developments should help.  The specter of putback risk has reportedly been holding back loans to borrowers at the lower end of GSE standards.  The FHFA has now committed to reducing putback risk beginning in January 2013 through better front-end quality control and time limits on liability.  With house prices on the rise, fewer loans should fall through because of appraisal issues.  Regulatory uncertainty should clear, as new regulatory   requirements for loan origination, securitization, and servicing are likely to be finalized in the coming months. Probably the biggest drag on lending is the shrinkage of loan origination capacity.  The industry is showing signs of strain in what looks to be only a trillion-dollar origination year, compared with a peak origination of $3 trillion not that many years ago. But if high profits are the best fertilizer, we should see more banks entering the business.  I want to investigate actual data, but anecdotally, the bankers I spoke with this time who were in the mortgage business were actually having record profits, while those who weren’t in mortgage origination were wondering about their survival.  I’m talking about the difference between a range of 0.5 to 0.6 ROA, for those with no mortgage business, versus one of 1.30 to 1.50, for those with a mortgage business.  So, for all of these reasons, I think there’s a lot of meat left on the house price and housing finance bone, and I’m optimistic about that part of the forecast.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements of contention or disagreement. It primarily provides information and the author's optimistic view on certain aspects of the economy.


Passage number 228.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Thank you, Governor Tarullo." It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 229.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Because John captured my views on the economic outlook, I’m going to jettison most of what I would have said.  In fact, I think John captured my views better than I had captured my views.  So I thought I’d turn back to labor markets, moved by some of Charlie Plosser’s comments.  The first comment I’d make is that it’s important to distinguish between cyclical labor market conditions and longer-term labor market issues.  I don’t think there’s any doubt that we’ve got some chronic labor market issues in the United States.  There’s been evidence of declining dynamism in U.S. labor markets for well over a decade.  There certainly is a substantial sense that people currently taking lower-income service-sector jobs—if they had better education and training—would be available for jobs that might then be created with higher value added. What Charlie referred to as polarization isundoubtedly true, but again, a chronic issue rather than a cyclical one.  I actually think that unlike so many other questions, there’s been a substantial convergence of views—not entirely, but a substantial convergence of views—around the proposition that a relatively small portion of the big jump in unemployment that we’ve seen is attributable to structural factors. There’s been, as you all know, substantial, good, and careful work from the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, New York, and San Francisco over the past several years that has supported that conclusion.  And I think among academic researchers, the convergence is also manifesting itself, as shown most recently in Ed Lazear’s paper at Jackson Hole, following on, by about five months, Jesse Rothstein’s paper, which surveyed much of the same material and came to many of the same conclusions. Jeff, at the last meeting, suggested that a paper done by Richmond Fed research staff was a dissonant voice on this basic proposition that structural unemployment was not a big part of the story.  This paper, of course, starts from a very different perspective on long-term unemployment than the literature I just referred to a moment ago.  The Richmond Fed paper argues that an unobserved heterogeneity among unemployed workers means that newly unemployed workers have inherently different exit rates, and that over time, the composition of the pool of the unemployed shifts toward workers who started with the lower exit rates.  I looked at the paper after Jeff talked about it at the last meeting, and I spoke with others here at the Board about it, and I actually don’t think it establishes a case for structural unemployment.  There are a lot of empirical and technical questions about the paper—it’s certainly interesting and may well have significant merit—but I actually don’t think it’s making a structural argument, at least not if we think of “structural” as referring to nontransitory unemployment that can’t be affected fairly directly by fluctuations in aggregate demand.  It would be unsurprising to learn that firms are   more likely to lay off relatively less-valued employees whose lesser perceived abilities may mean that they’re less likely to be quickly plucked up by a firm that is hiring.  That phenomenon is entirely consistent with a demand-driven increase in unemployment.  More generally, the Richmond Fed model attempts to decompose the variation in the pool of the unemployed over time.  So it addresses the reasons for fluctuations in unemployment over history—in recessions, but also in recoveries.  The reasons for unemployment increases also explain the reversals that take place during recoveries.  That is, as there are fewer unemployed, firms cannot afford to be as demanding and thus are more likely to turn to the pool of the supposedly less valuable workers. This seems, to me at least, more a cyclical than a structural explanation, and thus, again, whatever the ultimate merits of the paper, I don’t think it really undercuts the consensus reached in the papers to which I referred earlier. One final thought on structural unemployment, and this relates a bit to what Janet was saying a moment ago.  The Richmond paper describes something as the “true duration dependence” position, as opposed to the “unobserved heterogeneity” position that it takes.  The true duration dependence position is that, quite apart from any inherent worker qualities, the bad luck of being unemployed for an extended period will itself begin to erode the overall employability of enough workers that there will be macroeconomic effects. As Janet said, historically, we haven’t seen much evidence of this in the United States, though many, myself included, have thought that the severity and duration of the current employment problem could produce some observable hysteresis effects this time around.  Logically, one would think that at some point these effects would manifest themselves.  But I have to say, to date, there still isn’t much indication of any such effects.  And indeed, I think if one looks at what’s been happening to long-term unemployed, you might say there’s actually been a little bit of an improvement intheir performance, which would suggest that we’re not sliding closer toward hysteresis, but that, once again, for reasons not entirely understood, the U.S. labor market seems relatively insulated from those effects. But again, as Janet said, basically, whether you believe that hysteresis is around the corner or not doesn’t change your policy prescription.  If you think that it hasn’t clicked in to date but it might, that’s an argument for greater stimulus now in order to stop it from happening.  If you think that there’s unlikely to be hysteresis and thus the cyclical explanation dominates, then obviously the unemployment should be susceptible to increased aggregate demand stimulus.  So, in that sense, I think these arguments happily converge around the same policy prescription.  And for me, this all, again, reinforces the view that the story of the economy is still one of inadequate aggregate demand.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of one person expressing their views on the labor market and discussing various research papers supporting their views. There is no evidence of opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 230.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The given passage does not provide any information or context to suggest that Mr. Lacker disagrees with the chairman or that there is any conflict between them.


Passage number 231.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without any context provided for the passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 232.
 MR. LACKER.  First, I’d like to thank Governor Tarullo for reading the Richmond Fed paper.  Second, I’d like to point out that—in terms of the distinction I was making before between what the unemployment rate would converge to in the long run and the reference rate that’s relevant for current policy—a shock that hits the economy today, if it’s a structural shock that’s permanent and long lived, it is going to affect the longer-term normal rate of unemployment. But whether it’s permanent or transitory is irrelevant for whether it affects the policy-relevant rate today.  See what I’m saying. It doesn’t matter if it fades out right away or if it’s going to last a long time. It could affect the policy-relevant rate today either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Lacker is acknowledging and thanking Governor Tarullo for reading the paper, and then offering his own perspective on the distinction between the long-term normal rate of unemployment and the policy-relevant rate. He is explaining that the permanence or transitory nature of a shock does not change its impact on the policy-relevant rate.


Passage number 233.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How does that handle policy lags.  Monetary policy doesn’t work for a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating that monetary policy may not have immediate effects and may take some time to work.


Passage number 234.
  MR. LACKER.  I think that’s orthogonal.  I think that’s tangential to this question.  In the models, you’ve got policy lags.  Policy takes effect over time, but it’s still the case that you’re carrying around this reference rate—President Bullard talked about a flex price equilibrium— and it’s affected by both transitory and permanent shocks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Governor Raskin." It simply refers to a person's title or position without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 236.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook has not changed materially since the July–August meeting.  Maybe incoming data have been mixed, but forward-looking indicators still remain consistent with an economy growing in the near term in a range between 1½ percent and 2 percent. Similarly, the factors shaping the medium-term outlook have not changed significantly; the general contours of my outlook remain the same.  Yes, some of the incoming data during the intermeeting period suggested modest increases in household spending and employment, and the household sector showed some further slight signs of improvement.  But no data are yet showing a basis to believe that these modest increases will be sustained to such an extent that faster momentum might be expected.  Indeed, other data, such as those for business spending and consumer confidence, remain soft.  It is not yet obvious that this path, or even a couple of months of stronger-than-expected economic activity, could reduce the amount of slack in labor markets or alter the trajectory of expected inflation to a degree that would obviate the need for a further easing of monetary policy.  Last week’s employment report— payroll employment only 55,000 higher than reported in July, after taking into account revisions—does not suggest above-trend economic growth or a declining trend in the unemployment rate.  It suggests, instead, that the unemployment rate is likely to move sideways with no sign of a substantial and sustainable strengthening in the pace of economic recovery.  And this unsatisfactory modal projection is what exists before even considering downside risks to the outlook.  One particular downside risk that remains quite elevated relates to what we’ve been talking about—the depressed level of labor participation and the enhanced level of long-term unemployment. The decline in the labor force participation rate since the beginning of the recession is ominous, and although the Board staff predicts that over the next couple of years the labor force participation rate will flatten out, the recession, as Governor Yellen described, may well have permanent effects on the labor force participation rate, just as the high-pressure labor market of the late 1990s pulled people back into the labor force who had been excluded for a long time—only now, unfortunately, in reverse. In addition, with a substantial and growing proportion of unemployed workers having been jobless for long periods, we face an elevated risk that such a high level of long-term unemployment will persist long enough to permanently depress labor supply and potential output.  Unlike downside risks emanating from the European crisis and U.S. fiscal policy—which, were they to occur, theoretically can be addressed with accommodative monetary policy after the fact—the potential hysteresis created by drops in the labor force participation rate and increases in long-term unemployment will prove intractable to address with accommodative monetary policy that isn’t inflationary.  So I find the particular downside risk of hysteresis to be especially pernicious because it’s difficult to address after the fact. But, more optimistically, it is one downside risk that monetary policymakers do have some ability to mitigate prior to its occurrence. Similarly, I wonder about the permanent or transitory nature of household and business expectations.  The economic outlook appears damped by some form of pessimism.  Look at the Michigan survey question on the proportion of households expecting unemployment to improve.  Earlier this year, that number had recovered, but now it has dropped down again.  Similarly,   households’ income expectations for the coming 12 months have hardly recovered at all since the recession despite the fact that actual income has somewhat increased.  On the business side, expectations for business conditions six months hence as measured in the Empire State and Philadelphia Fed surveys have dropped back sharply again.  In the case of the Empire State survey, they’re back close to levels seen during the recession.  Capital spending plans also don’t look great.  Surveys from the National Association for Business Economics show capital spending to have dropped sharply in the second quarter.  Surveys from the National Federation of Independent Business show capital spending to be gradually rising, but still remaining at less than half of its pre-recession level. It’s difficult to project whether these expectations will transition from being temporary blips to permanent shifts, but the fact that these expectations have tried to recover from the recession before but been knocked back, sometimes more than once, might be a factor that could keep households and businesses from getting too hopeful again. The longer we have an economy that looks bleak as far as the eye can see, the more this bleakness gets built into expectations.  Households and businesses now see a recovery slow to materialize.  They assume that things will get better because they always have, but then things don’t get better.  So households and businesses start to wonder if this is just a delay or if it’s just the new normal.  If they think it’s the new normal, it could become just that.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker acknowledges some positive signs in the economy, such as modest increases in household spending and employment. However, they argue that these signs are not enough to sustain faster momentum or indicate a substantial and sustainable strengthening in the pace of economic recovery. The speaker also highlights the downside risks, such as the depressed level of labor participation and long-term unemployment, which they believe could have permanent effects on the labor force and potential output. The contention lies in the differing views on the current state of the economy and the potential for future improvement.


Passage number 237.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a polite and respectful expression of gratitude towards Governor Stein.


Passage number 238.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In terms of the outlook, I’m reasonably close to the consensus forecast you put forth, and just a shade more upbeat than I was at our last meeting—that is to say, maybe a tenth or two lower on the unemployment rate for 2013. I’ve interpreted the incoming data since the last meeting inclusive of the jobs report on Friday as approximately a wash and feel as though the situation in Europe looks just a bit brighter.  So,overall, I would say it appears we’re still about as “stuck in the mud” as we have been over the last several months, and I agree with Governor Tarullo’s characterization that it’s largely an aggregate demand phenomenon. In trying to think about the factors that are leading demand to be so sluggish and about the channels by which monetary policy might be able to help, I’ve been struck by a few pieces of survey evidence.  Now, they turn out to be the same pieces of survey evidence that Governor Raskin was just referring to, thereby scooping a fair portion of what I was going to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Stein is expressing his agreement with the consensus forecast and his slightly more positive outlook, while also mentioning that he agrees with Governor Tarullo's characterization of the situation as an aggregate demand phenomenon. He also mentions that he was going to discuss the same survey evidence that Governor Raskin referred to.


Passage number 239.
 MS. RASKIN.  It happened to me for a long time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a personal experience without expressing any conflicting ideas or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 240.
  [Laughter] MR. STEIN.  I’m going to just start juggling next time. Anyway, just to underscore, really—on the Michigan survey, we had a very interesting briefing a few weeks ago by Claudia Sahm, in Research and Statistics, who’d been looking carefully at these data.  And the gist of the finding is, not only is it low, but also, basically, it fell from 2007 to 2009, and it really hasn’t recovered since.  Moreover, it’s not well explained by household characteristics—there’s a large negative residual there in a way that seems different from previous experience. In a similar vein but much less scientifically, I looked at a different survey, the Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Index, which also fell in August.  Very much to your point, they do a breakdown of the index into views of the current situation—a present situation index—and a future expectations piece, and all of the drop was coming from the future expectations piece.  So I was curious.  I went back and compared it with previous peaks of unemployment that we’ve had.  The ones I looked at were May 1975 and December 1982.  What you see is, at those times when unemployment was also very high, if you asked people about the present situation, it was dismal, but if you asked them about future expectations, it was not nearly so bad as it is today.  These are just a couple of data points, but they’re consistent with what I take to be the spirit of Claudia’s  work, which is, it’s as if, given where we are today and given the current situation, people feel the future is considerably more pessimistic.  And again, I think this is pessimism as opposed to uncertainty, which has a slightly different implication because it’s less clear that, if the fiscal cliff resolves itself, this kind of thing gets fixed. Another survey on the business side: I just yesterday got a survey that Duke University does in conjunction with CFO magazine, where they talk to 900 CFOs of U.S. firms.  One of the new questions in there this time—I think, actually, Steve Sharpe helped them design this question—asked the firms if they would in any way change their capital spending plans for a given change in interest rates.  Here, it is strikingly like a large-sample version of President Fisher’s CEO conversations, where only 3 percent of the firms say they would in any way change their capital spending for a 50 basis point movement in rates.  Now, I take Vice Chairman Dudley’s critique here.  First of all, in this one, unlike consumer confidence, we don’t have a benchmark, so I don’t know what people would say in normal times.  But as a Bayesian, I’m inclined to think that there’s something going on here, even though I wouldn’t say it’s a huge thing. So, putting this together—now, this part is very impressionistic, but I guess the overall feeling I get from looking at these various pieces of survey evidence is the sense that when we make a policy move now, we’re playing more for whatever effect we can have on consumer and business confidence than for the normal hydraulic effect we would have on financing conditions per se.  That is to say, we may know more about how to move interest rates than about how to influence confidence, but it’s the latter that, in some sense, is the dragging anchor.  This is not an “always” situation.  I think it’s, in some respects, the opposite of where we were in 2009 at the  time of QE1, when really the thing to do, the imperative, was to fix financing conditions, and people would figure it out one way or the other. I don’t know if this has any implications for policy. It strikes me that, if this is right, it should color particularly how we think about the communications aspect.  I, like many others here, believe that the need for action is clear, but I think, less so than usual, the bond market is not really our primary audience.  So maybe when we think about policy, we want to worry less about putting together the biggest, most inclusive package that has the maximum bond market impact, and worry more about, how do we deliver a simple and coherent message that normal humans can understand, as opposed to mainly Fed watchers.  I think we’ll have a chance to talk about some of these issues.  I’m not sure if this concept is fully operational, but I have this conviction that we really have to think about our audience as being business managers and households—more so than at other times.  There’s so much talk about, what are the Fed watchers expecting us to do.  And I think we don’t want to get overly caught up in delivering just to them.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is presenting different survey data and interpretations of the data, such as the Michigan survey and the Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Index. They are discussing the different perspectives on current economic conditions and future expectations. They also mention the different opinions on the impact of policy moves on consumer and business confidence.


Passage number 241.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a polite expression of gratitude and a mention of Governor Powell, but there is no clear indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 242.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Could I ask the Governor a question.  Geographically, do they express any preferences about where they want to have the business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of two separate questions. The first question asks about asking the Governor a question, which does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The second question asks about the geographical preferences of the unspecified "they" in terms of business location, which does not contain any conflicting opinions either.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 243.
 MR. POWELL.  Yes.  The hedge funds are, as a staff memo from Matt and Fabio pointed out, unanimously not believing a long-run solution in Europe.  They’re just very pessimistic.  I   would say the private equity firms are in the same place.  You see very little private equity interest in Europe.  There’s great uncertainty and that kind of thing.  In the United States, you see a lot of activity—again, restrained only by a lack of supply.  When there’s a good company that’s out there, the bidding is furious, and they’re all saying, “This is the time.”  This happened 10 years ago. And Asia—I can’t really give you any call on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage reveals disagreement or contention regarding the long-run solution in Europe and the level of private equity interest in Europe. The hedge funds and private equity firms are portrayed as pessimistic and uninterested in Europe, while the speaker mentions activity and bidding in the United States.


Passage number 244.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing ideas. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 245.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thanks for those remarks.  I found them very useful in my own thinking.  I, too, thought the staff’s work on LSAPs over the last couple of intermeeting periods has been really helpful, but even more broadly, I certainly came to the question of the efficacy of the LSAPs from the same Modigliani–Miller framework that Mike sketched, and I found the empirical work on the asset pricing side very informative.  It certainly shaped my thinking moving away from the Modigliani–Miller framework. Our statements, alternative A and alternative B, make reference to continuing to study the efficacy of the LSAPs.  Part of that will have to be ongoing work and ongoing study of that linkage betweenwhat’s going on in the financial markets and how that’s getting through to the real economy.  At least for me, that’s a major source of uncertainty still.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the remarks made by someone else and also mentioning their own thinking and perspective on the topic.


Passage number 246.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me make one comment on that, which is, you sometimes hear the following kind of statement:  “Tight monetary policy is not causing the problem; therefore, easing monetary policy won’t help.”  That’s a non sequitur.  If, say, tight fiscal policy is the problem, if that’s the reason the economy is growing slowly, it doesn’t mean that monetary policy can’t mitigate that.  So I think that kind of argument needs to be looked at very carefully.  We are doing a lot.  We are absolutely doing a lot.  There’s no question about it.  Nobody can blame the Federal Reserve fairly, in my opinion, for being tightfisted and stingy and not willing to take risks to try to support the economy.  But the fact that it’s not our fault that the recovery is slow doesn’t mean that we can’t try to help if we think, in fact, that the benefit–cost ratio is appropriate. What I’d like to do is let Bill English do his introductory remarks for tomorrow.  I’m in your hands.  The reception starts at 5:30.  Would people like to continue with the policy round, or should we just have Bill and then start fresh at 8:30. PARTICIPANT. Break. PARTICIPANTS.  Fresh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the idea that tightening fiscal policy is causing the slow growth does not mean that monetary policy cannot help mitigate the problem. They also state that the Federal Reserve is not to blame for the slow recovery, but that they are willing to try to help if they believe it would be beneficial. There is no conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 247.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fresh.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Fresh. Okay," as it only consists of two separate words without providing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 248.
 MR. FISHER.  Governor Powell needs to take a nap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Governor Powell needs to take a nap.


Passage number 249.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  He’s not the only one.  [Laughter] All right.  We’ll ask Bill to make his opening presentation and take any questions, and then we’ll recess for reception and dinner.  Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 250.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there any questions for Bill. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude followed by a request for questions directed towards Bill. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 251.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, if I could ask Simon and the Desk—again, just to have a factual grip here:  What kind of market penetration will we have on mortgage-backed securities under the program of $30 and $40 billion per month.  You mentioned this earlier.  I apologize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is a request for factual information regarding market penetration.


Passage number 252.
 MR. POTTER. That’s the flow rate relative to gross issuance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting a specific measurement, the flow rate relative to gross issuance, without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 253.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Fisher agrees or confirms something. It does not indicate any disagreement or contentiousness.


Passage number 254.
 MR. POTTER. If we’re about one-third right now, if we added $30 billion, we’d be about 60 percent; at $40 billion, we’re about 70 percent.  But in terms of the stock, I think that would—what was that, Lorie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of numerical calculations and predictions.


Passage number 255.
 MS. LOGAN.  I don’t have the exact numbers for the particular scenarios, but the stock would be 25 percent under the $30-billion-per-month pace, and it would be slightly higher under $40 billion per month. I don’t have that exact number, and it depends on the length, but just for a maximum, under the $2 trillion scenario that we had run, the maximum was 36 percent.  So that gives you the very upper bound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and numerical data without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 256.
 MR. FISHER.  And if we assume that we finish the MEP at year-end, what will be our duration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a factual question about the duration of a project.


Passage number 257.
  MR. POTTER.  The duration will be eight years, but we’ll own quite large amounts of some of the longer-duration securities.  That’s in the Treasury part of the portfolio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the duration of the securities in the Treasury part of the portfolio.


Passage number 258.
 MR. FISHER.  And of some of the particular issues, we have significant—above 70 percent.  Is that correct now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a percentage without giving any context or opposition.


Passage number 259.
 MS. LOGAN. We’ve a 70 percent per CUSIP cap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of fact regarding a 70 percent per CUSIP cap.


Passage number 260.
  So we can’t buy any— MR. FISHER.  That’s our cap per CUSIP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by MR. FISHER simply provides additional information and does not contradict or oppose the previous statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 261.
 MS. LOGAN.  That’s the cap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The dialogue suggests that there is disagreement between Ms. Logan and another person. Without further context, it is clear that there is contention as Ms. Logan's statement is met with opposition or differing opinions.


Passage number 262.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 263.
 MS. LOGAN.  We’ve only hit the cap on ten issues, I think—the number that we’ve hit the maximum 70 percent on.  And most of those were old bonds in very small size.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides factual information about the number of issues on which the maximum 70 percent was reached, specifically mentioning that most of those were old bonds in small sizes.


Passage number 264.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is expressing gratitude or appreciation.


Passage number 265.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the existence of "other questions" and President Bullard without further elaboration or indication of conflict.


Passage number 266.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Bill, I just wanted to clarify since we have a few minutes here.  When we do this on page 1 here, there are three lines, and then alternative B has a couple of options in it.  Are you saying that this is a rough guide to what alternative B would deliver.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification about the content on page 1 and the details of alternative B.


Passage number 267.
 MR. ENGLISH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No. The passage does not present any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 268.
 MR. BULLARD. Or do you feel as though it wouldn’t make too much difference which option is chosen within the subgroups that are proposed.  Or is it just that it’d get too cluttered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for the opinion of the speaker.


Passage number 269.
 MR. ENGLISH. What we tried to do here was write down something that seemed plausibly in line with alternative B. Alternative B has a couple of different choices that the Committee would have to make.  One is, later on, what do you do in a few months after you’ve observed the economy.  Do you continue purchasing into next year. We’ve assumed that youcontinue purchasing for about, I think, seven months in this.  And then the other question is, what do you do with the forward guidance. We’ve assumed, basically, that the forward guidance goes out to mid-2015 and is compelling—everybody believes it.  It’s possible, as I mentioned, that because market participants’ sense of the outlook is a bit weaker than our sense of the outlook, they may read that 6½ percent unemployment rate as pushing the liftoff even later.  If that were picked up, then you’d get a little bit more impetus to the economy out of that, but we’ve not modeled that here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different choices and assumptions that were made in a plan.


Passage number 270.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  And the other thing—I’ve been concerned about the withering of alternative C here.  Alternative C isn’t mentioned in the graphs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Bullard expresses his concern about the lack of mention of Alternative C in the graphs. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 271.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Alternative C would be, as long as you left the liftoff date unchanged, pretty similar to the consensus forecast.  What I’m taking out of that is the sense in the words in alternative C that might hint that things could move more quickly than that. So the straight consensus forecast is no change in the forward guidance, no additional purchases beyond the end of the year.  That broadly is consistent with alternative C but maybe doesn’t quite get the sense of what the words in alternative C could mean to market participants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement and analysis of different options or alternatives without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 272.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, when you describe it, you say, “Markets would be surprised.”  I think that’s accurate—they’d be very surprised by a statement like that—and that you probably would have some effect.  Plus, if we were going in that direction, which I guess we’re not, you’d have the possibility of moving up the date of liftoff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 273.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 274.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. One important point here:  The black line—the consensus forecast—implicitly has in it a significant disappointment for the market because they pull back their expectations for liftoff to late 2014, and they remove their expectations of any further expansion of the portfolio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the black line or consensus forecast includes a significant disappointment for the market because it pulls back expectations for liftoff to late 2014 and removes expectations of any further expansion of the portfolio. This implies that the market had different expectations or desires, indicating a disagreement or contention between the forecast and the market's expectations.


Passage number 275.
 MR. BULLARD.  I see.  So I should read this as “Consensus forecast/alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply Mr. Bullard summarizing how he should interpret the given information.


Passage number 276.
” MR. ENGLISH.  Roughly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states the name "Mr. English" without any additional context or information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 277.
 MR. BULLARD.  Roughly speaking.  Well, I guess, Mr. Chairman, I have a concern whether we have three options that are live options.  And I think it’s been hard while the Committee has been trying to think about ways to ease, and when the Committee shifts in the other direction, the same thing will happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, expresses concern about whether the three options presented are all viable options. He suggests that the committee has difficulty finding ways to ease and that a shift in the opposite direction may also cause issues. This indicates a disagreement or contention within the committee about the effectiveness of the options being considered.


Passage number 278.
  But I think you want to have some things that are a little bit tighter, a little bit easier, and might actually have a chance of— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We circulate this and ask whether it spans the range of views so, of course, we always welcome suggestions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is discussing the need for certain things to be tighter and easier, and the circulation of a document for suggestions.


Passage number 279.
 MR. BULLARD. Well, it’s up to you.  But if you try to span the range of views, you might have to put something on the table that’s not going to be adopted.  But from my point of view, I’d like to see three live things that we could do and things that we might be able to maneuver around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their point of view and suggesting potential actions that could be taken.


Passage number 280.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The other way we’ve used the alternatives, of course, is to try out different language or alternative language. And in the past, we’ve combined, mixed things together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the different ways the alternatives have been used in the past. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 281.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply responds with "Yes" to a statement or question, without indicating any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 282.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage you have provided does not contain enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions "President Lacker" without providing any context or additional details.


Passage number 283.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  One is for you, Bill.  I’d like your help with understanding the second sentence in B(4).  I’m having trouble with it.  I don’t think I understand it correctly, particularly the role of price stability.  So let me tell you  what I think it says, the way I read it. It says, “If the outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially” in coming months—so, if that happens—then we’re going to do X.  So X, I think, is, as I read this, “undertake additional asset purchases . . . as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a context of price stability.”  As I think about that, if that improvement is achieved but it’s not in a context of price stability, that seems to say to me that we’re going to still keep purchasing assets.  Have I got this wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is seeking clarification and asking for help in understanding a specific sentence. He is not expressing a conflicting viewpoint or challenging anything.


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I want to defend Bill because he pointed out this problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement shows support and agreement with Bill's perspective, indicating there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 285.
 MR. LACKER.  I actually pointed it out to him yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker simply states that he pointed something out to someone.


Passage number 286.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You pointed it out to him.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This statement is a simple acknowledgement of a previous action, without any evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 287.
 MR. ENGLISH.  You’re not the first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Mr. English is speaking, without any opposing viewpoints or contradictory statements present.


Passage number 288.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We have poetic license here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "poetic license" suggests creative freedom or permission to deviate from strict rules or conventions in art or literature. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 289.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  You don’t mean that literally, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is confirming that the statement made by the other person is not meant to be taken literally.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 290.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It means that we’re looking for improvement in a context of price stability. If we see improvement without price stability, that’s not a good thing, and we won’t continue purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is disagreement in the passage regarding the relationship between improvement and price stability. The speaker argues that improvement without price stability is not desirable and therefore suggests discontinuing purchases. However, there could be differing opinions on whether improvement alone is enough to justify continued purchases, regardless of price stability.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 291.
 MR. LACKER.  But this says you’re going to wait until you get improvement with price stability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, suggests waiting for improvement with price stability before taking action, which may differ from the viewpoint or approach of others in the conversation.


Passage number 292.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Bernanke without providing any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 293.
 I think it’s clear what— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It’s “subject to.” That’s really what it means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their opinion and providing an explanation of what they believe the phrase "subject to" means.


Passage number 294.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It’s “subject to.”  When we actually clarify this, assuming we go ahead and do more in January or whatever, we’ll be a little clearer in this kind of language here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It is discussing the need for clarification and improvement in language.


Passage number 295.
MR. LACKER.  All right.  The second question I have—and I probably should have asked this during our first agenda item.  I’ve asked this at times in the past.  On the table is a flow of purchases of mortgage-backed securities.  I’ve asked in the past about the thought experiment of buying mortgage-backed securities versus buying an equivalent amount of U.S. Treasuries.  What I’ve asked about is, all right, comparing those two options, undoubtedly your forecast, as you’ve said, is that mortgage-backed security yields will be lower with purchases of mortgage-backed securities than with purchases of Treasuries, and that mortgage rates will be lower. Now, my gut instinct is that some other rates will be higher.  And I’ve asked about this in the past, but did you do any work on that this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked by Mr. Lacker about the potential effects of purchasing mortgage-backed securities versus U.S. Treasuries.


Passage number 296.
 MR. POTTER.  Which rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "MR. POTTER. Which rates...". This is because there is no conflicting opinion or viewpoint presented. The passage merely seems to be a statement or a question from Mr. Potter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 297.
 MR. LACKER. Aren’t other rates going to be higher if we buy mortgage-backeds rather than Treasuries.  Because presumably, that means Treasury rates will be higher than they otherwise would be.  Presumably, some other rates are linked to Treasuries and not mortgage-backed securities, and presumably, they’re higher. Isn’t there some other rate that’s going to go up if we buy mortgage-backeds rather than Treasuries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 
The passage presents a disagreement or contention. Mr. Lacker is suggesting that if they buy mortgage-backed securities instead of Treasuries, it will lead to higher rates. This contradicts the opposing view that mortgage-backed securities would not have an impact on other rates.


Passage number 298.
 MR. ENGLISH. Not go up, but go down by less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple assertion or suggestion to go down by less.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 299.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Go down by less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "by less" suggests a comparison and implies that there is a disagreement or difference of opinion about how much something has decreased.


Passage number 300.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think that’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement that was made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 301.
 MR. LACKER.  Oh, okay.  Well, no—but, see, I’m asking to compare buying X amount of Treasuries with buying X amount of mortgage-backed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement or contention. The use of phrases like "Oh, okay" and "but, see..." suggests that there is a difference in opinion or perspective being expressed.


Passage number 302.
  So rates go down— MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we are still buying Treasuries under the MEP in this program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individual simply states a fact about rates going down and addresses President Lacker to inform them about the purchasing activity of Treasuries.


Passage number 303.
MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know.  But instead of buying $30 billion of mortgages, buy $30 billion of Treasuries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a suggestion or alternative solution.


Passage number 304.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think the answer to your question is in table 1 in the options memo that we sent, which had an experiment where you do $500 billion of Treasury purchases or $500 billion of MBS—just one or the other.  The term premium effects are a little bit smaller if you buy the MBS, so Treasury yields decline by less.  They still decline. It’s still a purchase of a longer-term security and still taking duration out of the market and still putting downward pressure on longer-term rates, but by less.  The mortgage rate goes down by more if you buy MBS than if you buy Treasuries, because you’re pushing MBS down more and mortgage rates down by more.  And our estimate of the effects on inflation and output are similar in size.  They’re a little smaller for the MBS purchase, based on our modeling and our assumptions, than for the Treasury purchase, but they’re in the same ballpark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information and explains the effects of different types of purchases.


Passage number 305.
 MR. LACKER.  So what other rates go down by less or are higher because you’ve been tilting toward mortgage-backeds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 306.
 MR. ENGLISH. In FRB/US—Dave Reifschneider will tell me if I’m wrong—I think, basically, that other long-term rates, corporate rates or whatever, would go down by more if you bought Treasuries than if you bought MBS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. English, who is seeking confirmation or clarification from Dave Reifschneider.


Passage number 307.
 MR. PLOSSER.  So the MBS would provide less pass-through, in some sense, to corporates and other things.  Is that the idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is making a statement and seeking clarification on the idea of MBS providing less pass-through to corporates and other things.


Passage number 308.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is "Yes" because "Yes" is the response to the question "Is there contention or disagreement in the following passage?" However, without the actual passage provided, it is not possible to determine the exact nature of the contention or disagreement.


Passage number 309.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Depends on what you think the degree of substitutability is between them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is acknowledging that there may be differing opinions or beliefs about the degree of substitutability between certain things, but it is not expressing any disagreement or taking a particular stance. It is simply stating that the answer depends on one's perspective or judgment.


Passage number 310.
  MR. ENGLISH.  Yes.  And this really is pushing pretty hard on our ability to model this stuff, but that’s what our modeling says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the difficulty of modeling something but agrees with the modeling results.


Passage number 311.
 MR. LACKER.  So that takes away some stimulus, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is making a statement about the impact of something on stimulus, so he is not expressing any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 312.
 MR. ENGLISH. Yes, that’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is simply confirming or agreeing with something that was previously stated.


Passage number 313.
 MR. LACKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but the passage you provided is incomplete. Please provide the complete passage so I can analyze it and determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 314.
 And the MBS, on net— MR. POTTER.  Well, not overall, necessarily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. The use of the phrases "on net" and "not overall, necessarily" suggests a balanced observation or statement.


Passage number 315.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, it doesn’t take away stimulus relative to doing nothing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is stating a fact or opinion without any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 316.
  It takes away stimulus relative to—  MR. ENGLISH. Buying an equivalent amount of Treasuries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that does not involve any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 317.
 MR. LACKER. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it only includes a response beginning with "Right."


Passage number 318.
 MR. POTTER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only provides the name "MR. POTTER" without any additional information or context to suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 319.
  On those— MR. LACKER.  In that sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or information that suggest contention or disagreement. It only mentions a sector without providing any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
 MR. POTTER.  Not necessarily for the economy as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Not necessarily for the economy as a whole" suggests that there is a difference in opinion or perspective regarding the impact on the economy.


Passage number 321.
 MR. LACKER. Right.  So the rationale for MBS—is it that, on net, real outcomes are better.  Or is it more of a sectoral argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is posing a question regarding the rationale for MBS (mortgage-backed securities) and asking if it is based on overall improved real outcomes or if it is more focused on a specific sector.


Passage number 322.
 MR. ENGLISH.  The argument we gave in the memo was that you want to have a balance across the two so that you can ramp up or ramp down.  We know from the capacity memo that we sent the Committee before the last meeting that there’s a maximum amount, roughly, that we were comfortable saying we could buy over the next couple of years.  That maximum amount has a ratio of Treasuries to MBS, and we’ve roughly maintained that ratio in these purchase programs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply explaining the reasoning behind wanting to have a balance across two types of purchases.


Passage number 323.
 MR. LACKER.  I understand.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is simply expressing his understanding and gratitude for the information provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 324.
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. That’s the main argument.  There’s a second argument, which is not in the model sims we’ve run, but a lot of people believe that MBS could have effects that the model isn’t picking up—say, larger effects on house prices, bigger effects on mortgage refinancing, or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement expressed in the phrase "a lot of people believe that MBS could have effects that the model isn't picking up." This implies that there are differing opinions on the potential impacts of MBS that are not accounted for in the model simulations.


Passage number 325.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart has a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that President Lockhart has a two-hander. There is no conflicting or contrasting information presented that would indicate disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 326.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Is there a connection or correlation between lowering mortgage-backed rates and other securitization vehicles such as auto, student loan, credit card.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply asks if there is a connection between lowering mortgage-backed rates and other securitization vehicles such as auto, student loan, credit card.


Passage number 327.
 MR. ENGLISH.  There might be in practice, but we’re not picking that up in the modeling that we’re doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker is stating a fact about their modeling and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 328.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contentious or disagreement indicated in the word "Vice Chairman" alone. It is simply a title or position.


Passage number 329.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just one observation.  Presumably, the reason why you also might want to split it is a market functioning issue. You can go bigger if you split it between two markets than if you concentrate all on one market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It offers an observation and a potential reason for why someone might want to split a market.


Passage number 330.
 MR. POTTER.  We are still buying in the Treasury market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement by Mr. Potter indicates that they are still actively purchasing in the Treasury market, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 331.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. That was just a comment, but I have a question.  It seems to me as though the key money line in B is, “If the outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities and undertake additional asset purchases.”  That’s the key money line.  Now, I’d like to get staff members’ views of what they think people are going to interpret that line to mean in light of, say, the SEPs that are going to be put out and the Chairman’s press conference statement.  How do we think people are going to interpret that line.  That’s critical—you have to have a view on that to know what you’re really voting for, in some fundamental sense.  I know it’s judgment, but I’d love to hear your view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a desire to hear the staff members' views on how people are going to interpret a certain line in a document.


Passage number 332.
 MR. ENGLISH. We’re not sure.  I think we argued in our memos that it might be something like a ½ percentage point decline in the unemployment rate that’s sustained.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 333.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, I don’t mean the effects on the macroeconomy.  I mean, when people write the articles at the end of the day, what are they going to think about how big this is likely to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply clarifying their statement and expressing their thoughts about the potential impact.


Passage number 334.
 MR. POTTER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage "MR. POTTER" as only a name is provided. There is not enough context to determine if there is disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 335.
  I don’t think it will show— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 336.
  They’re going to have our SEPs, and they’re going to have this information that shows that this unemployment rate trajectory— MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You mean the purchase program itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement relaying information.


Passage number 337.
 MR. POTTER.  The total amount for—they’re going to try to work out an expected date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 338.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  And so I guess I’m asking, what kind of expected date do we think they can work out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the phrase "I guess" suggests uncertainty or doubt in the speaker's thoughts or beliefs, indicating a lack of consensus or agreement on the expected date.


Passage number 339.
 MR. POTTER. The SEP will give them some information.  I don’t believe that shows a substantial improvement in the labor market for quite some time.  So that means that they’ll probably be looking for sometime in 2013.  That’s the way we’ve been modeling this, I think.  And the assumption you had, Bill, was something like $600 billion of total purchases—is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating different opinions and assumptions about the labor market and the amount of total purchases. There is no clear contention or disagreement between the speakers.


Passage number 340.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Including purchases under the MEP, it was $750 billion.  But, as I said in my remarks, it could easily be more.  People might see that the economy is expected to be weak for quite a while; they might carry it out further into 2013 and get a bigger amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the possibility that the amount could be larger due to certain economic factors.


Passage number 341.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. For me, the obvious question to you, Mr. Chairman, at the press conference might be, given the SEP and your views, what does the SEP forecast imply in terms of “improve substantially”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a question that they think would be obvious to ask the chairman in a press conference.


Passage number 342.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  My answer will be that we want to see—not what we saw last Friday.  We want to see increases in payrolls.  We want to see some progress—not sharp progress, but some progress—in the unemployment rate.  And we want to have a sense that the economy is moving in a direction that will help labor markets get better. We used the word “outlook.”  So a pickup in GDP growth would certainly be a factor in the outlook for labor markets, for example. I think we have a fail-safe here, which is that if it doesn’t have any effect, then we have the efficacy clause here as well.  But the idea would be that we want to see something different from the current waiting-in-place kind of situation where there’s no progress, the unemployment rate stays about the same, and monthly payrolls are 100,000 and less. And I will emphasize that it’s not a single indicator or a single trigger number; we’re looking holistically at the labor market indicators and, in fact, more broadly because it’s the outlook for the labor market that matters, not just the current number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is stating what the speaker wants to see in terms of improvements in the labor market indicators and the overall outlook. There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 343.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you’d have to see improvement in the labor market that you thought would be sustained in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply discussing the requirement for improvement in the labor market and the need for that improvement to be sustained in the future.


Passage number 344.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or presenting any arguments. It simply states the word "Right." without any context or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 345.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. For what it’s worth, the Blue Chip forecasts for the unemployment rate going into the middle of 2013 are very flat.  Then, in the second half of 2013, they’re expecting to see a more noticeable downtilt in the unemployment rate.  So that’s another way of looking at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information about the Blue Chip forecasts for the unemployment rate without expressing any personal opinion or contradicting other viewpoints.


Passage number 346.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So the market would presumably put in nine months or more—that would be a reasonable guesstimate, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or estimation without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 347.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Again, it’s the outlook and not the actual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the following passage. The phrase "it’s the outlook and not the actual" suggests that there is a disagreement between different perspectives or interpretations of a situation.


Passage number 348.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: It is not clear what specific passage is being referred to in the question. In order to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in a passage, the passage itself needs to be identified and analyzed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 349.
  MR. PLOSSER.  I just want some interpretation of the word “substantially” here because the market is going to ask you that as well.  What constitutes substantial progress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the word "substantially" is subject to interpretation, which suggests that there may be disagreement or differing opinions on what qualifies as "substantial progress." Mr. Plosser's request for an interpretation indicates potential contention or uncertainty around the meaning of the term.


Passage number 350.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Substantial progress means that we are seeing ongoing progress in the direction of improved labor market conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that substantial progress is being made towards better labor market conditions.


Passage number 351.
 MR. PLOSSER.  So it’s not something about the magnitude of the rate of change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Plosser regarding a topic.


Passage number 352.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It’s not the magnitude, but really a movement in that direction that is, I might say, persuasive or indicative that there is now progress in the right direction, as opposed to simply remaining static or getting worse.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply states a perspective on progress and direction without any mention of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 353.
 MR. LACKER.  This is on the same point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that "MR. LACKER" is discussing something "on the same point," without providing further context or information.


Passage number 354.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 355.
 MR. LACKER.  David Wilcox showed us employment in his forecast summary, and when they do all of the seasonal adjustment right, it looks as though half of the improvement we got in the labor markets this past winter or the winter before, was spurious, seasonal stuff.  Would what we saw last winter suffice. Would we stop after that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing employment and seasonal adjustments.


Passage number 356.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would think so.  It dropped 1 percentage point between August and April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 357.
 MR. LACKER.  I’d be on board with that.  But his analysis suggests that that would be like another seasonal head fake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 358.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we’d look at a range of variables.  Of course, there’s nothing that says if you stop, you can’t start again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a general course of action ("look at a range of variables") and then stating a common-sense observation ("there's nothing that says if you stop, you can't start again").


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 359.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, but last winter, though, it wasn’t really that convincing because, remember, payrolls were strong but GDP was weak, and we had this riddle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrases "though," "wasn't really that convincing," and "but" indicate a contrasting perspective or disagreement with the previous statement about the payrolls being strong. The mention of weak GDP and the term "riddle" further suggest a disagreement or contention regarding the situation being discussed.


Passage number 360.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We had this riddle.  Yes, that’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact, specifically that they had a riddle.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 361.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And so you could argue that you wouldn’t necessarily stop last winter, because you didn’t have the GDP growth to support the labor market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents an argument or point of view regarding the relationship between GDP growth and the labor market. It suggests that the lack of GDP growth would not have prompted a halt in the labor market.


Passage number 362.
 MR. POTTER.  I don’t think our outlook changed that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states the personal opinion of Mr. Potter about their outlook.


Passage number 363.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We basically want to see progress in terms of the key macro labor market variables.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement expresses a general desire for improvement in labor market variables but does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 364.
 MR. LACKER.  All right.  Well, let me ask Bill Dudley’s question again.  What do you want the USA Today headline to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Lacker wants to ask the same question as Bill Dudley.


Passage number 365.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. “Bernanke, the Hero”. [Laughter] “Federal Reserve Says It Will Support Economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any specific information or statement that could lead to contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the title "Bernanke, the Hero" and a statement from the Federal Reserve about supporting the economy, without providing any further context or details.


Passage number 366.
” MR. FISHER.  That’s the sports section, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply providing information about the section of a newspaper called the sports section.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 367.
 MR. PLOSSER.  “Federal Reserve All In.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage mentions Mr. Plosser and the phrase "Federal Reserve All In," which suggests that there is a discussion or debate surrounding the actions or decisions of the Federal Reserve. The use of the phrase "All In" also implies that there may be disagreement or differing opinions about the extent of the Federal Reserve's involvement or intervention.


Passage number 368.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. “Federal Reserve Will Provide Support to Labor Market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply mentions that the Federal Reserve will provide support to the labor market. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 369.
” MR. LACKER.  By buying MBS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 370.
 MS. DUKE.  And housing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 371.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Housing.  People understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any differing viewpoints or conflicting ideas about housing. It simply states that people understand something about housing, but the content of that understanding is not provided.


Passage number 372.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 373.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  Did you have a question, President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The second sentence is simply asking if President Pianalto has a question.


Passage number 374.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, you made some comments about the 6½ percent unemployment trigger in alternative B, paragraph 5′. You said that some forecasters have slower progress on the unemployment rate, so they may view what is in alternative B as more accommodation than markets expect.  If you look at your page 1, “Alternative Monetary Policy Scenarios,” that 6½ percent rate, as you mentioned, is about mid-2015.  I know we’re  trying to get away from the date, but you made those points.  You didn’t say very much about the inflation rate, because here it says “no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent objective.”  When you look at those scenarios, with alternative B, we don’t get anywhere close to 2½.  We’re just slightly above the 2.  At one point, we looked at some language that said “close to the Committee’s 2 percent objective.”  And I see that alternative B, and even alternative A, is close to our objective.  What are some of your thoughts.  Just as you had some thoughts about the 6½ percent being interpreted by some as being more aggressive, would that 2½ percent objective be viewed as, again, more aggressive, and is it necessary given the scenarios that you’ve laid out here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Pianalto is simply asking for clarification and expressing her thoughts on the data presented.


Passage number 375.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s not an objective, though, right. GOVERNOR YELLEN.  It’s not an objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Governor Yellen is an agreement with the previous statement/question.


Passage number 376.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s not an objective.  It’s just a tolerance level.  That’s quite different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement and then clarifies that it is different from another concept. There is no argument or conflicting viewpoint present.


Passage number 377.
 MS. PIANALTO.  But it’s a matter of perceptions also.  We’re talking about communications.  And we’ve made a lot of progress and laid out a 2 percent objective.  What are the advantages. Using “close to 2 percent” would still give us the flexibility that’s laid out in these scenarios, but we’re not communicating to the public that we’re throwing out ½ percentage point.  It seems as though we’re throwing out a number, whereas, “close to” gives us some of that flexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the advantages of using the phrase "close to 2 percent" in communication.


Passage number 378.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think the ½ percentage point buffer was intended just for clarity.  If you said “close to,” everybody would ask the Chairman at his press conference, “What do you mean by ‘close to’.” and try to extract that information.  People will be looking at the SEP, and the SEP shows inflation below 2 or at 2, roughly, but not going above.  So I don’t think they’d   misread the ½ percentage point buffer as suggesting an intention to set out to push inflation above 2.  It would simply be seen as a buffer.  There could be transitory shocks that would change the inflation outlook for a time, and the Committee could look through those and say, “Okay.  We’re going to go up as high as maybe 2½ for a little while, but after that, we think inflation is going to come back.  In the end, we’re getting to our objective, and that’s okay.” But whether you want to say explicitly “½ percentage point” or “close to” is a question of communications.  It’s a little clearer to say the number and not use “close to.”  But this is a communications issue for the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. English, is discussing the potential use of a ½ percentage point buffer for clarity in communication regarding inflation targets. He does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 379.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 380.
 MR. STEIN.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Can I ask one more press conference question.  Suppose somebody says, “We get to the end of 2013, it’s December 2013, and we’re exactly where we are today.  So the unemployment rate, job growth—everything is pretty much exactly where we are today. Do you envision that we’ll still be continuing asset purchases at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a hypothetical question.


Passage number 381.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  As we go through time, as the balance sheet grows, as we observe the effects on the economy, we’ll be continually reevaluating the efficacy of the program and the costs that it is imposing.  And if we feel that we’ve reached that point and the program is not being effective, then we will have to stop.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about evaluating the effectiveness and costs of a program and the possibility of stopping it if deemed necessary.


Passage number 382.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. I’ll just add on to what you said, Mr. Chairman.  This question is an important one, but I think there are just two ways you could end up being in the same place.  It could be that there were a lot of bad shocks and the asset purchases helped you stop that, or maybe not.  We’ll have to make that call at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is simply adding on to what the chairman said and acknowledging that there are two possible ways to interpret the situation.


Passage number 383.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We have overnight.  If any genius around the table would like to come up with better language, I would be more than happy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is open to suggestions and inviting others to contribute their ideas.


Passage number 384.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I counsel you against offering that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 385.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  Are we all set.  [No response] Bill, what do you want us to do with these handouts. Do you want us to take them home and bring them back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage as indicated by the lack of response to the question and the subsequent question asking for clarification on what to do with the handouts.


Passage number 386.
 MR. ENGLISH.  You have lots of Class I information in your Tealbook, so you can keep them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a factual statement about the person having Class I information in their Tealbook.


Passage number 387.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "All right" is a simple expression that does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 388.
 MR. ENGLISH.  But please don’t leave them on the subway.  [Laughter].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The laughter suggests that Mr. English's statement is meant to be a joke or lighthearted remark.


Passage number 389.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Don’t leave them on the subway.  So 8:30 tomorrow morning.  The reception is available at 5:00 p.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The first sentence gives a suggestion or instruction, while the second sentence provides additional information about the availability of the reception at a specific time. Both sentences are unrelated and do not present any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 390.
 [Meeting recessed]  September 13 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We should have a reasonable amount of time.  We need to get the statement in by 11:30 and close the meeting by noon.  But first, to get started, why don’t we begin our policy go-round. I have President Williams first on the list.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement about the schedule and order of events for the meeting.


Passage number 391.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is not provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 392.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B with the forward guidance on the funds rate in paragraph 5′.  The case for further action is clear. In the absence of significant additional monetary stimulus, progress toward our policy goals would remain stalled.  Such an outcome is simply inconsistent with the notion of appropriate monetary policy and, in my view, is unacceptable. We must aim for a path that brings us measurably closer to our goals over the forecast horizon, and we must take concrete actions that get us on that path.  Open-ended purchases of MBS represent a substantial step in that direction.  With this action, unemployment will fall more quickly and inflation will return toward 2 percent faster than under the status quo. The flow-oriented asset purchases in alternative B also provide flexibility that’s particularly valuable, given all the uncertainties of the economy, the fiscal cliff, and Europe.  They serve as a useful automatic stabilizer as market expectations about the ultimate size of the program adjust in response to changes in economic conditions and the outlook.  If the labor market shows signs of substantial improvement sooner than expected, the program can be curtailed.  In contrast, if the recovery falters, the program can provide additional needed support. There would be similar benefits from incorporating such an automatic stabilizer into our forward guidance of the future path of the funds rate.  The language in paragraph 5′ does just that.  Incorporating this language into our statement would allow us to finally get the calendar-date monkey off our back and provide better guidance on our policy reaction function— importantly, at least, on economic conditions—for funds rate liftoff that is both clear and consistent with our dual-mandate objectives.  It’s also flexible enough to handle a variety of future paths for the economy and inflation.  Indeed, the beauty of this approach is it provides guidance for contingencies where our forecasts go wrong, which they inevitably do. Finally, I continue to favor lowering the interest on excess reserves rate, the IOER rate, to 15 basis points.  We should be using all of our tools in the same direction.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, is expressing support for alternative B and the forward guidance on the funds rate. However, it is clear that not all members may agree with this stance, as Williams states that "such an outcome [lack of further action] is…unacceptable." Additionally, Williams mentions that the interest on excess reserves rate should be lowered, which may be a point of contention among the members.


Passage number 393.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a simple expression of gratitude from the speaker to President Rosengren.


Passage number 394.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B with the $40 billion per month mortgage purchase program and prefer option 5′, which moves us away from dates and focuses on the economic outcomes we seek to achieve. Inflation is quite low, and unemployment is quite high, and most of our forecasts for the past nine months have overestimated how quickly we would see improvements in either element of our mandate. Alternative B embraces the sense of doing what it takes to move the economy at an acceptable pace toward full employment with stable prices. Alternative B continues to take out duration, provides some direct support to housing, which is just beginning to recover, and extends guidance on the funds rate liftoff, which, given our lack of progress toward our mandate, seems appropriate. I strongly support the $40 billion rather than the $30 billion monthly mortgage purchase program. I would also prefer to include economic targets rather than date targets in our guidance.  Thus, I would prefer the conditionality language in 5′. The language has two advantages.  First, the conditions for changing our policy stance are clear and observable to the general public.  Second, date-conditional language can be subsequently undercut by Committee members’ comments that suggest a different date may be appropriate, thus altering the effect of policy relative to the intent of the consensus reached by the Committee. Because 5′ conditions the policy on observable outcomes, the public can adjust its expectations automatically to changing economic circumstances, and there is less likelihood of perhaps inadvertently diminishing our policies’ effectiveness due to Committee disagreement. There seem to be two arguments against taking action at least as strong as B at this meeting.  First, that it would be ineffective.  Estimates in Boston are that following option A would reduce unemployment by approximately 0.8 percent by the end of 2015.  This is roughly in line with the Board staff memos and the consensus policy submissions from three other banks that reported a preferred policy that was close to A.  If accurate, this implies creating more than 1 million jobs relative to doing nothing at this meeting. I do not view that as de minimis. The second argument against more aggressive action is that it will cause inflation.  Again, the consensus forecast exercise is instructive.  Among banks that provided numeric submissions, those that assumed further easing assume underlying inflation will remain well anchored.  This assumption is consistent with the Boston forecasting model.  Two of the Banks that provided numbers and assumed earlier tightening than we do have virtually identical unemployment rates with and without tightening, but a dramatically higher inflation rate under the baseline policy.  This is markedly different than the staff forecast, the DSGE models that we have seen, and the models used by Banks assuming the need for easing.  It would be interesting to discuss the theoretical basis and empirical evidence for such an inflationary process, which I presume is tied to dislodging of inflation expectations.  However, absent a strong empirical basis for such an inflation process and with inflation tracking below our target and roughly consistent with the staff forecast in models that assume expectations remain well anchored, I view the risks ofinflation as being well contained through 2015, even with a more aggressive policy than in alternative B.  Thus, I support B but would strongly prefer the forward guidance in the language of 5′ and the larger mortgage purchase amount.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their support for alternative B with the $40 billion per month mortgage purchase program and expresses a preference for option 5′, which focuses on economic outcomes rather than dates. The speaker also argues against two possible arguments against more aggressive action, but there is no direct disagreement or contention with anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 395.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 396.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards someone named President Bullard.


Passage number 397.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We’re going through at a rapid pace. We’re going to be done within the hour here, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude for the pace at which they are progressing and expressing their belief that they will be finished soon.


Passage number 398.
 MR. TARULLO.  Don’t bet on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Don't bet on it." It is simply a cautionary or skeptical statement without any conflicting views or arguments present.


Passage number 399.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple thank you statement from President Rosengren.


Passage number 400.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes, just a point of clarification.  I view the language of 5′ as a threshold, not a trigger.  Threshold language would be, “low rates appropriate, at least as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6½ percent.”  A trigger would be, “A low rate is appropriate only as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6½ percent.”  So I think it is written as a threshold, not a trigger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is offering a point of clarification about their interpretation of the language used.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 401.
 MR. BULLARD.  Can I respond to that.  I agree that that is the language in there, but I think markets will interpret it as a trigger.  Or let me say, as a fair way, I think there is a danger that markets will interpret that as a line in the sand or a trigger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is disagreement or contention. Mr. Bullard agrees that the language is included, but he expresses concern that markets may interpret it differently, possibly as a line in the sand or trigger. This suggests a difference in viewpoints or potential disagreement.


Passage number 402.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it’s pretty easy for the Chairman in the press conference—if we were to go this route—to explain what a threshold means.  I don’t think it is that complicated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not showcase any contention or disagreement. Both statements express similar opinions and agree that explaining the concept of a threshold is not difficult.


Passage number 403.
 MR BULLARD. If it’s not a trigger, why put the number in. Put a lower number in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by MR BULLARD where he questions the purpose of including a specific number in a certain context.


Passage number 404.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s okay, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 405.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions the name "President Lockhart" without any context or surrounding statements that indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 406.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to support alternative B. Having said that, I have some reservations about going down the path of a new LSAP, particularly the whole-hog approach that’s in alternative A. I am reticent on two counts. First, I remain unconvinced about the likely efficacy of expanding our asset purchases.  As I said in the economy round, I think the conditions that made the first two LSAP programs successful—a lack of liquidity in MBS markets in the case of LSAP1 and elevated concerns about outright deflation in the case of LSAP2—are not present in the current environment.  This time around, it seems to me that we face a more conventional problem of inadequate demand, and I am not convinced that lowering general market rates will stimulate much credit expansion and spending.  Furthermore, it is not clear to me that credit conditions in mortgage markets have eased quite enough to the point that more MBS purchases will have a significant impact. Second, I have learned to be humble as regards outlook certainty.  I have not completely abandoned the hypothesis that the willingness of businesses to hire and businesses and consumers to spend will improve on the other side of the election and fiscal cliff negotiations.  As I commented yesterday, I believe there is some upside risk.  Though the European situation is not rapidly converging to a truly comprehensive resolution, I see some hope that the process of incremental steps may cumulatively lead to a large leap in overall confidence. I don’t have a whole lot of conviction that these optimistic outcomes will be realized, so I accept the case for some policy response to current circumstances in the Committee’s outlook. That said, I will support alternative B’s modest pace of $30 billion per month.  That would be my preference for expansion of our MBS portfolio.   With respect to the choice between paragraph 5 and 5′, I am sympathetic to the idea of replacing calendar dates with economic conditionality.  I have said that in earlier meetings. But I am not in favor of the formulation in 5′, at least today. I have views similar to President Bullard’s.  The unemployment rate is a partial and potentially misleading indicator of labor market performance.  The pace of employment growth needed to attain a given unemployment rate can be very sensitive to changes in the participation rate. For example, at current participation rates, it will take just over 200,000 jobs a month to get to a 7 percent unemployment rate by the end of next year.  I would consider 200,000 jobs a month over the next 16 months to be consistent with sustained significant improvement in the labor market. But the Board staff, and many on the Committee, have noted that labor force participation rates appear to be well below the levels that can be explained by demographic trends.  My own staff estimates that only 40 percent of the drop in participation rates since the beginning of the recession is due to labor force aging.  If the participation rate were to revert to the level it was just last September, job gains of 200,000 per month would, everything else being equal, yield an unemployment rate that would be barely below 8 percent by the end of 2013.  And I would not be willing to say that such an outcome would constitute a lack of progress in meeting our employment mandate. Paragraph 5′, as it is written, contains no reference to broader labor market conditions.  I believe there was a reference in an earlier version, but it is has been removed.  I think that this is a significant omission, particularly with an unemployment threshold as ambitious as 6½ percent.  I’m not comfortable with a number that low, combined with a lack of any reference at all to our broader employment objectives.  There are enough facets of the 6½ percent decision to consider that it feels a little rushed to me at this meeting.   As regards paragraph 4, I would include the reference to other policy tools. I think the meaning of this paragraph should be that if conditions don’t improve, the Committee will continue the MBS purchase program and may undertake additional asset purchases, employ other policy tools, or both.  If I misunderstand the meaning of that paragraph, then I would ask for a little bit more work on this paragraph and further clarification this morning.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their own reservations and preferences, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement with anyone else in the passage. They are simply stating their thoughts and opinions on the matter at hand.


Passage number 407.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart, in 5′, the very last sentence does reference labor market conditions.  Did you note that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions President Lockhart and his reference to labor market conditions.


Passage number 408.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Let me look at that.  I stand corrected.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, acknowledges that he was incorrect and expresses gratitude for the correction. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 409.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because there is no discussion or statement that can cause disagreement or conflict. The passage only presents a brief mention of President Evans without any context or information that could lead to a difference of opinion.


Passage number 410.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Resource slack is large, labor market conditions lack momentum toward improvement, and the inflation profile in our projections is slightly below our longer-run objective for the most part. I support strong and meaningful policy actions today to address these deficiencies. I accept that alternative B delivers on these requirements.  I think that the $40 billion of MBS and 5′ are very helpful in delivering that. I will simply note that the formulation of forward guidance in 5′ is not quite as strong as I have preferred in the past, but I do think that it is a good, careful approach that will in fact boost monetary policy accommodation, and I can certainly support that, if it is adopted. I think that the wording paragraph 2 is extremely important. It states the monetary policy concern as follows:  “The Committee is concerned that, without further policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions.”  That is very important.  It follows through on the minutes from our July meeting, as well as your grave concerns and remarks expressed at Jackson Hole, so I favor that.I favor this combination of essentially open-ended asset purchases, which are flexible when you put paragraphs 3 and 4 together, plus the enhanced state-contingent forward guidance in paragraph 4.  President Bullard went through this rationale a little bit. Let me just summarize and say I put a lot of weight on the research literature that Mike Woodford described.  I thought he did a terrific job.  In Woodford’s formulation, clear expectations of forward guidance are important and effective for delivering policy accommodation. In fact, I held my breath when I read the page where he described when I had talked about the 7/3 thresholds, and I thought that Mike was kind and gentle in criticizing but saying that that type of forward guidance did deliver more accommodation than what his best choice was.  In that sense, the language in 5′ would indeed be helpful.  The evidence for LSAPs that you mentioned yesterday, Mr. Chairman, was very important.  The two reinforce each other very well. In paragraph 3, as I mentioned, I favor the stronger pace of MBS at $40 billion.  I think that paragraph 4 makes this essentially open-ended by conditioning further LSAPs on substantial improvement in labor conditions, joint with price stability, and with policy effectiveness, as you mentioned yesterday.  So there are important safeguards there.  It can be flexible and can turn around if in fact it is not working as best we would hope. In terms of labor market improvement, it would be unambiguously an improvement if we got something on the order of payroll employment increasing 200,000 per month for several months.  If the unemployment rate declined either with momentum or continuous improvement, and, indeed, we got GDP growth above trend, those would be all of the markers that we would expect for a strong recovery that would be associated with an improving labor market.  We may well not be lucky enough to see all three of those at the same time, so we will have to pay attention to that.   As you mentioned, the last sentence in paragraph 5′ gets at this larger characterization of labor market improvement beyond just the unemployment rate, but the unemployment rate is a very important marker.  I think that the paragraph 5′ forward guidance is explicitly state contingent, and it allows us to remove the calendar date.  It is very easy for us to be against calendar dates.  I think that most of us are uncomfortable with this formulation, that policy can remain low until late 2014 or beyond.  But we are uncomfortable because of the ambiguous nature. Is it a forecast.  Is it commitment. It is easy to be against that, but you have to be in favor of something in order to actually take it out.  The state contingency in 5′ is very useful.  So the 6½ unemployment rate marker, with the 2 plus ½ percentage point on inflation, is a useful safeguard.  Presidents Williams, Rosengren, and Kocherlakota spoke well about how this works, and that it is critical to describe our attitudes about inflation above our goal of 2.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses support for the policy actions and language in the proposal being discussed. He agrees with the use of open-ended asset purchases and enhanced forward guidance to boost monetary policy accommodation. He also agrees with the state-contingent forward guidance in paragraph 5′ as a useful safeguard.


Passage number 411.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite and appreciative statement from the author.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 412.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by saying something positive about alternative B.  [Laughter] I very much like the idea in paragraph 5′ of replacing our problematic calendar-based guidance with language that is conditional on future economic conditions.  I think this is much needed change.  It focuses our communication, our forward guidance, on a reaction function, and reduces the danger that Michael Woodford very eloquently laid out that our forward guidance is actually just making people gloomier about the economic fundamentals. It’s a very real danger, and I think there is a very real possibility that that is the effect our forward guidance has been having over the course of the last year. Okay.  That was my positive remark.  I would like to move on now to some improvement opportunities I see.  [Laughter] I think in 5′ that it would be better if we avoided using a specific numerical value for the unemployment rate as a threshold or trigger, whatever we are going to   do. I took a step back.  This is a large change in our statement.  This is a fairly dramatic change in the set of language we use to characterize our forward guidance. It’s an ambitious statement. In view of our experience with the forward guidance earlier this year, where we got boxed in for something that in hindsight we could have anticipated, I tried to think of ways in which this language could unexpectedly box us in or tie our hands in ways that we don’t anticipate now.  I think this numerical unemployment rate is one of them. President Lockhart was very eloquent about this.  This makes us hostage to labor force participation rates.  We would be vulnerable to a scenario—he sketched it out—in which employment picks up, and that starts drawing people into the labor force.  This is not an unfamiliar phenomenon historically, in which labor force growth that tails off and turns negative when the unemployment rate goes up, then picks up when employment growth starts rising.  Given the behavior of the labor force over the past several years, I don’t think we should have a lot of confidence in our ability to project how the unemployment rate would behave in a scenario in which employment growth picked up a lot.  I think this is a really serious risk.  It would be better to write the statement in terms of the qualitative language used earlier that President Lockhart was referring to. For example, we could say, “This exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least until the Committee has seen substantial ongoing improvement in labor market conditions.” I think that formulation would be preferable to the language that uses a specific numerical target. The second opportunity I see has to do with the inflation language in the same statement.  We used the phrase that “this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as” blah, blah, blah, “provided that inflation at a one- to two-year horizon is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent objective and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.”  So the logic is  clear, to give ourselves an out if the inflation picture deteriorates substantially.  Personally, I think the “close to 2 percent” language would be better.  That’s more consistent with the kind of standard we described in our consensus statement.  Proliferating conditionality language can be confusing.  But there is a deeper problem with this language.  My sense is that it has been true for the past 20 years in which we have achieved price stability—I believe it has been true—that inflation over the medium term, the next couple of years, was projected to be close to 2 percent or below that.  I haven’t gone and checked, but I am virtually sure that’s true.  This was a period during which we achieved and maintained price stability.  It is essential to maintain that credibility because it can be costly to regain, but we started this period by moving preemptively, before the forecast of inflation moved away from that low rate.  And in the future, it is going to be important for us to be able to move preemptively. If this condition is violated, it is in some sense too late. It’s not like we are going to go back to the 1970s right away if this condition is violated, but I think this sets too low a bar.  There is a way to word this that tightens this. We can say, instead of “provided that inflation at a one- to two-year horizon,” we could say, “unless inflation, at a one- to two-year horizon, would be projected to be more than ½ percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent objective.”  Something like that makes clear that we would move to keep this condition true, that we are not going to wait until this condition is violated in order to move. The third suggestion I have for improvement in B(5) concerns the last sentence. I suggest we delete it. I think it is quite confusing.  This represents the fifth different statement of conditionality on the second page, in two paragraphs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement or contention. The speaker expresses positive remarks about alternative B, but then goes on to suggest improvements and criticize specific elements of the proposal. They disagree with the specific numerical value for the unemployment rate as a trigger, the language used to describe inflation, and suggest deleting a sentence that they find confusing.


Passage number 413.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Are you saying the last sentence in 5′.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the specific content of the last sentence in 5'.


Passage number 414.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude from the speaker to the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 415.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I want to comment on one of your observations, President Lacker, about the last sentence of 5′. I read it slightly differently than you do, and I don’t know how other people read it. I read the sentence preceding it as saying that we currently anticipate that these are the right metrics, but then the last sentence says that that current anticipation could be modified by what we see over time.  You are basically saying that you are not completely locked into the first thing, regardless of what economic information you see in the future.  So I think the sentences actually do work together in a reasonable way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates that there is no disagreement or contention between the two speakers. The speaker simply presents a different interpretation of a sentence but concludes that the sentences work together in a reasonable way.


Passage number 416.
 MR. LACKER.  So the policy we’re adopting here is that an exceptionally low rate for the funds rate is going to be appropriate as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6½ percent, inflation is well contained, or we decide that some other indicator of labor market conditions is more appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It describes a policy being adopted and lists the conditions under which an exceptionally low rate for the funds rate would be considered appropriate.


Passage number 417.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We currently anticipate that this is the right range, but our view is going to be modified by future information about a broad range of indicators.  That is how I read it.  That seems to be more intelligent than saying we are locked into this, regardless of what happens, regardless of what we see, and we are not allowed to learn about anything as the economy evolves.  It creates a little nuance, which is reasonable in terms of how one would expect the Committee to operate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that their view is subject to change based on future information, which they believe is a more intelligent approach compared to being locked into a fixed perspective. The statement suggests a reasonable and nuanced approach for the Committee.


Passage number 418.
   MR. LACKER.  Well, then, why not soften the 6½ and use more general labor market conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Lacker is suggesting an alternative approach but there is no clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 419.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Because you are trying to give guidance about what the Committee thinks at the time, what we think today that might be modified or might not be modified by future information.  But clearly it would be unintelligent not to modify your view if the information strongly contradicted your prior view.  That’s how I read it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses a logical and coherent thought process about modifying one's views based on new information. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 420.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 421.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Despite massive monetary policy accommodation over the past four years, a stronger recovery has not yet materialized, and last week’s labor market report was a frustrating reminder of this long slog.  Like others, my forecast accounts for any number of risks related to Europe, the U.S. fiscal cliff, and the regulatory environment, and does recognize that policy accommodation may need to remain in place for some time in order to support the recovery.  I understand the case for taking action in order to spur the recovery and bring down unemployment faster.  To that end, the Committee agreed to undertake additional balance sheet actions only a few months ago.  Today, we contemplate doing more.  Certainly, the data flow since the last meeting was a bit softer than I had expected, but not sufficiently so to warrant a further expansion of our balance sheet.  In that regard, I note that the Tealbook had pulled forward the timing of the first rate increase since our last meeting. As I weigh the cost of action versus the status quo, I have appreciated the thoughtful analysis of Board staff and a number of my colleagues around this table about the effects of another asset purchase.  Unfortunately, I find that the risks associated with further action carry less precise measurement, but, to the extent they are possible, pose significant cost if realized.  Impairing market functioning in certain financial markets, the potential for the Federal Reserveto experience financial losses in the future, and risks to financial stability due to the extended low rate environment all strike me as significant when weighed against potential benefits.  A larger balance sheet also has the potential to further complicate an exit strategy. Another LSAP also may have near-term adverse consequences.  Given the recent rise in gasoline prices, additional asset purchases could generate a further rise in oil and gasoline prices, which would weigh on middle- and lower-income households and, thus, partially offset estimated benefits. I also remain concerned that a balance sheet expansion could at some point raise inflation expectations.  Longer-term measures of inflation expectations, or breakeven inflation, appeared to respond strongly to past LSAP announcements.  Given that current longer-term breakeven inflation measures are consistent with our stated goal, I am concerned that another LSAP program could push longer-term expectations above a level consistent with our objectives. If this were to occur, we would face a difficult tradeoff between allowing longer-term expectations to drift higher or reversing course by reducing the size of the balance sheet.  Either option strikes me as damaging to both the real economy and our credibility. In terms of the forward guidance, I agree with those who note the time-contingent guidance has been problematic.  And so conceptually I agree that the state-contingent guidance is preferable as long as we can articulate this guidance in a manner that is fully consistent with our January 2012 strategy statement, including our assessment of risk to the financial system.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. Ms. George expresses disagreement with the idea of undertaking additional balance sheet actions and another LSAP (Large-Scale Asset Purchase) program. She highlights the risks and potential costs associated with further action, such as impairing market functioning, financial losses for the Federal Reserve, risks to financial stability, a more complicated exit strategy, and potential adverse consequences on inflation expectations and household budgets. She also criticizes the time-contingent guidance and suggests that state-contingent guidance is preferable if it can be articulated consistently with the January 2012 strategy statement.


Passage number 422.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Thank you. President Fisher" is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 423.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only consists of a polite expression of gratitude addressed to President Plosser.


Passage number 424.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only contains expressions of gratitude and a mention of President Pianalto without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 425.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 426.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  My preference is for purchases of $40 billion MBS a month, and with respect to forward guidance, my preference is for 5′. The data we have received since our August meeting provides yet further confirmation that economic growth is proceeding near or slightly below the economy’s potential, and downside risks continue to be substantial.  For quite some time, the Committee has been in watch-and-wait mode.  We’ve patiently monitored the economy to see whether the MEP and our forward guidance would be sufficient to produce a stronger recovery.  The verdict now seems clear.  Absent further policy action, I see little chance that unemployment will decline in the foreseeable future.  We should not delay action any further.  Indeed, I hope we will send the message loud and clear that we intend to provide additional accommodation through new assetpurchases until we observe substantial and sustained improvement in labor market conditions, and will maintain policy accommodation for an extended period as the recovery strengthens. I support the open-ended and conditional nature of the asset purchase program in alternative B. I think it’s very helpful to spell out the goal of the program and to articulate the economic conditions we’ll need to observe before halting those purchases.  In particular, we should promise to add accommodation through asset purchases until the outlook for labor market conditions has improved substantially, and we would stop doing so only if our outlook for inflation or assessment of the efficacy and costs of the program changes significantly.  The challenge with such an open-ended program is that its effectiveness will depend on market expectations of the ultimate size of our asset purchases, and we’re offering no clear guidance on how long we expect them to continue.  In addition, we’ve included some escape clauses relating to efficacy and costs.  I, therefore, think it’s important that our public communications, including the Chairman’s press conference, emphasize our commitment to continue the program until we have seen ongoing and sustained improvement in labor market conditions. Even though the open-ended nature of the program creates challenges in shaping expectations, it also has the very desirable property that market participants should adjust their expectations about the size of the program in response to changing economic conditions.  And this means that the program should induce stabilizing movements in financial conditions as expectations adjust automatically to incoming data indicating a stronger or weaker economic outlook. There’s been quite a bit of debate both inside and outside the Fed about the likely economic impact of asset purchases, and there is sizable uncertainty about the effects of LSAPs. I appreciate ongoing staff efforts to refine our estimates of these effects.  Nonetheless, in light of  the evidence that I’ve seen, I’m persuaded that this program can be a helpful tool for achieving our objectives.  And while I’m mindful of the implications of further asset purchases for capital losses and remittances down the road, these concerns pale in comparison to what I view as the potential economic and human costs of failing to reduce the unemployment rate as aggressively as we can. I’m hopeful that a determined commitment to continue providing accommodation until we achieve more rapid and durable progress in attaining our employment goal may bolster household and business confidence and spending.  Any stimulus provided through this channel will boost its effect relative to the staff’s estimates. I think it makes sense to direct our new purchases to MBS to provide additional support to the housing market, and I support purchases at the higher rate of $40 billion per month, which is a rate that in the Desk’s assessment could be sustained for the next year or two.  Consistent with the open-ended approach, I’d be prepared to scale the flow of these purchases up or down as the economic outlook evolves.  If this flow of purchases is maintained through the middle of next year, our holdings of longer-term securities would increase by about $800 billion, which I think is large enough to have a substantial economic effect. Paragraph 4 of the statement spells out the conditions under which we will provide additional accommodation through asset purchases.  Paragraph 5, in contrast, concerns the conditions under which we will maintain the level of accommodation that’s reached when our asset purchases end. If we end up adopting 5 rather than 5′, I consider it critical to make clear that an extension of the expected calendar date to mid-2015 is intended as a policy shift to improve the economic outlook, and that it does not convey a downgrading of our outlook in the face of disappointing new data.  Whereas our previous language tied exceptionally low levels ofthe funds rate to economic weakness, the new language incorporated into the beginning of B(5) is much more positive, and I think it’s a very significant improvement. As between the alternative versions of paragraph B(5), while I can support B(5) today, I strongly prefer version 5′. We contemplated a formulation along these lines when we introduced calendar-date guidance in August of last year, and we have discussed this formulation extensively for many months now.  President Evans, in his speeches, and Presidents Kocherlakota, Williams, and Rosengren have explained in detail and very persuasively why a formulation like this makes sense.  I don’t want to go over the arguments again that they have set before the Committee. I simply think that clarifying the economic conditionality of the funds rate path is useful for precisely the same reasons that it’s useful to tie our asset purchases to economic conditions.  And I also think—a point that President Kocherlakota emphasized—that the language has the possibility of bolstering household and business expectations about their future incomes, and this would be a very important mechanism potentially for supporting additional spending. In summary, I support the provision of additional monetary accommodation.  I anticipate that continuing our additional purchases will be warranted well into 2013.  I also support 5′ today and hope that if we end up going with 5, we will make further progress in future meetings on refining our forward guidance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage discusses the different preferences and opinions of Ms. Yellen regarding the amount and duration of asset purchases and forward guidance. She supports alternative B and the open-ended and conditional nature of the asset purchase program, but expresses concerns about the effectiveness and communication of the program. She also discusses her preference for version 5' of paragraph B(5) and explains why she believes it is important to clarify the economic conditionality of the funds rate path.


Passage number 427.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude by Governor Duke.


Passage number 428.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and I’d like to point out that the player’s financial portfolio is probably bigger than anybody at this table.  [Laughter]  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The laughter suggests that the statement made is meant to be humorous or light-hearted.


Passage number 429.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to Governor Raskin.


Passage number 430.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming data have been consistent with my expectations, reinforcing my view that additional policy stimulus is needed.  The inflation outlook is subdued, and the employment outlook is unsatisfactory, so a balanced approach requires the providing of significant additional stimulus. My comments will, again, focus on the communication channel.  First, I think that some marginal monetary stimulus could be delivered, without incurring the costs associated with an LSAP, through the use of forward guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook.  While I appreciate the fact that an asset purchase program and forward guidance are not perfect substitutes, I like 5′ because it is close to a costless way of providing some accommodation.But even if we were not in agreement that more accommodation is necessary, I see little downside in shedding our adherence to a calendar date.  The calendar date, as we have heard, is working against us.  It is communicating that we are continuously downgrading our assessment of the future.  Why not, instead, show households, businesses, and markets what we are looking for in terms of particular economic outcomes.  Why not offer a sneak preview of what we need to see before we begin contracting.  With such a preview and credible delivery, households and businesses and markets figure out how we are going to react.  Providing that window, and keeping the panes of that window clean, reduces volatility and pessimism about our commitment to support a recovery.  In mitigating this volatility and pessimism, as argued by President Kocherlakota and others, we maximize the effectiveness of the other actions being contemplated. But we have been down this road before, so we ask, why now.  Why move to forward guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later. We should consider forward guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later because there could be costs to putting this off.  The primary cost is the permanent downward shift in expectations that becomes more probable the longer we wait.  The longer we put off these contentious decisions, the greater the probability that we let stand the perception that there is a new, lower, slower trajectory of economic growth that we are comfortable with; the greater the probability we let stand the perception that the FOMC doesn’t adhere to the statutory directive of a dual mandate; the greater the probability we let stand the perception that we act forcefully when we are off the price-stability mandate but not when we are off the maximum-employment mandate; and the greater the probability we let stand the perception that 2 percent is a ceiling. Forward guidance that is dependent on an economic outlook counters these otherwise pervasive and erroneous interpretations and perceptions.  The longer we postpone correcting such interpretations and perceptions, the more pervasive, credible, and intractable they become. In short, we want to oxygenate the forward guidance before households and businesses permanently harden their expectations about both the future path of the economy and our future reaction to it.  All of this argues for moving away from a calendar date sooner rather than later. We still may not know what the right numbers are for insertion into a formulation like 5′, but we have all seen that in optimal control simulations under commitment in the FRB/US model, the unemployment rate is around 6 percent at the time of liftoff, and inflation never rises above 2½ percent.  We have seen justification for these particular thresholds.  Moreover, 6½ percent is still above the Committee’s view of the long-run rate of unemployment.  The forward guidance in 5′ has come a long way since we discussed it in August of 2011.  It now contains a firm, definitive, non-vague inflation proviso.  A problem we debated in the August 2011 meeting was the risk that moving the forward guidance from a calendar date to one based on economic conditions would dislodge inflationary expectations.  In the current version of 5′, that possibility seems extremely unlikely. Instead, if inflation at a one- to two-year horizon were above the small ½ percentage point threshold of 2 percent, the Committee would be required to reengage on the federal funds rate debate, even if unemployment still exceeds 6½ percent. It is, to use President Kocherlakota’s phrase, a threshold for conversation.  These are hardly putting in place conditions by which inflation can brew silently, unchecked, and unaddressed. At the end of this round, there are still some who say that the egg hasn’t been cooked long enough.  I might have to disagree, noting that I am not sure what we are waiting for.  Paragraph 5′ could be in a form close enough to convince the public that the FOMC is following a different strategy; one that tries to achieve its employment mandate more forcefully than the public has perceived thus far; one that more credibly delivers accommodation and, at the right time, contraction, than the markets have understood thus far; one that has none, if any, of the costs associated with an LSAP; and one that may be necessary now to make the MBS purchases in alternative B more effective. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own views and opinions without contradicting or arguing against any other points.


Passage number 431.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Stein.


Passage number 432.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. I will just comment on a few of the specifics.  First of all, in terms of the flow rate of purchases of MBS, I would go with $40 billion per month, though I can’t say I have a particularly strong view on this. With respect to the trigger- or threshold-based policy described in paragraph 5′, I am quite sympathetic to the strategy. It has the potential to be of significant help.  I appreciate and find quite compelling the arguments that President Kocherlakota and a number of others have made. There is really quite an appealing intellectual case to be made. Now, having said this, I find myself in very close agreement with Governor Tarullo in terms of whether now is the right time to move forward.  As he pointed out, there are two issues.  There is the internal issue.  We have to get this right internally.  We have to really agree on the design and on the parameters.  The numbers really matter here. If we don’t coalesce around a reasonably strong version, one in which we make it clear that we have, as President Kocherlakota suggested, an ambitious unemployment threshold and some tolerance for a symmetric loss function on inflation, the intellectual case for it in some sense starts to disappear.  That’s one issue—we have to get that right. Second, the external issue is also challenging, and the communication here is crucial. To give one example, something that is not clear in my own mind is, how would we respond to the  following question.  Have we really deviated from our previous forward guidance in the sense that now we are making more of what is really a commitment, in the spirit of optimal control, to do something that we would stick with, even if it’s, in a sense, time inconsistent.  Or, is it just a statement, well, that we’ve introspected, we have thought about our reaction function, and we have discovered in our souls that we have a different reaction function than we previously knew ourselves to have. These are challenging things to explain, and it’s absolutely important to get it right. The concern, then, would be that if we throw something this consequential and tricky into what is already a hard-to-parse statement in other areas, it could end up being somewhat counterproductive.  Again, I very much have sympathy for the underlying idea and the principles, and I would hope that we could further develop and do more work on it.  My own preference would be not to push it out the door in the next hour or two. With respect to paragraph 4, this is the part I had in mind when I said it was already a little bit hard to parse. You get a flavor of this in some of the comments that have already gone around.  In other words, it seems like it is really open to different interpretations.  Some of you have, as I hear it, read paragraph 4 as a quite strong and open-ended commitment to continue doing asset purchases as long as it takes until the labor market improves.  At the other extreme, the way I heard President Bullard reading the paragraph was, “Well, it doesn’t really say much more than that we will do this for several months and then reassess where we are.”  You can certainly point to various forms of wiggle room in the phrasing.  I suppose the truth is sort of in between and a little bit in the eye of the beholder. For my part, I would align myself quite closely with President Pianalto.  I appreciate the commitment arguments. I like the idea of having wiggle room, and that is because of my own  understanding of the costs and the benefits, and that in spite of the fact that I do believe the benefits of past programs have been significant, I sense that we are verging into diminishing returns territory. Moreover, flexibility may be particularly warranted with MBS because there is a particular kind of market feedback that we might get reasonably quickly, which is to say—and Governor Duke mentioned this—there is this issue about the pass-through from MBS spreads to primary mortgage rates. We will see, presumably in a few months, whether that pass-through is weak or strong, and one might want to update one’s policy based on that. In any event, as we talked about yesterday, given the language in paragraph 4, this makes the press conference important.  For what it’s worth, Mr. Chairman, I thought that the trial balloon answers that you were floating yesterday struck a good balance here, so I was certainly comfortable in that dimension. Given these two earlier points, one being that I think it is worth giving serious further thought to 5′, and the second being that there is some virtue to not getting overly locked in on asset purchases, I also—very similar to President Lockhart and to President Pianalto—was thinking about whether there is an alternative framing that would work here.  And my thought was maybe we can lean just as far forward, or even a little bit further, on the general principle of giving accommodation if the economy doesn’t strengthen but be more open as to whether that accommodation would take the form of asset purchases or a change in our guidance. This could be done, in principle, either by rewording paragraph 4 of the statement or simply by the way the press conference is handled.  In the former case, if it’s done via the statement, you could rewrite the two key sentences—it’s just a suggestion—as follows: “If the outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue to add further accommodation as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a context of pricestability. In determining the nature of such accommodation, the Committee will, as always, take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of the tools at its disposal.” It is less precise, and I take that to be in the spirit of what you all were thinking as well.  The intent is not to back away from being supportive but to be a little bit more flexible in the tools that are used to provide that support.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and provides comments on specific aspects of the proposal. However, there are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented in the passage.


Passage number 433.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and acknowledging Governor Powell.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 434.
 MR. POWELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will vote in favor of alternative B.  My support for alternative B leans heavily on the language in paragraph 4 requiring us to consider the likely efficacy and cost of further actions when and if they are proposed and considered, and I join strongly Governor Stein and Presidents Pianalto and Lockhart in an editing of paragraph 4 that moves very much in the direction that Governor Stein just read. I am a supporter of paragraph 5.  I think that the arguments that have already been raised and vetted about 5′ are dispositive at this time.  I will say that the two things that need to be done—the good news is there are only two things.  The bad news is those two things are, first, the Committee has got to reach agreement on the desirability of moving to a state-contingent forward guidance. I’m very open to the intellectual appeal of that, but going around the table, it’s quite obvious that we don’t fully have that, particularly around the levels in the language and the conditionality. The second is clearly the public communication aspect.  There’s nothing about it in the Jackson Hole speech.  There really hasn’t been any supportive discussion of it by the Chairman lately that I’ve seen. We could get ourselves to a place where this could be announced.  It would be the work of some months both internally and externally, in particular explaining how it does fit in with the principles that we adopted in January.  It’s not something that can happen in the next 45 minutes. I will also vote in favor of extending the guidance to mid-2015 as proposed.  My own view of this is that the market moves the estimate of the liftoff date every day, and our proposed guidance doesn’t contain any surprise element. The idea that the date can contain a negative, contractionary aspect is certainly plausible in a different setting, but not on the facts we face today. Let me say a couple of comments about LSAPs.  As I look back on the use of LSAPs so far, I too believe that the evidence supports the view that the effects of any LSAP are highly dependent not only on some mechanics, but also on the setting in which it is launched.  The main driver of real effects is probably that of enhancing confidence, confidence that bad outcomes will be avoided, and that there is reason to hope for good outcomes. In this view, it is really our credibility, the design of the program, and the setting that make it work.  For me, an argument in favor of alternative B is that it is limited to MBS at a time when the housing market is consistently surprising on the upside.  This alternative can be well explained and understood by the public as welcome support for housing as well as for the broader economy.  So presented, it stands a decent chance to actually be noticed and appreciated by people who are neither Fed watchers nor professional market participants nor economics bloggers.  I encourage an emphasis on support for housing in our public communications around this action. My view is that alternative B can have positive effects on the economy but that these effects are likely to be quite modest, and I do come to that view without a great deal of certainty.  It does seem clear to me that LSAPs have affected asset prices, and to deny that does call for—as was done in a certain well-mentioned Jackson Hole paper—that most hackneyed of all economist jokes that while it may be observed in reality, it will simply never work in theory.  [Laughter] But of course, affecting MBS and Treasury prices is just the beginning.  We need translation to rates that actually matter for private economic activity and then translation to the real economy. Looking at the channels through which we believe our policies operate and the caveats, confidence intervals, headwinds, and multiple uncertainties that surround the estimates so well addressed in yesterday’s meeting, my strong sense is that the real effects will be quite modest, and it is all too easy these days to find credible private forecasts that agree. The last two forecasts that I’ve seen both from well known, credible sources who happened to be broadly supportive of accommodation, point to estimates of unemployment effects of around 20 or 30 basis points for a program the size of QE2—use that as a rough proxy for this.  That would be 300,000 to 450,000 jobs under those forecasts.  That might be equivalent to bringing the recovery forward by a couple of months. As far as the costs, I certainly agree that they appear manageable in the near term. There’s enough risk and uncertainty about the medium and long term that if the view of the likely benefits is right, one would have to believe further that the likely costs are close to nil to want to proceed with a large LSAP.  I also agree with President Bullard’s point earlier in the meeting that the problem has not been the lack of aggressive monetary policy.  As a separate matter, taking the Chairman’s points from yesterday, I do not feel that additional aggressive monetary policy is likely to provide much of a solution. I know that every member of the Committee struggles to balance these highly uncertain costs and benefits.  I’m supporting alternative B with a certain lack of enthusiasm, and I am somewhat uncomfortable with the road that we are on.  As others have mentioned, this is not  , 2009, or 2010.  We’re now using LSAPs as a straightforward jobs program.  There is no credible threat of deflation, recession, or financial crisis, any of which could present a compelling case for action and the use of all of our tools, including LSAPs if appropriate.  Again, these are concerns about the medium and the long term, not the next six months.  My concern is that for very modest benefits, we are piling up risks for the future and that it could become habit-forming. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention and disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses support for alternative B but does so with a lack of enthusiasm and discomfort. They also express concern about the potential risks and costs of the LSAPs, and argue that the benefits are likely to be modest. They question the need for additional aggressive monetary policy.


Passage number 435.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The Vice Chairman is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 436.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you, and thank you all very much, as always, for your good advice. Let me make a couple of comments.  I think that action is needed.  I don’t think we’re being precipitous.  We extended the guidance in January.  In June, we extended the MEP.  Bothof those things were viewed essentially as temporizing moves and were discussed in that way around this table.  The evidence is that while we are not necessarily facing recession or crisis, it’s also true that we seem to have stalled, and that very serious problems with unemployment are not improving.  Given our mandate, I think that requires at least a consideration of action. The action that is proposed here, and it should be very clear, is a cautious action.  Governor Duke was very helpful in helping me think about this.  What this alternative B actually does is make a down payment of X per month of MBS for the rest of the year, and then three or four job market reports from now we will consider at that point what the job market outlook looks like, and then respond appropriately.  So it is, in that respect, emphasizing the conditionality of the program and the fact that we will be looking—in a way that wasn’t conveyed adequately by our fixed-size LSAP programs—at what’s happening in the data and what’s happening in the economy.  But I do think there is a basis for expressing our support for the economy at this point, to help support confidence and to help give the economy a bit more strength in case we do face shocks from Europe or from the fiscal cliff. So, again, obviously I propose alternative B. I’ll come back to the body of it in a moment.  On 5 versus 5′, there was a pretty clear consensus around the table that there’s a lot of hunger for moving away from the date toward some kind of state-contingent guidance.  I think one of the lessons of the paper whose author’s name will not be mentioned was that clarity about future rate policy is a very powerful tool and one that we should make use of.  I would advocate that we continue to work on this because the other part of the consensus today was that we’re not quite ready for prime time on this issue. So I would propose for now that we retain paragraph 5, but with a very strong injunction to the staff and to colleagues that we work to figure out how we can put language like 5′ in soon.  In paragraph 3, I’d like to make the following proposal.  I’d like to propose that we do $40 billion a month, but I’d like to add the words “through the end of the year” where it says $85 billion a month three lines from the bottom.  The $85 billion, which is the MEP plus the $40 billion—of course the MEP runs out at the end of the year, and that’s about the time we’ll be looking at how we’re going to proceed from here. The advantage of doing $40 billion is, first of all, that $30 billion feels a little underwhelming to me in terms of what we announce today, but also it seems to me that one of the options we might have in January, if we are looking at it, would be just to continue the $40 billion.  To me, $40 billion seems like a more plausible number there.  And we have talked about it with the Desk, and their view is that it’s consistent with both our operational capacity and with market functioning even if extended for a long period, longer than I expect that we would actually do it. In paragraph 4, I would propose—and there were views on different sides here—we use the second language, “undertake additional asset purchases and employ its other policy tools.” Governor Duke spoke against this because she mentioned IOER and discount window lending.  Of course, those are Board tools, but the other tools that the FOMC has are the statement language and the guidance, and certainly that could be part of additional steps that we take in January or whenever it is that we begin to review the situation.  If no one has too strong an objection, I’d like to use that second phrase with the understanding, which I will make clear if asked, that what we mean by that is communication—which is the other topic I talked about in Jackson Hole.  I don’t want to make any other changes.  We do have the phrase “as appropriate.” That already conveys the notion of conditionality, the fact that we may or may not take action.  It depends on what the economic outlook is, and I think that’s very important.   I forgot to say, by the way, on 5—a point that Governor Raskin made—that I think the reason that there has been in the SEP, as well as in the guidance, a fairly sharp movement into the future of the expected takeoff date is not really because there’s been a massive deterioration in the outlook, but that the Committee has come to the view that a somewhat more extended period of low rates—for reasons articulated by the artist formerly known as Michael Woodford [laughter]—can be helpful in a zero lower bound situation, and I will try to make that point also in the press conference. To summarize—and I look around the table, if there are any voters who are extremely bothered, please let me know—I would propose to choose $40 billion and $85 billion from the third line from the bottom, propose to insert the phrase “through the end of the year” after “each month,” and then in paragraph 4, I propose to take the second option, “undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate.” Are there any comments. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their ideas and proposals, but there is no mention of anyone opposing or disagreeing with them.


Passage number 437.
 MR. FISHER.  May I just ask a question. When we say “in a context of price stability,” we also mean well-anchored inflation expectations, is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher simply asks for clarification and confirmation.


Passage number 438.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We do.  That’s the phrase.  I recognize it’s not completely grammatical as President Lacker pointed out, but the implication is that, of course, at all times we’ll maintain that conditionality as we undertake our policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a recognition of a grammatical error but affirming the intention to maintain a certain conditionality in policy.


Passage number 439.
 MR. FISHER.  And you will work that into your press conference if it’s appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing a plan to include something in a press conference if it is deemed appropriate.


Passage number 440.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, yes.  Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without a specific passage to analyze, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 441.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 442.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of President Lockhart or any form of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 443.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In paragraph 4, just a thought to throw on the table, and that is take the last sentence of 5′, inject it after the words “price stability,” so that the effect of the last two sentences would be to frame this whole question of continuing accommodation—in effect, framing the way we’re going to deliberate over this over the next few weeks. It seems to me comprehensive.  It refers to improvement in labor market conditions generally, and also of course, efficacy and cost and all of that.  I can see combining those two sentences.  Each begins, for what it’s worth, with “In determining, …” and that might make that paragraph a good set-up. I’ll also point out that in all likelihood, the minutes are going to portray that we have given some consideration to threshold thinking, and so this would serve to frame that for the market reaction over the next few weeks.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a statement by Mr. Lockhart suggesting a change of wording in a paragraph. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 444.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Because it refers to the time horizon, wouldn’t that kind of language be more appropriate as we look toward the language of 5.  In other words, I thought for a moment you were suggesting taking that and putting it at the end of 5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a hypothetical question and a clarification request, but there is no disagreement between the speaker and the listener.


Passage number 445.
 MR. LOCKHART. I’m actually thinking it might fit in 4.  I put this on the table a little bit off the top of my head.  The Committee will continue its purchases, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its other tools until such improvement is achieved in the context of price stability.  In determining how long we’re going to do that, we’d take into account the pace of labor market conditions and so forth.  In determining the size, pace, and composition, as always, we’d take into account efficacy and cost.  I just saw that as a boxing of all of the things we would take into consideration if we go to essentially an open-ended kind of approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 446.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In my press conference I’m going to be very clear that obviously this is not a numeric objective, and we’ll be looking at a range of employment and output indicators, which all bear on the outlook for sustained improvement in labor marketconditions and declining unemployment, and I’d rather convey that breadth verbally.  I’m afraid we’re getting a little complicated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their plans for a press conference and explaining their intention to address a range of indicators related to employment and output. The last sentence simply expresses concern that the topic may become difficult to understand or explain.


Passage number 447.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Fair enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lockhart's response "Fair enough" indicates agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 448.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The excerpt merely mentions the position of Vice Chairman without providing any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 449.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, I had the same reaction that you had. I didn’t see how it would fit in 4 because you hadn’t really explained the forward guidance yet.  One could take the last sentence of 4 and the last sentence of 5′ and make a new paragraph 6 and sum up.  Then you’d have the statement about asset purchases, the statement about forward guidance, and a summary paragraph that said, “in determining both these things.”  That would be more logical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker disagrees with how the information is presented and suggests reorganizing it for better logic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 450.
 MR. LACKER.  A paragraph full of escape clauses, in other words.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing their disagreement or criticism of the paragraph, saying that it is full of escape clauses.


Passage number 451.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Essentially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "essentially" suggests that what follows is a summary or a statement of core ideas, rather than a source of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 452.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions President Lacker without providing any information or context to analyze any possible contention or disagreement.


Passage number 453.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I was going to ask a question about something else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker simply states that he was going to ask a different question.


Passage number 454.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage provided, I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement. Could you please provide the passage?


Passage number 455.
 MR. LACKER. In the forward-guidance language, we deleted the economic conditions clause there.  We’ve had a lot of discussion of Professor Woodford’s paper.  We’ve talked  a lot about that in the context of 5′ and that language, but I’m thinking that what you had in mind by deleting the economic conditions clause was in part motivated by his critique as well, the idea that by saying it’s conditions that are pushing the time horizon out, we were focusing on how bad things are.  The intention, as I read you, is for us to be communicating more about our reaction function.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any direct contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement by one person (Mr. Lacker) about the discussion and his interpretation of the intention behind deleting the economic conditions clause in the forward-guidance language.


Passage number 456.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That's right" does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply affirms the correctness or accuracy of a previous statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 457.
 MR. LACKER.  I want to re-ask a question I asked earlier this year.  When we adopted this language, we never really got clear on whether it’s a commitment or not.  We wrestled with different versions of what that meant.  Is this signaling that we’re going to pursue an action that later on we would not want to pursue then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is uncertainty and disagreement regarding the language and whether it implies a commitment or not. The speaker mentions that they have wrestled with different interpretations of the language, indicating a lack of consensus.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 458.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it’s still conditional because it obviously depends on the timing of the recovery and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker believes that the statement is conditional, dependent on factors such as timing of the recovery. This implies that there may be disagreement or differing opinions on whether the statement is indeed conditional.


Passage number 459.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  So it’s contingent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 460.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I mentioned the SEP changes and so on.  I think we around this table have moved to the view that communicating low rates for longer in a way that may require some credibility is an approach to dealing with the zero lower bound, not in an extreme way, but I think there is some of that now in the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their observation and opinion about the views of the people around the table.


Passage number 461.
 MR. LACKER. We have a statement, and we can walk away from this and each interpret it in our own way, or we can have a Committee sense of what we’re doing. Is policy in the future to be conditioned on this.  In other words, as Woodford suggests, is policy going to be history-dependent. Is the fact that we said this going to alter future policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not indicating any contention or disagreement. It is simply posing a question and discussing potential options regarding policy interpretation and future actions.


Passage number 462.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In my Jackson Hole remarks, I talked about the guidance.  I said it was conditional, dependent on the state of the economy.  But in explaining the time, I said we look at rules and optimal control and those sorts of things, but we also take into account some other factors such as downside risks, the effects of the zero lower bound, and implicitly I said the possibility that the equilibrium real rate of interest is lower than normal—that is, headwinds.  So I am conveying, I think, some sense that in order to achieve more stimulus today, there’s a bit of a commitment element there—I don’t think we’ve gone too far out on a limb on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their viewpoint and the factors they take into account when making decisions.


Passage number 463.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker simply responds with "Okay", indicating agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 464.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Can we go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement or question without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 465.
 MS. DANKER.  This vote is on alternative B, as amended by the Chairman, and the associated directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating what the vote is on.


Passage number 466.
 Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke Yes President Lacker No President Lockhart Yes President Pianalto Yes Governor Powell Yes Governor Raskin Yes Governor Stein Yes Governor Tarullo Yes President Williams Yes Governor Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  We have a few other items.  We’re going to hear a little bit about the implementation, we’re going to do very quickly the forecast, but if everybody is okay, why don’t we just go ahead and take a 15 minute coffee break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply lists the names of individuals present and their agreement to proceed with a coffee break.


Passage number 467.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence. Let me turn the floor over to Lorie Logan, who will talk a bit about the operational aspect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 468.
 MS. LOGAN.8  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will offer a brief description of how the Desk plans to implement the Committee’s decision regarding the SOMA portfolio.  Consistent with recent practices, the Desk intends to release a statement with operational details on this initiative at the same time as the release of the FOMC statement.  A draft of the Desk statement is provided in the handout for your reference, with the exception that we will add the clause “through the end of the year” into the second sentence of the second paragraph. Based on the directive, the Desk intends to expand the SOMA’s holdings of agency MBS by $40 billion per month and maintain the existing policy for reinvesting agency principal payments.  Our current projections indicate that through the end of the year, paydowns on the agency debt and MBS portfolios will result in average monthly reinvestment purchases of roughly $30 billion.  Thus, combined 8 The materials used by Ms. Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 8). purchases will initially total around $70 billion per month and constitute about three-fourths of monthly TBA gross issuance. Should the purchases extend for 10 months, as was considered in Tealbook B, we anticipate that the SOMA’s ownership share of the outstanding fixed-rate agency MBS market would grow from about 18 percent to 27 percent, and that’s over a 10-month horizon. In line with the current practice for reinvestment operations, the Desk plans to conduct the additional purchases in the newly issued securities in the to-be-announced market, or TBA market.  These securities represent the most liquid sector of the MBS market, allowing purchases to be made in large size and are most closely tied with the primary mortgage rate. The Desk may purchase other agency MBS if market conditions warrant. The Desk intends to conduct these additional purchases internally as we’ve been doing for some time rather than relying on an investment manager to conduct the trades on our behalf.  We expect to be active almost every day, and purchase operations will continue to be conducted in a competitive auction format with the primary dealers.  Further, the Desk will continue the practice established at the end of last year of margining the unsettled MBS transactions with the primary dealers. Given the substantial portion of issuance being purchased and the uncertainty associated with MBS supply, the Desk will continue to conduct dollar roll transactions when necessary to facilitate the settlement of our purchases. Dollar rolls can be used to postpone or accelerate the delivery of purchases based on indications of the availability of agency MBS for settlement. In the reinvestment operations to date, the size of dollar rolls needed to postpone settlement have been fairly small, at about 5 percent of purchases, though this amount is likely to increase with the additional asset purchases. We will also use coupon swaps, if needed, to facilitate settlement, as was the case in 2010.  A coupon swap would allow the Desk to exchange unsettled purchases in a given agency MBS coupon for other coupons more readily available for settlement.  However, we do not envision needing to conduct such transactions, except in very rare cases where persistent supply problems suggest that settlement of purchases, even over several months, is unlikely. The purchases of agency MBS securities under this new asset purchase program will begin tomorrow.  We plan to have two separate announcements for MBS operations going forward, one for the new purchases and one for the continued reinvestments.  The Desk will publish the monthly asset purchase amounts along with the announcement of the Treasury MEP operations around the last business day of each month.  Given there are only 17 calendar days remaining in September, we will purchase a pro rata share of the monthly pace in September of about $23 billion.   In addition, we will continue to publish around the eighth business day of each month the planned amount of reinvestment purchases for the next month.  Thus, there will also be a new reinvestment purchase amount target posted today at the same time as the Desk’s operating statement is released.  That concludes my comments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the plans for implementing the Committee's decision.


Passage number 469.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a simple statement followed by a request for questions.


Passage number 470.
 MR. LACKER. Help us interpret financial market data going forward.  What do you expect.  Because our purchases don’t include TIPS, should we factor something in about TIPS yields.  Are they in the habitat, out of the habitat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of questions seeking clarification or information.


Passage number 471.
 MS. LOGAN.  In our MEP purchases, we purchase TIPS today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about their purchases.


Passage number 472.
 MR. LACKER.  You do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: not have to be chairman of the Federal Reserve to have a key role in monetary policy. I think that the president ought to be a political appointee.


Passage number 473.
 MS. LOGAN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage states "Yes" but does not provide any context or information to indicate what the disagreement or contention is about.


Passage number 474.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 475.
 MR. POTTER.  The MEP is still ongoing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the MEP (presumably referring to some ongoing project or event) is still ongoing.


Passage number 476.
 MR. LACKER.  But we weren’t proposing to do it in the overall asset purchase program, were we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is asking a clarifying question.


Passage number 477.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Sorry" is not a statement or claim that can be contended or disagreed with. It is simply an expression of regret or apology.


Passage number 478.
 MR. LACKER.  Include TIPS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any statement or indication of disagreement or contention. It simply mentions including TIPS.


Passage number 479.
 MS. LOGAN. If we had added purchases under a new asset purchase program for Treasuries, we would have done so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a hypothetical situation without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 480.
 MR. LACKER. Okay.  You would.  Sorry.  I misread something then.  I apologize.  Let me ask another question.  How linked is the private-label MBS market to agency MBS yields. Do you anticipate this pushing that spread apart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple exchange between two individuals where one person apologizes for misreading something and asks another question.


Passage number 481.
 MS. LOGAN.  I think the way we’ve been estimating these effects is that the MBS purchases would affect the Treasury term premium, and to the extent that the pass-through from the lowering of interest rates moves other asset markets, equities, or the private-label market— we talked about what that pass-through is.  There’s some uncertainty, but we would expect the channel to be through that form.  I guess there could be some other form because it is MBS, and private label is a little bit more closely connected than maybe from Treasuries to private label, but overall we have been expecting the pass-through to happen through lowering interest rates more broadly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the way MBS purchases can affect the Treasury term premium and how the pass-through from lowering interest rates can impact other asset markets. The speaker seems to be presenting their understanding without any conflicting views.


Passage number 482.
 MR. LACKER.  All right.  Relative to buying Treasuries, we’re tilting credit from the private-label market to the agency market.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple explanation of a decision made by Mr. Lacker, without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 483.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 484.
 MS. DUKE.  I’d just like to say something about the private label because there has been almost no issuance of private label in a number of years because there’s just not much supply out there.  There is a little bit of jumbo issuance.  Again, in the spirit of things that are cooking out there, the Federal Home Loan Banks, particularly I think the Home Loan Bank of Chicago is now looking at consolidating jumbo securities from banks across the country, not just that are in the Chicago district, and feeding them through Redwood to try to generate some more broader private-label issuance, for jumbo and more broadly. I would expect that to the extent that that happens, it certainly wouldn’t be unhelpful.  It might be helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and expressing their opinion.


Passage number 485.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, but what they’re saying is that compared with buying Treasuries only, this is reducing agency MBS yields by more—Treasury yields will fall, but not as much as what they would fall if we bought Treasuries only.  They’re tilting the playing field away from everything priced on Treasuries toward agency MBS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating what "they" are saying about the impact of buying agency MBS instead of Treasuries. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 486.
 MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we’re still buying $45 billion of long-term Treasuries in the MEP right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no disagreement or contention in the passage. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 487.
  MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know that, but the apples-to-apples thing is $40 billion agency MBS versus $40 billion Treasuries in this setting, and comparing those two, private-label MBS yields are going to be higher, given that we’re buying agency MBS, than they would be if we were buying Treasuries only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about the yield difference between agency MBS and Treasuries.


Passage number 488.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They’re not going to be higher.  They’re not going to drop as much, presumably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is making a prediction that something will not happen (being higher) and another thing will not happen as much (drop). There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 489.
 MR. LACKER.  Exactly.  They’re going to be higher than they would in the alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 490.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In that respect we don’t care because they’re not being created.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The sentence simply states that the speaker does not care because something is not being created. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 491.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, they would be even less created now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Well, they would be even less created now" does not indicate any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 492.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I don’t actually think we know very much about what would happen to private-label MBS yields because there’s so little issuance; there’s so little pricing information. It’s conceivable that pushing down agency MBS would also push down private-label MBS yields, but I don’t think we know because there hasn’t been much issuance there and we don’t have information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. English, acknowledges that there is a lack of knowledge and information regarding the potential impact of pushing down agency MBS on private-label MBS yields. This indicates disagreement or contention about the expected outcome.


Passage number 493.
 MR. POTTER.  The stronger the housing market is, the more it should support the private-label market coming back and having more capacity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states a cause and effect relationship, expressing that a strong housing market would lead to a revival of the private-label market.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 494.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.9 Let’s go on to the consensus forecast.  This, of course, is still an exercise.  We’re still working to figure out what we’re going to do. You have in front of you the consensus forecast.  If you turn to page 3, and we look at the forecast inclusive of the policy action today, that would be best approximated, I guess, by the line that says, “Plus $750 billion LSAP program.”  That’s the post-action policy forecast, and note that it includes the jointly determined federal funds rate at the bottom.  What I’d like to do is ask each person to say 9 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). one of three things.  Either you broadly agree with the forecast as given or you agree with reservations—let me go back a second.  As part of our exercise the staff, I believe, is intending to write up our discussion as if it were a quarterly monetary policy report, and what they will do is if you agree but with reservations, they will write up your reservations in minutes style describing without attribution what the concerns were that people raised about the forecast.  The other possibility is if you just disagree with the forecast, you should say so and explain why, and then they’ll write up the monetary policy report with attribution—that’s the plan—and say, again, what it is that you disagree about.  Yes, President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking each person to either broadly agree with the forecast, agree with reservations, or disagree and explain why. This indicates that there may be differing opinions among the participants.


Passage number 495.
 MR. LACKER.  I don’t understand.  Are these two different plans or are these two different options for us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their confusion and looking for clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 496.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Two different options.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Two different options" implies that there are conflicting or contrasting perspectives being presented.


Passage number 497.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You have three choices.  When I go around the table, you have three choices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are three choices available.


Passage number 498.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  We can disagree anonymously or with attribution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 499.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree modestly and anonymously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply describes a way in which someone can express their disagreement.


Passage number 500.
 MR. LACKER. Modestly and anonymously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreements or contentions. It simply states that someone is being modest and anonymous.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 501.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree violently and for attribution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement "You can disagree violently" implies a strong disagreement or conflict, while the phrase "and for attribution" suggests that the disagreement is being openly acknowledged or attributed to a specific source.


Passage number 502.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  And there’s a threshold.  [Laughter] Or is it a trigger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 503.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Can I bring up just one more thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Reifschneider wants to bring up one more thing, without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 504.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 505.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  For those people who strongly disagree, we’re also asking them to submit in the next few days—by Monday—a paragraph or so explaining why, and we will eventually put this into a document and then circulate it back to the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that for those who strongly disagree, they are invited to submit a paragraph explaining why, which will be included in a document circulated back to the Committee.


Passage number 506.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is everybody okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is simply asking about the well-being of everyone, and does not introduce any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 507.
 MS. DUKE.  Can I just ask one question about agreeing with reservation.  If we’re comparing it with the $750 billion LSAP program, and in voting for alternative B, I didn’t assume that the purchases went past the end of the year, would that be a reservation. I just want to know how to characterize it.  What does “with reservation” mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Duke is simply seeking clarification on the meaning of "agreeing with reservation" and how it can be applied in the context of comparing different programs.


Passage number 508.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think you assume that you should take the Tealbook assumption here, the $750 billion, and say:  Would the economic path shown here be a reasonable approximation of what you would anticipate, given the policy action taken.  And if not, why not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and asking a question for clarification or justification, but there is no evident disagreement.


Passage number 509.
 MS. DUKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging and responding to the statement or question.


Passage number 510.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The single word "Okay" does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 511.
 MR. BULLARD.  Am I agreeing that this is a consensus forecast or am I agreeing that this is actually my forecast.  Because I submitted my forecast. And you can see point for point, you know, where they’re different and where they’re not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is questioning whether they are agreeing that the forecast is a consensus or if it represents their own individual forecast. They are not expressing disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 512.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any content or information that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply states the title and name of the person, Chairman Bernanke.


Passage number 513.
  We’re trying to determine if it is a consensus, and therefore, we’re asking if you yourself find it— MR. EVANS.  Is it close enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply asking for the opinion of the person being addressed in order to determine if there is a consensus.


Passage number 514.
 MR. BULLARD.  I think it’s a good consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I think it's a good consensus" implies that Mr. Bullard agrees with the consensus reached, suggesting harmony and agreement.


Passage number 515.
  It’s not as accurate as— MR. FISHER.  I’m trying to remember my specific numbers.  All I remember is that I was in the central tendency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher is simply trying to remember specific numbers, while the initial statement is stating that something is not as accurate as something else. There is no conflicting information or debate in this passage.


Passage number 516.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So why don’t you just report what you reported and say if you think it’s broadly consistent with this or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely suggesting that the reported information should be mentioned and whether it aligns with a particular viewpoint or not should also be stated.


Passage number 517.
   MR. WILCOX.  This is an effort to ascertain the extent to which participants can affiliate themselves with the consensus forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the purpose of the effort, which is to determine the level of affiliation of participants with the consensus forecast.


Passage number 518.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply mentions President Fisher without providing any further details or context, so it's impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 519.
 MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 520.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "Sorry."


Passage number 521.
 MR. TARULLO.  I think it’s not unlike what we do with policy statements, which is to say everybody would have written it somewhat differently, but in the end can you kind of go along with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Tarullo is discussing the process of writing a policy statement and acknowledging that different people may have written it differently, but ultimately, he suggests that they can all agree and go along with it. There is no contention or disagreement asserted in this statement.


Passage number 522.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, that’s what it is.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply agreeing with the previous statement.


Passage number 523.
 MR. FISHER.  You said there were three questions.  Do we agree with the forecast.  Do we have reservations.  If so, what are they.  What’s the third.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on the three questions that were mentioned previously. Their tone appears to be cooperative and focused on ensuring a shared understanding.


Passage number 524.
 MS. DUKE.  Do you disagree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 525.
 MS. YELLEN. Do you have a fundamentally different view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking if the person has a differing perspective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 526.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you fundamentally disagree with the forecast.  And remember it’s not about whether you agree with the policy action or not.  This is conditional on the policy action.  Conditional on the policy action, do you agree more or less with the forecast that’s been presented.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Do you fundamentally disagree with the forecast" suggests that there might be differing opinions on the accuracy or validity of the forecast presented. The statement also emphasizes that the disagreement should be based on the forecast itself, rather than personal opinions on the policy action being discussed.


Passage number 527.
 MR. FISHER.  And if we have reservations, we should submit them.  Is that what you were saying earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 528.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, Janet, would you like to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply asking someone named Janet if they would like to comment on something without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 529.
 MS. YELLEN. If you broadly agree but have some reservation—you’re slightly more optimistic about the forecast, you have a different view on oil prices, but aside from that you basically agree this is a reasonable forecast contingent on the policy path—then say you agree  with reservations.  And the write-up, as in the minutes, will say people have expressed some reservations, but nevertheless associate themselves overall with the view. The staff will write up the discussion of what the reservations were.  But those who just have a basically different view of the forecast should say so, and then there will be a few paragraphs they’ll submit, and that will be included in the document with attribution.  This would be a portion of a monetary policy report where there would be a discussion of the diversity of views.  Think of this as a diversity of views and say 10 people supported the forecast without reservation.  Several people had reservations of the following sort, and four had essentially different views.  Here are the submissions.  In your paragraph, you’d describe and explain why your views are essentially different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage describes a process for expressing different views and reservations in a report, but does not indicate any specific contention or disagreement among the individuals involved.


Passage number 530.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me just make sure I understand.  We’re assuming the policy path, this policy action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is not expressing any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating that the speaker wants to make sure they understand the assumed policy path.


Passage number 531.
 MS. YELLEN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 532.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes, that’s what we are doing today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging or confirming what is happening.


Passage number 533.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  So we’re not having individual “appropriate monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement.


Passage number 534.
” MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. No.  It’s just given what we passed today, is this a reasonable forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Reifschneider is asking a question about the reasonableness of a forecast based on the information they have passed.


Passage number 535.
 MR. LACKER.  Wait.  That’s different than a policy path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 536.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I’m going to suggest something slightly different from what Chairman Bernanke said, which is:  Given the policy decision today, if you look at the numbers that go along with that $750 billion LSAP program—forget about whether the $750 billion is correct or not because you may think it will end up being $500 billion or some other number—   do you think that’s a reasonable forecast. Is it close enough for talking purposes.  But if you think this is the wrong model of the world, the economy is just going to look a lot different, so much so that you want to, in effect, dissent, then you’re in the third category.  The middle category is a little tougher, but I think the two ends are very clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a different perspective and asking for others' opinions.


Passage number 537.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Everybody, this is a trial run.  [Laughter]  We’re trying to find out what works and what doesn’t work.  We may have already found out what doesn’t work. President Fisher, did you have a comment or question or you’re okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply informing the audience that they are conducting a trial run and seeking their feedback.


Passage number 538.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, states that he is fine.


Passage number 539.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You’re fine.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that "you're fine" and mentions the title "Vice Chairman."


Passage number 540.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. My question was would it be better to try to have a little bit better understanding about what “close to” is or would it be everyone’s personal view of what “close to” is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 541.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s your judgment of whether you sufficiently disagree that you want to have your name identified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that the decision to have one's name identified is up to their judgment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 542.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it does matter if people disagree or have different parameters in terms of how close is “close to.”  We can do it either way, but you could argue that if you think the standard error is more than X, then you should disagree, or you could be a perfectionist and you disagree for very minute changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement mentions that people may have different parameters or standards for determining what qualifies as being "close to." This implies that there could be conflicting opinions or disagreement about how to define what is considered close. Additionally, the mention of being a perfectionist and disagreeing for very minute changes further highlights the potential for contention.


Passage number 543.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So all of this is about reporting.  We’re trying to report the sense of the Committee, and so how you would like the sense of the Committee reported is basically the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the purpose of reporting and seeking clarification on how the Committee would like their sense to be reported.


Passage number 544.
 MS. YELLEN. Right.  If we were really doing this, the Chairman would be walking out into a press conference with these numbers, explaining the policy action, and putting these  numbers out to the public and saying, “This gives you a description of how we envision the economy unfolding with the policy decisions.”  And the question is:  Would you be comfortable with these numbers as what he walks out into a press conference with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a hypothetical scenario and asking a question about comfort levels.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 545.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I understand all of that, but let’s imagine that there’s half the people on the Committee who disagree for very small tolerances and half the people have very large tolerances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "half the people on the Committee who disagree for very small tolerances and half the people have very large tolerances" suggests a disagreement or contention within the committee regarding tolerances. Some members have small tolerances while others have large tolerances, indicating a difference in opinion or perspective.


Passage number 546.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Then no.  It should be meaningful tolerances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Then no. It should be meaningful tolerances" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply seems like a response agreeing with the previous statement.


Passage number 547.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It would be better if we had a more common metric about what the tolerances are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a suggestion or preference, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 548.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, put it this way:  Are you willing to write two paragraphs for Dave Reifschneider.  [Laughter]  That’s it, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is made in a lighthearted manner, with the speaker jokingly asking if someone is willing to write two paragraphs for Dave Reifschneider. The "laughter" mentioned also indicates a non-contentious tone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 549.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, no, that’s different.  That’s a fundamental disagreement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. The phrase "No, no, that's different" shows a disagreement or contradiction in response to a previous statement or argument. The following statement "That's a fundamental disagreement" further emphasizes the presence of a difference of opinion or perspective.


Passage number 550.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. The way I would put it is this.  If the consensus forecast came out like this, and you were the sort of person who in a speech would say, “I want to make an important point that my personal unemployment rate forecast at the end of 2015 would be one-tenth lower,” then you should say you have reservations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply presenting a hypothetical situation and suggesting a course of action based on that hypothetical.


Passage number 551.
  [Laughter]  But if you perhaps feel uncomfortable about making a big distinction about one-tenth or so, then— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There’s a standard error, though, implicit in that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 552.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think there are two things.  One, there’s obviously a huge confidence interval around this, and so one way to look at it is that many differences just blur.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is a large confidence interval around a certain topic, which can blur the perceived differences.


Passage number 553.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course. There will always be fan charts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any argument or disagreement. It simply states that there will always be fan charts, implying that they are a common or expected occurrence.


Passage number 554.
  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  But does it make it a material difference for monetary policy, and the question might be if it’s one-tenth or so off on inflation or unemployment, you would say probably not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It seems like a statement made by Mr. Reifschneider expressing his opinion or viewpoint.


Passage number 555.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s a good way of phrasing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement in the passage is stating that the way something is phrased is good, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 556.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans, did you have a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any specific comment or topic that President Evans is being asked about, so it is not clear if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 557.
 MR. EVANS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage. Without additional context, it is impossible to determine if there is any underlying disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 558.
  I was just thinking we should probably start [laughter], and then we’ll figure out— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Excellent suggestion.  All right.  Who would like to go first.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Excellent suggestion" indicates agreement and willingness to start.


Passage number 559.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I endorse it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any specific idea, proposal, or statement that could generate contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states their endorsement of something without any indication of opposing views or conflicts.


Passage number 560.
  [Laughter and applause] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Very good.  Anyone. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only contains expressions of laughter and applause, indicating agreement or contentment, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 561.
 MR. BULLARD. Is it a good consensus.  I do think it’s a good consensus.  There are issues here about the mix between the forecast and the policy assumptions.  The way I did it was I had more inflation coming in the out years, and then I applied the outcome-based policy rule, which would then have the funds rate moving in a different way from here, and so the policy assumption then starts to also look different.  So I’m not quite sure what to make of this exercise.  It’s fine as a statement of where the Committee is, and I would endorse it in that sense.  As a general rule on this whole process, I don’t think that it’s a good thing to get into the business of trying to dissent on a forecast because there are zillions of points here and a lot of subtleties here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing some confusion about the exercise and how it relates to the policy assumptions, but overall, he agrees with the consensus and endorses it.


Passage number 562.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is why we’re having a trial run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 563.
 MR. BULLARD.  Mildly different, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the situation is "mildly different" without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 564.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no information or context provided in the passage regarding Governor Powell or any potential contention or disagreement. Thus, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 565.
 MR. POWELL.  Broadly endorse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement evident in the statement "MR. POWELL. Broadly endorse." This is a straightforward endorsement without any conflicting opinions or contradicting viewpoints.


Passage number 566.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since no passage is provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 567.
 MR. EVANS.  Conditional on the policy path, I broadly endorse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It states that the speaker, Mr. Evans, endorses something.


Passage number 568.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Okay. Governor Duke."


Passage number 569.
 MS. DUKE.  I actually normally would endorse, except that the reservation I would express at this point is that I think 2013 will be significantly lower because of the fiscal cliff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Duke simply expresses her concern about the fiscal cliff potentially lowering the numbers in 2013.


Passage number 570.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The word "okay" does not imply any conflict or differing opinions.


Passage number 571.
 MS. DUKE. That would be a reservation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage simply states that "That would be a reservation." There is no mention of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 572.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s a good example of a reservation.  Very good.  Anyone else.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of brief statements without any conflicting elements.


Passage number 573.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 574.
 WILLIAMS.  Broadly endorse, but I have a weaker outlook.  So that’s my only reservation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that the speaker broadly endorses something but has a weaker outlook or reservation. This does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 575.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions Governor Yellen without providing any context or statement that could indicate disagreement.


Passage number 576.
 MS. YELLEN.  Broadly endorse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. MS. YELLEN is stated to "broadly endorse" something, suggesting agreement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 577.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement about President Kocherlakota.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 578.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I see what I would term modestly more inflationary pressures than what are in this forecast, maybe one-tenth or two-tenths or three-tenths more in inflation. With that said, it comes back to what the Vice Chairman was talking about, that the choices of the Committee seem to be averse to those kinds of upticks in inflation.  For my own view, I think I would say I see modestly more inflationary pressures than what are in this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota believes there are more inflationary pressures than what are in the forecast, while the Committee seems averse to any upticks in inflation.


Passage number 579.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fine.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The word "Fine" indicates agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 580.
 MR. STEIN.  I broadly endorse the baseline.  I’m not sure if I would be a weak deviator on the conditional effect of policy in the sense that I think that the incremental effect of theLSAP is going to be roughly half of what it’s projected to be.  I’m not quite sure where that puts me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker expresses some uncertainty and lack of clarity about their position, but there is no direct disagreement or contention evident in the passage.


Passage number 581.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  You sound like a “two” to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is making an observation about the speaker's behavior without expressing disagreement or arguing against it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 582.
 MR. STEIN.  That feels like a “two” to you. PARTICIPANT.  Do you want to write two paragraphs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The contention in the passage is indicated by the participant questioning Mr. Stein's suggestion of writing two paragraphs.


Passage number 583.
 MR. STEIN.  No, I don’t want to write any paragraphs.  I want to hide in the weeds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Stein, simply expresses his preference to avoid writing paragraphs and hide instead.


Passage number 584.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren said he broadly endorses.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any specific statements or arguments that would indicate contention or disagreement. The mention of laughter is unrelated to any disagreement between President Rosengren and President Fisher.


Passage number 585.
 MR. FISHER.  I modestly endorse it.  It might scare people in terms of my forecasting.  I was within the central tendency.  They might want to change their forecast based on where I would be, with the exception of the funds rate, and I’d have to think about that.  But generally, I endorse.  I will say this, Mr. Chairman: Fiscal cliff, no fiscal cliff, et cetera—and I said this in my write-up—going beyond the first part of 2013 is largely pure guesswork.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is endorsing something and expressing their thoughts on forecasting, but there is no direct disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 586.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In some positive sense, that’s true.  In a normative sense, we do need to find some kind of plan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting two different perspectives ("positive sense" and "normative sense"), but it does not indicate any conflicting opinions or disagreement between them.


Passage number 587.
 MR. FISHER.  I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage merely states that Mr. Fisher understands something, without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 588.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We have to have some kind of projection to base our thinking on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments. It simply states the necessity of having a projection for thinking.


Passage number 589.
 MR. FISHER.  With that caveat, it’s a wonderful exercise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a positive opinion about the exercise.


Passage number 590.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Obviously, yes.  One of the benefits of this exercise, I hope, is that we will be able to show fan charts that will give some sense of the uncertainty. President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is expressing an expectation and hope for a certain outcome.


Passage number 591.
  MS. PIANALTO.  I broadly endorse the forecast, although my forecast is slightly weaker for GDP growth and unemployment in the later years partly because, like Governor Stein, the effectiveness of policy is just a little weaker in my forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. MS. PIANALTO is expressing her endorsement of the forecast while acknowledging that her own forecast is slightly weaker.


Passage number 592.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It only states that Governor Tarullo is good.


Passage number 593.
 MR. TARULLO.  I broadly endorse, but two things about the process as opposed to the substance.  One, the issue that arose at the outset that Betsy mentioned is something that people are going to have to think about, which is, what if we emerge from a meeting with a policy action that really isn’t any of the ones that are listed there.  And, secondly, this category two—I have a feeling—is going to be problematic in the following respect. I have heard several people already who might have fit themselves into category two, and if you end up saying, “We’ve got a consensus forecast—14 of the 17 members of the FOMC had qualifications on it,” I’m not sure how powerful it becomes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although Mr. Tarullo raises some concerns about the process, there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 594.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the interesting question is whether or not a number of them had the same qualification. If they’re all nitpicks, that’s one thing, but if everybody said, “This doesn’t take enough account of the fiscal cliff,” then that would be something that should be communicated I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, because the author is posing a question and expressing their own opinion rather than stating any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 595.
 MR. TARULLO.  Fair enough.  There may be some utility in thinking about moving to a binary system as we do with the statement.  You are either endorsing or you are not, but giving people a chance to comment, so if they say something like Betsy said a minute ago, it could be included in the explanation of the consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a potential approach (moving to a binary system) and acknowledging the potential usefulness of incorporating comments in the consensus explanation.


Passage number 596.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the phrase "That's fine." It simply expresses agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 597.
 MR. TARULLO.  But that’s just something to think about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Tarullo.


Passage number 598.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  Thank you.  We are looking for suggestions.  Anyone else.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of a statement, an expression of gratitude, a request for suggestions, and an invitation for others to contribute.


Passage number 599.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with Governor Tarullo.  You don’t have to frame it as a reservation.  You can just frame it as where people would prefer to tilt the forecast.  I’m with Betsy on the fiscal restraint. I am assuming that we will get some fiscal restraint next year, and it will be more problematic to the outlook, so we have somewhat weaker growth in 2013.  That said, I think this is a pretty good forecast.  That is why I was getting at the point of, how much do you disagree. I am pretty confident that the economy will be weaker in 2013 than this forecast, but if I take this whole thing in its entirety, I wouldn’t really quibble about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with Governor Tarullo and expresses agreement with Betsy on the issue of fiscal restraint. They also state that they have a relatively positive view of the forecast overall.


Passage number 600.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "Okay" simply indicates agreement or acknowledgement, so there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 601.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I have a tiny reservation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses a small reservation or hesitation about something.


Passage number 602.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, the question is, would you object to my hypothetically taking this, putting this on the screen, and saying, “This is the Committee’s consensus forecast of what the economy is going to look like”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about sharing a hypothetical scenario and seeking permission or agreement.


Passage number 603.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it would also be good, though, to say, “A few people thought that 2013 could be a little weaker because” blah, blah, blah.  But I would do it in Governor Tarullo’s two-bucket camp rather than three-bucket camp.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 604.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but could you please provide the passage you are referring to?


Passage number 605.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thanks.  Anyone else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 606.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any specific topic or subject matter, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 607.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 608.
  MR. PLOSSER.  I would say my forecast differs from this, obviously, and I think it is likely to show up in the assumption about current policy.  We are going to see more inflationary pressures and less positive outlooks on output and employment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 609.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The word "okay" indicates agreement or confirmation, rather than contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 610.
 MR. LACKER.  I still don’t have a clear, coherent sense of what policy I am supposed to be conditioning on.  Am I forecasting the Committee.  I think I am.  So on that basis, I might provide a good test case here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage indicates that there is disagreement or confusion about what policy the speaker is supposed to be basing their decisions on. They express uncertainty about whether they should be forecasting the Committee or not.


Passage number 611.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Okay" because it is a simple affirmation or agreement.


Passage number 612.
 MR. LACKER.  First of all, coming into this, on appropriate policy, I was weaker in 2013 by a couple of tenths.  And I saw inflation a couple of tenths stronger, closer to 2 percent over the next year or two, getting to 2 percent next year. So I would have put policy to raise rates earlier. Modifying that in terms of making it a forecast of the Committee’s action, I would mark up inflation in 2014.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply stating his own views and beliefs about inflation and policy, without contradicting or challenging anyone else's views.


Passage number 613.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sounds right.  Anyone else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Sounds right" indicates agreement, but there is no evidence of any contention or disagreement. The additional question "Anyone else" suggests inviting others to provide their opinion, but it does not necessarily imply disagreement with the original statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 614.
 MR. FISHER.  Can I ask a question on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that Mr. Fisher wants to ask a question, which suggests possible disagreement or contention in the conversation.


Passage number 615.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any specific statements or actions by President Fisher that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 616.
 MR. FISHER.  Forgive me.  I’m slower than everybody else at the table.  In releasing this, we would be releasing the funds path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply describes a situation where Mr. Fisher is apologizing for being slower than others and mentions the action of releasing funds.


Passage number 617.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Releasing what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage fragment "Releasing what" does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement present. It is a brief statement that does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 618.
 MR. FISHER.  The funds path, the fed funds rate forecast as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Fisher talking about the "funds path" and "fed funds rate forecast." There is no mention of contention or disagreement between different individuals or parties.


Passage number 619.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without providing the actual passage, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. To evaluate the presence of contention or disagreement, the content of the passage must be analyzed for conflicting perspectives or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 620.
 MR. BULLARD. If you are a year earlier, is that a significant reservation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply asking a question about timing and has not expressed any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 621.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "[Laughter]" simply indicates that someone is laughing, which does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 622.
  MR. BULLARD.  A year earlier on the funds rate, is that a significant reservation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is posing a question or seeking clarification on a specific topic, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 623.
 MS. DUKE.  But is that a difference in the policy path.  Because the policy path assumes 2015 liftoff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 624.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You could have a different reaction function.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is only stating a possibility that someone could have a different reaction function, but it does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 625.
 MR. BULLARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 626.
  But then you’ve got to do your presumably outcome-based— MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Based on the original line of comments where we asked you to condition on the forecast, and you submitted something that had higher inflation, I would have said that you were a “three” because you showed that, conditioned on sticking with the August statement-type policy, you had much higher inflation than this forecast, and that should be exaggerated more based on the policy.  So I would have said that you’re a three.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that reflects the speaker's opinion based on the information provided.


Passage number 627.
 MR. BULLARD.  But I don’t think I am outside of these confidence bands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion, but there is no indication of any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 628.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I don’t think that is relevant.  It goes back to the question of, do you think that your forecast, from a policy perspective, would be materially different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 629.
 MR. BULLARD. Again, I just don’t think getting into dissenting on a forecast is a sensible thing to do.  Has the Chairman done a good job of characterizing the center of the Committee.  Yes. I think yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard agrees with the Chairman's characterization of the center of the Committee.


Passage number 630.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states "President Lockhart" without providing any additional information or context for analysis.


Passage number 631.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I want to make sure I understand.  The next step is to write up a mock quarterly monetary policy report or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating Mr. Lockhart's desire to clarify and understand the next step, which involves writing up a mock quarterly monetary policy report.


Passage number 632.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  I’m sorry.  Just a description of this discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 633.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Right.  But we see how it is going to be communicated, how it is going to be implemented, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is clarifying the process of communication and implementation.


Passage number 634.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  That’s the purpose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not present any specific ideas or arguments that would prompt contention or disagreement. It simply states a purpose without providing any supporting details or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 635.
   MR. WILCOX.  Just the diversity of views portion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 636.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Right" and "Okay" are simply acknowledging or agreeing with the previous statement, but not introducing any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 637.
 MS. DUKE.  For the mock exercise, in addition to my own fiscal cliff reservation, can I sign up to Sandy and Jeremy’s reservation about the effectiveness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Duke, is simply expressing her desire to sign up for a reservation regarding the effectiveness of the mock exercise being discussed.


Passage number 638.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Oh, sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Oh, sure" indicates agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 639.
 MS. DUKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Duke, seems to be acknowledging or agreeing with something.


Passage number 640.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else.  [No response]  All right.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a statement followed by silence, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 641.
 MR. POWELL.  I’m on that line between the one and the two for exactly the same reason.  I went with the one, but of course I do have the same reservation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they are on the line between the one and the two and have a reservation about their choice.


Passage number 642.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A question to be thinking about here is:  What would Governor Powell do if he thought that the policy action is weaker than we anticipate, but the underlying economy is stronger, so that the outlook looks okay for him.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply posing a hypothetical question about what actions Governor Powell would take in a specific situation.


Passage number 643.
 MR. POWELL.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Powell simply agrees or affirms something.


Passage number 644.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Because we are not showing a comparison, right.  We are just showing the ex post.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate a contention or disagreement. It simply states that a comparison is not being presented, but rather the focus is on the "ex post."


Passage number 645.
 MR.STEIN.  Oh, you’re just showing the ex post.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements. It simply starts with a phrase "Oh, you're just showing the ex post."


Passage number 646.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that’s the question.  That’s what we’re discussing here.  We haven’t asked the question whether or not you think the baseline is adequate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that a question is being discussed without indicating any disagreement on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 647.
 MR. FISHER.  You might have to prepare for your press conference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "You might have to prepare for your press conference" implies that there is a difference of opinion or conflicting views about the necessity of preparing for the press conference.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 648.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Do you have a question or a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, because the question or comment suggests that there is a disagreement or different viewpoints present in the passage.


Passage number 649.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, the plan is, once we get this nailed down, that you would then refer to it in your press conference. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a plan and asks for confirmation.


Passage number 650.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And then, we are hoping at some point to have a monetary policy report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply states a desire for a monetary policy report without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 651.
 MR. FISHER.  Which you would still refer to the consensus forecast in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is referring to a consensus forecast, indicating that there is agreement among a group of people.


Passage number 652.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nothing is nailed down.  One possibility, which Governor Tarullo alluded to, is that we can’t do this in a timely way because we don’t know what the policy action is going to be soon enough, in which case it might be something that only appears in publication with the minutes, for example, three weeks later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no disagreement or contention in this passage. It is simply mentioning a possibility or scenario regarding the timeliness of policy action and its disclosure.


Passage number 653.
 MR. FISHER.  I agree with Governor Tarullo, by the way.  He makes an excellent point.  My next question would be:  Could you summarize what we just discussed as though we were at a press conference. It probably would be difficult at this juncture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions agreement and a request for a summary of the discussion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 654.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would say that this is the forecast of the Committee.  A few people disagreed, thinking that these policies would lead to higher inflation.  Most people agreed with the broad contours, except they pointed out a few issues related to the fiscal cliff and the efficacy of policy.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage as indicated by the phrases "A few people disagreed" and "they pointed out a few issues."


Passage number 655.
 MR. LACKER. I’m a little confused.  Someone used the phrase “a diversity section.” But you, at the beginning, described—I think you did in this context—a minutes-like document, and in the minutes, of course, when they discuss participants’ views, the different views are sort of woven into the main narrative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of confusion and seeking clarification.


Passage number 656.
  I wasn’t quite clear on what you guys— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I just learned about this five minutes ago myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is not fully knowledgeable about a subject and has recently learned about it themselves.


Passage number 657.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay. Great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the conversation as "great," indicating a positive and agreeable tone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 658.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I think the plan is to have a document that describes the consensus forecast, gives its main feature, and shows it in a minutes-type discussion: “The Committee discussed it. Most agreed with it but raised the following points anonymously. President Lacker thought that it was a bunch of garbage.”  [Laughter]  And that would be the content.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This is evident when President Lacker is quoted as saying that the plan is "a bunch of garbage." The laughter that follows suggests that this statement is in opposition to the consensus view, creating contention.


Passage number 659.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay, we will just have to start.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that something needs to begin. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


