Passage number 1.
 Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJuly 9-10, 1985July 9, 1985--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to approve the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker's statement is simply stating that the minutes of the meeting need to be approved.


Passage number 2.
MR. MARTIN. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement or action being communicated.


Passage number 3.
MR. PARTEE. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states the name of the speaker (Mr. Partee) and the word "second" without providing any context or information that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll turn to foreign currency operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement about what the next topic of discussion will be.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 5.
MS. GREENE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 6.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 7.
MR. WALLICH. Gretchen, when you say that people holdingdollars have many alternative techniques to protect themselves and soare encouraged, is it to be understood that the cost of that does notfully account for the difference in interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is simply seeking clarification from Gretchen regarding her statement.


Passage number 8.
MS. GREENE. Well, they can manage this hedging quiteaggressively and they can select, if you will, the term of theirinsurance protection against an adverse exchange rate move. So, theycan pay the price of this insurance for relatively short periods oftime. We believe, or at least we have heard, that in many casesduring the spring money was made on these so-called protective hedgingoperations when the dollar came down earlier in the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about how companies can manage hedging and potentially make money on protective hedging operations.


Passage number 9.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No other comments, observations. Youprovoked nobody. Domestic operations, Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement mentions that there are no other comments or observations and acknowledges that the person being referred to, Mr. Sternlight, did not provoke anyone in domestic operations. There is no contradiction or conflicting viewpoints presented in this passage.


Passage number 10.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without being able to access the statement mentioned in the appendix.


Passage number 11.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided to analyze.


Passage number 12.
MR. MARTIN. Move approval, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is simply making a motion to approve something, and there is no indication of any opposition or disagreement from the chairman.


Passage number 13.
MR. PARTEE. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Second" by Mr. Partee does not indicate any opposition or disagreement. It simply suggests that Mr. Partee is waiting for his turn to speak.


Passage number 14.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We'll see whether theeconomy sparks any more [comment].MESSRS. KICHLINE, PRELL, and TRUMAN. [Statements--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection" indicates that there is agreement or approval from all parties involved. The following statements from Messrs. KICHLINE, PRELL, and TRUMAN do not contain any conflicting or contradictory information.


Passage number 15.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any comments or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 16.
MR. FORRESTAL. Could I ask a question about these consumerand mortgage delinquencies. While we have had some better experiencerecently, they are still very high on balance. Does that conflictwith what we are seeing in higher net wealth or is there anexplanation due to distribution of income. How do you explain thatapparent conflict.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, is questioning the apparent conflict between high consumer and mortgage delinquencies and the reported higher net wealth. He is suggesting that there might be a discrepancy or inconsistency in this information and is seeking an explanation.


Passage number 17.
MR. PRELL. Well, it is very, very difficult. In a sense itconflicts with the wealth figures; on the other hand, one of the7/9-10/85things that has prevented wealth from growing so fast has been themild increase in housing prices, which had been a significantingredient earlier in wealth growth. It appears that there is acombination of factors involved in mortgage delinquencies. One isthat unemployment is still quite high in an historical sense, andconsiderably higher than the average in some locales. Income growthobviously varies across individuals, so those who took on mortgagesearlier perhaps with adjustable rates or with very aggressiveunderwriting terms--graduated payments or whatever--may findthemselves with a greater burden than they can handle readily. Thefact that the equity in their homes has not built up appreciably orcould even be negative, where there is negative amortization, has ledthem not to fight too hard to hang onto their homes. So it is a verycomplex matter, but those all seem to be ingredients in this picture.On the consumer side, the ratio is still fairly low historically butit could easily move higher, given what appears to be ratheraggressive lending and very aggressive borrowing in many cases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain disagreement or contention. It presents a range of factors and perspectives on the issue of mortgage delinquencies without any overt disagreement between them.


Passage number 18.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My impression is that it is moving higherquite rapidly. You have the first-quarter figure here, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their impression and asking for confirmation about the availability of a certain figure.


Passage number 19.
MR. PRELL. That's right. We don't have any anecdotalevidence that would suggest that the second quarter is going to lookworse. We polled the senior loan officers at commercial banks lastmonth and they suggested that the first quarter run-up had a bit of aseasonal in it and that they weren't seeing a further deterioration.In fact, they did not seem to be very concerned about delinquencyrates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there is no anecdotal evidence suggesting that the second quarter will look worse. It also mentions that senior loan officers at commercial banks do not seem to be very concerned about delinquency rates. This indicates agreement or lack of contention.


Passage number 20.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the trouble with senior banklending officers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states a general observation or opinion about senior bank lending officers.


Passage number 21.
MR. PRELL. We talked to the auto finance companies and theysuggested that the next figures may look a little better than the lastfigures. So, we don't see a reversal of the upturn, but there doesn'tseem to be a continuing deterioration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the next figures may look better than the previous ones and that there is not a continuing deterioration.


Passage number 22.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the provided passage.


Passage number 23.
MR. BOEHNE. You gave passing mention to the consumerinstallment debt burden which, as I recall, is high cyclically and ishigh over a much longer period of time. Has that not been a fairlyreliable indicator not only of consumer spending but of the length ofbusiness expansions. I guess I was a bit surprised that you did notspend a little more time on it. Or is it not all that important inthe flow of the business cycle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Boehne expressing surprise that the topic of consumer installment debt burden was not given more attention in the previous discussion. There is no argument or disagreement presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 24.
MR. KICHLINE. Do you want two opposing answers. If Mikeanswers, you'll hear something very different from what you will hearfrom me. I would be concerned about it. Mike and a number of otherpeople are less concerned about it. It has been a topic of greatdebate among the staff looking at this. At least two things are a bitdifferent now, allegedly. One is that a portion of the increase isassociated with a supposedly growing use of credit cards forconvenience purposes; those balances get built into the numbers but,indeed, are paid off monthly and are presumed not to be a problem--just a shift in means of payment. The second argument is that theoutstandings were so depressed in 1980, 1981, and 1982 that,7/9-10/85basically, repayments have been lagging. And if that view is correct,with the strong debt taken on in 1983-84 and so far this year,repayments ought to be rising and, therefore, we ought to be seeingvery limited further growth. If you go back historically, I thinkit's hard to isolate that factor as one element, but it did peak inlate 1978 or early 1979 and things got worse from there on. But lotsof things were going on in that period of time. I would say thatthere are really differing views on this whole issue--certainly amongthe staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the phrases "If Mike answers, you'll hear something very different from what you will hear from me" and "It has been a topic of great debate among the staff looking at this." These statements suggest that there are differing opinions and perspectives on the issue being discussed.


Passage number 25.
MR. PRELL. I might say, as a cyclical indicator, that manytimes in the past one of the elements in the downturn of consumerborrowing and of activity in general was a constraint on the supply ofcredit. As rates went up, usury ceilings began to bite and the supplyof consumer credit began to diminish. So it is a very complex issue,looking at the cyclical history.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own perspective and analysis of the cyclical history of consumer borrowing and credit supply. They are not presenting conflicting viewpoints or engaging in a debate with others.


Passage number 26.
MR. BOEHNE. I might just comment on your comment. There issome merit to the argument that credit cards are being used more as aconvenience. The actual numbers escape me at the moment but intalking with several bankers I was told that a very, very highpercentage--an overwhelmingly high percentage of people--do not payoff their credit cards in full when the bill comes. So that wouldsuggest that, yes, there may be some convenience; but there is alsosome debt in the true sense of the word there. So, I would not put awhole lot of weight on that as a reason to downplay the importance ofthe numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting information and sharing an opinion.


Passage number 27.
MR. PRELL. We felt it was sufficiently important to mentionit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 28.
MR. BOEHNE. But not have a chart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Boehne.


Passage number 29.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Keehn without providing any information that would indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 30.
MR. KEEHN. Mike, I have a question with regard to laborproductivity and unit labor costs. With productivity continuing toincrease and with compensation continuing to be fairly level through'86 [in your forecast], I am a little surprised that the unit laborcost doesn't show more improvement than it does or, in fact, come downa bit. If these numbers are right, I'm also a bit surprised that yourexpectation regarding inflation isn't a little higher. Can yourationalize that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that Mr. Keehn has some surprise and skepticism regarding the relationship between labor productivity, unit labor costs, and inflation. He questions why unit labor costs do not show more improvement despite productivity increases and relatively flat compensation levels. He also expresses surprise that the forecasted inflation expectation isn't higher given the mentioned factors. These points signify some degree of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 31.
MR. PRELL. The arithmetic is that we have compensation perhour rising a fraction over 4 percent from here on and we haveproductivity growing at something over one percent on average over thenext six quarters. So, net, you come out with unit labor costs risingsomething over 3 percent on average. It's conceivable that pricemovements would move closer to that of unit labor costs and thus giveus a bit better inflation performance. On the other hand, to theextent that the depreciation of the dollar permits businesses toimprove their margins a bit, that will tend to maintain some spreadover that period. In general, we have things moving fairly closelytogether--a fairly normal cyclical path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential relationship between compensation per hour, productivity, unit labor costs, and inflation, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 32.
MR. PARTEE. Could I just add on here. That is a very sharprise in non-oil import prices on that chart, Mike. Is that an 87/9-10/85percent rate of depreciation of the dollar plus a rate of inflationfor imported prices in foreign currency terms. It seems an awfullysharp increase to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The speaker is adding additional information and expressing his opinion, but there is no clear contention or disagreement stated in the passage.


Passage number 33.
MR. TRUMAN. It is in fact somewhat less. It is an annualrate of something like 4 percent over the four quarters of 1985 andabout 9 percent as it [unintelligible] over the four quarters of 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different rates of growth for different periods without any conflicting viewpoints or contradictory statements.


Passage number 34.
MR. KICHLINE. It is 3 percent in 1985 and 9 percent in 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 35.
MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "Mr. Truman" without any context or further details.


Passage number 36.
 But it is the combination of the dollar--MR. PRELL. The dollar is depreciating at an 8 percent rateand you are getting an additional price effect. You are gettingsomething less than that reflected in import prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 37.
MR. PARTEE. Something less than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee's statement is a straightforward response or clarification.


Passage number 38.
MR. TRUMAN. We assume that only half of the depreciationshows through, in and of itself, to the level of inflation. Looked atanother way: you have an 8 percent decline of the dollar but only 4percent added on to inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating an assumption and presenting a different perspective by providing an alternative way of looking at the numbers.


Passage number 39.
MR. PARTEE. You have about a 12 percent rise [in importprices] over this forecast period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a statistic about import prices without any conflicting viewpoints or opinions being expressed.


Passage number 40.
MR. PRELL. About 12 to 13 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple numerical figure and does not involve any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 41.
MR. TRUMAN. But on a quarterly rate [basis] it is about a 2to 2-1/2 percent rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreements or opposing viewpoints. It simply provides a statement about the quarterly rate.


Passage number 42.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd be surprised if there were 4 percentinflation abroad in the kinds of things they export to the UnitedStates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion or expectation about the likelihood of a 4 percent inflation abroad in the kinds of things that are exported to the United States.


Passage number 43.
MR. PARTEE. A lot of people say profit margins are going todecline on shipments to the United States and this does not seem toallow much for that as the dollar drops.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that some people believe that profit margins will decline on shipments to the United States, and it questions whether the current situation accounts for that possibility.


Passage number 44.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think at this point you can make apretty good case that that could happen, even to the extent ofneutralizing a small 8 percent change in the exchange rate completelyon domestic prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 45.
MR. MARTIN. It would still leave margins very, very wide forthose sellers into the U.S. market--into the most exciting market theycould have market share in. They'd absorb it all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that sellers would have wide margins in the U.S. market, which is seen as an exciting market with a potential for market share growth. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 46.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Going back to this chart that Mr. Keehnreferred to: Is that a 1 or 1-1/4 percent difference between the redline and the compensation line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking for clarification about the difference between two lines on a chart.


Passage number 47.
MR. KEEHN. That is the question that I asked.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in the given passage. It appears to be a simple statement of someone asking a question.


Passage number 48.
MR. PRELL. Between compensation and labor costs. Yes,approximately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker simply states that the difference between compensation and labor costs is approximately known.


Passage number 49.
7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we had a 10 percent decline in oilprices--you have more than that in here--how much does that lower GNPprices. What is oil, 5 percent of the GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 50.
MR. PRELL. A 10 percent decline in oil prices beyond what wehave already built in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there is a 10 percent decline in oil prices beyond what has already been accounted for.


Passage number 51.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, no--a 10 percent decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 52.
MR. PRELL. We estimated that a $2 to $3 a barrel decline inthe oil price could have an effect, over a couple of years, of aboutone-half percent on the consumer price level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an estimate of the potential effect of a decline in oil prices on the consumer price level.


Passage number 53.
MR. KICHLINE. In this forecast, if you were to excludeenergy prices, for example--there are some lags in this--in 1986 youwould get a fixed-weight price index that would rise three-tenthsfaster. So what we have built in amounts to about a quarter of apercent or more impact on prices in the GNP accounting sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing a statement and explanation about the impact of excluding energy prices in a forecast.


Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Excluding energy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that something is being excluded, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 55.
MR. KICHLINE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In order to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage, we need more context as the given statement by Mr. Kichline is insufficient.


Passage number 56.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what Mr. Prell just told me isthat if the energy price goes down that much you would have a slowerrate of increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a statement or explanation without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 57.
MR. PRELL. We have a decline in the oil price of $2.75 abarrel. That is worth three-tenths of a percent in the inflation ratenext year. That's not inconsistent with what I was saying, given thelag structure--about one-half percent for two years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and explaining that the decline in oil price has a certain impact on the inflation rate.


Passage number 58.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot continue to ignore the lack of funding for education in our state. Yes.
Explanation: The passage expresses Mr. Balles' view that there is a lack of funding for education in their state and implies that others are ignoring this issue. The statement suggests a potential disagreement or contention between Mr. Balles and those who are neglecting education funding.


Passage number 59.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I have a question, if I could, toask Jim. With respect to this overall forecast, Jim, how do you thinkit will be affected by the threat--or the prospect, as the case maybe, depending on the standpoint of the viewer--of tax reform.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about how the forecast might be affected by the possibility of tax reform.


Passage number 60.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, we have not made an explicit assumptionin terms of passage of a tax reform proposal. We tried to capture asbest we could in a variety of sectors the expectational effects thatmight be there. Our sense is that in the business fixed investmentarea--and this certainly is supported by the results of the ReserveBanks' poll of corporate executives--they are probably offsetting.There is some incentive for firms perhaps to speed up their plans inthe hopes of being grandfathered, given existing depreciation rules.On the other side, the general issue of uncertainty about a change indepreciation laws might well hold some back. So, net, we don't thinkmuch is going on there. In housing we have a sense that theAdministration's proposal is on balance a negative feature and that itis probably not a large issue in the short term. I would think onaverage uncertainty about changing taxes is probably a small negative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own analysis and opinions, without conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 61.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 62.
MR. STERN. Mike, you made some reference to pent-up demandon the part of the consumer and I think indicated that this probably7/9-10/85was largely behind us. I would like some elaboration on that because,as I recall the [staff's] February presentation, there was someconsiderable discussion about the continuation of pent-up demands--theaverage age of cars on the road, household formation and homeownership, and those kinds of things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 63.
MR. PRELL. I guess I nailed myself. I think we are beingfairly consistent. I showed last time, for example, that the stock ofnon-auto durables for households had fallen off during the early 1980sand had come back considerably through 1984. And in the first half ofthis year we had continued very strong durables spending. So, wethink we're pretty near the historical trend line, if that's anyindicator of those pent-up demands. On the auto side, it is very hardto read. It looks like the age of the auto stock has leveled off.The level of auto sales that we have in the forecast is historicallyquite high. We have almost 11 million units in total this year and wehave it going down to about 10-3/4 million units next year. Whilethat does not imply growth in consumer durables spending, it does meanthat some of the aging of the auto stock will be reversed probably toa slight degree. But we are not seeing any likelihood that suppliesare going to be such that we could have very much stronger autodemand. And given the income growth that we are projecting, we don'tsee the basis for projecting very much stronger spending on consumerdurables. But it is simply a question of how much is behind us. Ourjudgment is that a good bit of that durables pent-up demand is behindus now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their analysis and projections without any contrasting or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 64.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want to return to this price issue for amoment. I cannot resist giving you this little background--and I mayas well do it now--on the record of the Federal Open MarketCommittee's price forecasts over the last three years. In thebeginning of 1983--just taking the central tendency--we estimatedprices at 4-1/2 percent, and we continued with that in July; they cameout at 3-3/4 percent. We started out [in July 1983] projecting pricesfor 1984 at 4-3/4 percent and maintained them there in February; theycame out at 3.6 percent. We started out in July 1984, in our firstforecast [for 1985], projecting 5-3/8 percent and then we lowered itsubstantially [in February].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 65.
MR. BLACK. It's about time for us to miss in the otherdirection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that it is time for someone or something to move or go in a different direction.


Passage number 66.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 67.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I am struck not only by the usualdifficulties of forecasting but by the degree of uncertainty--not totake away from any of the work of our colleagues on the staff here andat the banks. It seemed to me that as you worked through thepresentation and the graphics today the theme could be uncertaintyabout non-oil imports and real GNP. Mr. Truman, in an attempt to bereassuring, said that even if we hit the higher imports--therefore thelower line relative to the GNP--it won't put us in a recession. Thatwas an attempt to be reassuring, which I appreciate. But if youtranslate that into the projection of consumer spending, which overthe last nine quarters has represented about 60 percent of the realGNP chain, you note the uncertainty that the import segment of thatspending presents. I noted in the presentation that that was areasonable comment: that the consumer spending element of the GNP7/9-10/85assumes that the domestic segment of that spending will be somewhathigher. There will be a bigger domestic share. But there again, itseems to me that the uncertainty presents itself.In the business investment area, I have no problem with theinventory projection; but when we get to business fixed investment, Iwonder whether or not the computer and the telecommunications spendingare indeed going to revive or hold, or whether [such spending] reallyhas topped out and the catch-up in that has occurred. It seems to methat there is uncertainty there. There certainly is uncertainty as towhen the nonresidential building industry is going to collapse--notwhether, but when. That certainly applies to the industrialbuildings, which haven't gone anywhere. There are closed plants allover the United States and there is overbuilding of office buildingsand shopping centers. So, that is a question of when, not whether. Idon't have any problem with the rather optimistic housing projectionsbut we certainly can have difficulties in the business fixedinvestment. It just seems to me that uncertainty is practically thetheme of our forecast, necessarily. I am struck by the range [ofuncertainty] that we have to have around any of these lines we'relooking at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin expresses uncertainty and raises questions about the projections and assumptions made in the forecast, particularly regarding consumer spending and business investment. He highlights the potential for a collapse in the nonresidential building industry and expresses doubt about the revival or sustainability of computer and telecommunications spending.


Passage number 68.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement surrounding Governor Wallich.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
MR. WALLICH. In the Greenbook you note that the capacityutilization has fallen by more than 2 percent. Labor capacityutilization--that is, the rate of unemployment--has remained almostflat. Can one put these two things together and say that there isincreasing pressure against price increases: constant pressure againstwage increases and more pressure against industrial price increases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement or contention. Mr. Wallich suggests that the decreasing capacity utilization should put pressure against price increases, but he also notes that labor capacity utilization (unemployment rate) has remained almost flat. This indicates that there may be differing opinions on whether there is increasing pressure against price increases.


Passage number 70.
MR. KICHLINE. It is very clear that there has been adownward trend in capacity utilization and that would continue in thisforecast. Basically, it reflects the strains that are being placedupon manufacturing and mining; there firms have been workingaggressively to cut costs and we have been seeing declines inemployment. Employment is down almost one-quarter million over thelast six months in the manufacturing sector. As you know, we havecontinued to see further growth in service employment. Put together,we have an unemployment rate that has been stuck for virtually thelast year at 7-1/4 percent. Now, we think that 7-1/4 percent is highenough to continue to exert some downward influence on price increasesand we think that would persist over the projection horizon. I thinkit is the case that industrial prices are being constrained in part byimport competition in many areas where firms are experiencingpressure. If they had the opportunity and felt they could get awaywith it and not lose market share, they would try to push some priceincreases through. But they can't. And I don't think in thisprojection horizon that that will change very much. So, both capacityutilization and the aggregate unemployment rate seem to me to be atlevels that would be exerting some downward pressures on priceincreases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting information and their analysis of the current state of capacity utilization, employment, and price increases. There is no indication that any opposing views or arguments are being presented.


Passage number 71.
MR. WALLICH. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only contains the phrase "Thank you," which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 72.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This seems to be an incomplete sentence as it does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 73.
7/9-10/85MR. BOEHNE. I would like to pick up on the uncertainty themethat Governor Martin raised. I think there is uncertainty here; butas I look through the presentation and think about the varioussectors, I can visualize this forecast materializing. I can visualizesomething slower than this; I can even visualize a recession over thistime horizon. But I find it very difficult to visualize sufficientlymore rapid growth than is in this forecast that would jeopardize theoutlook for inflation. As one goes through this, sector by sector,one could make a case for slower consumer growth but it's hard to makea case for booming consumer growth. In the investment sector, I thinkit's the same kind of outlook and it's the same in the governmentsector. The foreign sector may be less of a drag, but it is stillgoing to continue to be a major drag. Even if we got somewhat fastergrowth, it's hard to see that bringing about a significant increase ininflation above this forecast. The major source of inflation in herecomes from the foreign side. Someone made the point earlier, withwhich I agree, that those margins are big and fat in terms of what'sbeing imported into this country. And this is a very lucrativemarket. So I am much less fearful of that kind of import inflationbeing as serious as is [suggested] here.The other point I would make is about the tone that I senseout there. My District has been, I think, one of the most upbeatDistricts in recent quarters. I think that has been true up and downthe Atlantic coast. That area has been more upbeat than other partsof the country. I have sensed a change in that tone. I sensed thebeginning of a change the last time we met; but I sense it even morestrongly now that there is a definite scaling down of the outlook forthe rest of the year and in 1986 by a whole range of businesses. Theonly strong sector in my District now is real estate and construction,and I think that has a definite time limit. Like every place else,there has been weakness in manufacturing, but it has now spread toretailing and to some of the services. So, if you look at theobjective evidence that is here and at the change in the tone--evengranted the uncertainty that is present--it seems to me that there ismore chance that we are going to end up on the softer side of thisforecast than on the too strong side of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. One person is expressing uncertainty about the forecast and visualizing a slower or even recessionary growth, while also expressing doubts about the potential for rapid growth that would jeopardize inflation. However, another person is more optimistic and less fearful about potential import inflation. Additionally, the first person mentions a change in tone and a scaling down of the outlook, indicating a difference in perspective from the second person who sees the real estate and construction sector as strong.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 74.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make another comment about theseforecasts [by Committee members]. If that is true, it is notreflected in the forecasts given in preparation for this meeting.They are almost invariably higher than what the staff is forecasting,sometimes substantially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement between the committee members' forecasts and the forecasts made by the staff. The committee members' forecasts are consistently higher than the staff's forecasts.


Passage number 75.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, Mr. Chairman, sometimes those forecastshave a lot more staff input than other input.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. Mr. Boehne is simply stating that sometimes the forecasts have more staff input than other input.


Passage number 76.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd just make that observation. Also,they are [unintelligible]. Now, one thing may be that the staff isassuming a lower second quarter than other people may have beenassuming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making an observation and offering a possible explanation for a potential difference in the second quarter assumption.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 77.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I fall into that camp that you justdescribed, and it wasn't staff input. I put in a rather higherforecast, but this chart show gives me the uneasy feeling that we areabout to stall. The problem, as I see it, is in these charts thattend to be toward the bottom of the page. As I go through theforecast here, for example, you have a very sizable rise in the7/9-10/85multifamily vacancy rate and an increase in the mortgage delinquencyrate; and I think that starts to raise some questions about whetherresidential construction will be all that high. I agree with Pres; Iam surprised that your vacancy rate for office buildings is only alittle over ten percent since I think there is hardly a place in theColdwell Bankers survey that that's low. Maybe New York City is soheavily weighted that it brings it down. In any event, it is just aquestion of when there will be a collapse in office building ratherthan whether.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing disagreement with the forecast and raises doubts about the accuracy of the charts and the projected residential construction and office building vacancy rates.


Passage number 78.
MR. KICHLINE. Governor Partee, the scale is on the left.It's the red line and the red scale, so it's about 15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of information about the scale being on the left and representing about 15 percent.


Passage number 79.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am going to make a modest proceduralsuggestion. In the future, when you present a set of charts, youmight number them so that we can refind them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply suggests a procedural suggestion for numbering charts to make them easier to reference in the future.


Passage number 80.
MR. PRELL. It probably has risen considerably further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement in the passage, "It probably has risen considerably further," does not express any disagreement or contention. Instead, it presents a speculative view without any conflicting opinions or debates.


Passage number 81.
MR. PARTEE. I should have, I suppose, done the colorcoordination and gone to the left, but I didn't. So I see that youhave a vacancy rate of more like 15 or 16 percent, which is a veryhigh vacancy rate. One hears of concessions occurring all over thecountry. I am somewhat inclined to agree that consumers have beenoverspending; their debt has risen sharply and delinquency rates areup some in that area. You considerably restock the car inventoriesand durable goods inventories and, therefore, that looks sort of high.Even for the poor state and local governments, who have been spendingat a very modest rate, your chart at the bottom shows their surplusdropping off to nothing in the projection period. So I tend to getthe impression looking through this--and I realize it is verydangerous--that a stall is quite conceivable, particularly if onetakes Mr. Truman's adverse line on imports, which is closer to what Iwould have expected than the one that the staff projected as theircentral tendency. I tend to be persuaded by this presentation thatthe economy is really pretty weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 82.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since there is no passage provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 83.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, you may rule this next comment outof order; I'm experienced in that. But I would like to raise aquestion about the principal assumptions. I am aware that it isnecessary for the staff in its presentation of materials to make anassumption about [money growth for] the rest of 1985 and for 1986.And it is quite understandable to use an M1 growth of 8-1/2 percentfor the first period and 5-1/2 percent for 1986 to hit some kind ofmiddle point. Likewise, it is very understandable to use theassumption of level interest rates out through 1986. But given thoseassumptions and the others, all of which seem to be internallyconsistent, that produces then 2-1/2 percent real growth. As to theChairman's comment that the numbers in the FOMC's projections tend tobe a bit higher, I think that goes back to the Chairman's informalpoll here in March, in which as I remember the question he asked was:Is 3 percent real growth adequate. As I recall the results--I have arather fuzzy memory--there wasn't anyone here, among the voting ornon-voting participants, who felt that 3 percent was an adequate realrate of growth. Well, if 3 percent wasn't, is 2-1/2 percent adequatefor this period. Or shouldn't we in subsequent deliberations--the7/9-10/85Chairman hasn't ruled me out of order yet--consider the rate of growthand the level interest rates as something that needs to be debated andsome decisions made, which normally would be made in our procedureshere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 84.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that we will inevitably get tothat. You are talking about the assumptions. I would have wishedearlier that $50 billion [in deficit cuts] might turn out to bereasonable, or in my wildest thoughts, low. I must say right now thatI think it is much too high for an assumption as to how much thebudget is going to be cut in 1986. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they think $50 billion in deficit cuts is too high of an assumption for budget cuts in 1986.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 85.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think there is one element ofuncertainty that possibly overshadows these other uncertainties thatothers have mentioned and that is the issue that Steve outlined in hisvery fine paper: the question as to whether we have had this permanentone-time drop in velocity of money or not. The truth of the matter isthat none of us knows. I am inclined to think that we have had someof that; but if we have not, then I think there is a definite riskthat with this much money, we could have more growth than is beingprojected. I think that's the key to the uncertainty to all of thisand I don't know how to find an answer to that one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black acknowledges that there is uncertainty regarding whether there has been a permanent one-time drop in velocity of money. He personally believes that there has been some drop, but he also states that if there hasn't been, there is a definite risk of more growth than projected. This disagreement revolves around the uncertainty of the velocity of money and its potential impact on economic growth.


Passage number 86.
MR. PARTEE. A permanent one-time drop in velocity would bethe second occasion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply states that a permanent one-time drop in velocity would be the second occasion.


Passage number 87.
MR. BLACK. The second permanent one in very few years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only presents a statement by Mr. Black, without any explicit indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 88.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any other comments on thebusiness situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone else has additional comments regarding the business situation.


Passage number 89.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides the title of Vice Chairman Corrigan, without any context or information that indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 90.
 The forecast that I put in--I haveto say it was my own and not my staff's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the way it's supposed to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any disagreement or contention. It explains that the forecast was made by the author and not their staff, which is the correct way it should be done.


Passage number 91.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Like Governor Partee's, it is verymuch on the high side in terms of what I see as the consensus for1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker's view is very much in line with Governor Partee's view, which they consider to be on the high side.


Passage number 92.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My comparison was for 1985, but I guessit's also true--well, less so, for 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is acknowledging that their previous comparison was for 1985, but they are also stating that it is still true, although to a lesser extent, for 1986. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 93.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In looking at the six quartersahead, my forecast is on the high side. Arithmetically, it has thatresult because of a bunch of small differences in net exports andgovernment purchases. But the big difference is in housing where Ihave basically gone with about 2 million units in housing starts, andthat accounts for about 3/4 to almost a full percentage pointdifference in real growth. I came to that view with some considerablehesitation; nevertheless, I do think that there is something to theview that pent-up demand for conventional owner-occupied housing--notsecond residences such as Vail, Colorado condominiums--is still prettystrong in a framework within which financing opportunities lookdistinctly better.On the investment side, I don't have any real insight exceptto say that in recent weeks I have spoken to three CEOs of major-10-7/9-10/85computer electronics companies about this question: Do we see a realturnaround in high-tech investment or some kind of short-run glitch.Their opinion is that it is more likely a short-run glitch than anykind of real weakness of a permanent nature that is setting in. Idon't think it is going to make a great upside difference, but I thinkit does say something about the relative downside risks to theinvestment sector itself.I am influenced in the outlook also by the fall in interestrates that we have seen; and while I am certainly by no stretch of theimagination a monetarist, we sure as heck have a lot of liquidity inthe economy by any definition that I can think of. Having said allthat, I would have to say in terms of my own forecast that I wouldquickly recognize that the risks are on the down side. I think thefinancial sector presents its own risks; the commercial real estatesector that Chuck mentioned is one that worries me enormously at thispoint. Indeed, when you really look through the problem of thedynamics in trying to reverse the trade balance in any significantway, it is really tough sledding. We did a little exercise thatprobably isn't much better than the little exercises other people do--this is not built into the forecast--but even if we quickly gotsomething as large as a 15 percent one-time downward change in theexchange rate, the implications of that for the trade balance overthis six-quarter period are really quite modest, to put it mildly.So, while one can perhaps argue with some conviction that the rate ofdeterioration in the trade balance should moderate and might even comeclose to stabilizing, producing any meaningful reversal--particularlyin the face of these very, very large profit margins of foreignsuppliers--is going to be enormously difficult. The long-runimplications of that in terms of the current account, in terms of thecapital flows from abroad, and in terms of the ultimate vulnerabilityto a big shock in the exchange rate, seem to be that it will get a lotworse as time goes on. I certainly don't have an answer as to what todo; but I am more impressed with how difficult it is to get ourselvesout of the quagmire.On the price side, my own forecast is somewhere around themiddle or a shade on the low side. I basically have not assumed thata modest decline in the dollar will produce any further pricepressures. In the face of that, the reason I have a somewhat higherforecast of price increases relative to, say, unit labor costs, isthat I do have a larger spread between unit labor costs and pricesbuilt into my own mental arithmetic than the Board staff does. Andthat simply is a recognition of my own view that the pressure ondomestic producers to seize every little opportunity, every littlecrack in the window, to pass along cost increases in the form of priceincreases, even in the current labor market capacity utilizationsetting, is just so powerful. That is about where I am, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a personal forecast and analysis given by the speaker.


Passage number 94.
MR. RICE. You see the risks on the down side of the staffforecast or the down side of your own forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone sees risks on the down side of the staff forecast or their own forecast.


Passage number 95.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, the down side of my ownforecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not discuss or mention any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply discusses the downside of the author's own forecast.


Passage number 96.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided any specific passage to analyze for contention or disagreement. Could you please provide the relevant passage?


Passage number 97.
7/9-10/85MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess I am the optimist inthis crowd. The degree of pessimism I have heard around the tablesurprises me. I think that what we have been seeing in recent monthsis fairly typical of what we see toward the end of the second year ofexpansion: housing has run out of gas, insofar as an upturn, and wehave had an inventory adjustment. Go back to years like 1962, forexample. I remember; I was at the Treasury. There was real concernthat we were going into recession. For some reason, after the Cubanmissile crisis, consumers decided to up their spending. Maybe theywere happy to be still alive. I don't know what the connection was,but the recession of '62 disappeared very rapidly. I am encouraged bysigns that I see in the financial markets in response to what we havedone already. There is strength in the stock market; I am veryimpressed at the response in the long-term bond market, where we havegotten more bang than I expected we would get. And so far as theconsumer sector is concerned, the Michigan Survey of consumerconfidence, which had been tending to show some deterioration in thelast six months, turned up again pretty substantially in the month ofJune. So, it just seems to me that the level of pessimism around hereis a little beyond what the situation merits, and that is one reasonour forecast is significantly higher than the Board staff's forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, expresses his optimism and disagreement with the level of pessimism expressed by others. He provides examples and evidence to support his viewpoint.


Passage number 98.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to accurately determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 99.
MR. KEEHN. Well, without getting into the issue of whetheror not 2-1/2 percent growth is enough or whether or not we can doanything about it, our forecast is quite parallel to the Boardstaff's--a touch on the higher side. The unevenness that we have hadin the District continues, and at this point there is no reason toexpect any fundamental change in that between now and the end of thecurrent cycle, particularly in light of the high value of the dollar.Many of the companies that are in the heavy capital area really don'tthink that they are going to get back to the levels of 1978 and 1979.But there are other parts of the economy--autos, for example--that aredoing well and as I talk to people about next year they continue tothink they are going to have a good year next year. Residentialbuilding is going to be strong. Many retail people think that thisyear will continue to be good and that next year will be good. Thereare some risks out there. I won't belabor the agricultural problem,at least at this point. But I do think that as we look at it, theopportunity for a continued expansion at about the rate that isforecast is entirely reasonable. We are doing this against thebackground of a highly stimulative fiscal policy and a monetary policythat I think is at least accommodative and, as a consequence, at thispoint the risk of a recession or any significant downside run from theforecast is somewhat unlikely. Therefore, I agree with Mr. Morristhat the opportunity is for a continued expansion, perhaps at aboutthe rate that is suggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the forecast and believes that there is opportunity for continued expansion at the forecasted rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 100.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a forecast very close to thestaff's on real GNP; you're quite a lot higher on prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that the forecast for real GNP is very close to the staff's, suggesting agreement. However, it is mentioned that the speaker is "quite a lot higher" on prices, indicating a difference or disagreement in their views.


Passage number 101.
MR. KEEHN. Right. If we have any bias, it's that theinflation rate will be higher than the staff is suggesting. Our GNPnumber in terms of real growth is just a touch on the higher side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a slight bias or opinion about the potential inflation rate being higher than what the staff is suggesting.


Passage number 102.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why are you pessimistic on prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking for the reason behind someone's pessimism on prices. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 103.
-12-7/9-10/85MR. KEEHN. Well, I think the exchange rate situation islikely to turn around a little; it seems to me that there are someunderlying pressures there that will add to prices. And, frankly, itdoes seem to me that we have a monetary policy that provides abackground in which the opportunity for price increases is reallythere. Over the last two or three months we have put a lot of moneyinto the system and, if history is any guide, that ultimately ought toresult in a higher level of prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the viewpoint of Mr. Keen on the exchange rate situation and monetary policy.


Passage number 104.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only presents the name "Mr. Stern."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 105.
MR. STERN. Well, I agree with the more positive tone thatseems to be developing. Our forecast is for more rapid growth thanthe staff has for both this year and next. While it differs invarious bits and pieces, I think the critical difference is in theconsumer sector, in consumer spending. Underlying that is the factthat I am impressed by some of the things that we have already talkedabout: the wealth effect stemming largely from the run-up of stockprices; the effect stemming from declines in interest rates; the pent-up demand that may or may not be satisfied. My own view is that Idoubt that the last couple quarters have gone all that far ineliminating a lot of that [demand]. So I come out on the morepositive side, largely because of those things and because I thinkthat we have been reasonably accommodative as well.In the District, there seems to be very little that's new.The two-tiered economy continues with a vengeance. The one thing thatis new, and does concern me, is that the preponderance of theanecdotal evidence does seem to be becoming more negative, and it'snot confined entirely to agriculture and mining. If it were confinedto those sectors, I would certainly expect it and believe it. Butsome of that negative tone in the anecdotal evidence, I think, is abit of something that feeds on itself. You hear about layoffs inhigh-tech companies or one or two of the computer firms and you getthe impression that employment is dropping, net; and yet you look atthe data and [don't see it]. I know of at least one firm where, yes,they have laid off some people in their peripheral operations buttheir total employment is up because they have a main-frame operationthat is doing very well. What gets covered and what gets commented onare the layoffs; and what gets lost is the growth that is occurringelsewhere. So I am inclined to temper that somewhat more negativetone to the anecdotal evidence a bit, based on the numbers. Theunemployment rate in the Twin Cities is 3.8 percent. Everywhere yougo there are help wanted signs up. That [area] accounts for about 1/4of the people in the entire District and certainly more than that interms of non-agricultural economic activity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Stern agrees with the more positive tone that is developing, while also acknowledging the negative tone in the anecdotal evidence. He argues that the negative tone may be exaggerated and that the data shows growth in other areas. This disagreement suggests some contention or difference of opinion.


Passage number 106.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
MR. BALLES. Well, with regard to the outlook, our staff isalso somewhat more optimistic than the Board staff, starting with thesecond half of this year and running all through 1986. We wouldexpect, starting with the quarter we are now in, that the growth rateof real GNP would be something over 3 percent and that 1986 would comein at 3.4 percent. Certainly, we are not great optimists becausesomewhat over 3 percent isn't exactly something to write home about interms of rates of growth, but at least it is not quite as bearish asthe Board staff's forecast, which may still turn out to be correct. I-13-7/9-10/85am just giving you what our staff thinks. The differences, with whichI concur, seem to be that our staff is expecting a somewhat strongerpicture both in consumption as well as in business capital spending,in large part because of the lagged effects of lower interest ratesand greater availability of money and credit. Time will tell whetherthis modestly more optimistic view is right or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, mentions that his staff is more optimistic than the Board staff regarding the outlook for the economy. He believes that the growth rate of real GNP will be higher than what the Board staff predicts. This shows disagreement between the two groups regarding the future economic growth.


Passage number 108.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 109.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, our forecast is prettymuch the same as the Board staff's; I don't know whether that puts mein the optimistic or the pessimistic camp. I guess I am a littleconfused because I think that there is more uncertainty in the economynow than we have seen in a while. Talking to people around myDistrict, I sense that while the situation continues to be pretty goodin everything except the manufacturing and agricultural areas, thereis a perceptible change of attitude toward more uncertainty and moreapprehension of a downturn. I cannot quantify why that is takingplace, but that is clearly a sentiment that is coming through to me.If anything, as I indicated before, I am concerned about the growth ofdebt and delinquencies. I also think, if we are going to face lowercapacity utilization in the economy, that we could very well get lessbusiness-fixed investment than has been forecast. So I think the riskis perhaps on the down side. I would be surprised if economic growthturned out to be much higher than my forecast and the Board staff'sforecast. On the inflation side, again, we are not terribly far off.Frankly, I don't see--outside of an abrupt change in the exchangevalue of the dollar--where inflation is going to come from in the nearterm; so my concern about inflation has abated to some extent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, acknowledges that his forecast aligns with the Board staff's and expresses uncertainty and concern about the economy. He also states that he does not see any immediate sources of inflation.


Passage number 110.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided to analyze for contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 111.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am glad to be at ornear the end of the ones to speak because I was a little depressedwith the earlier conversations, and I was delighted to hear FrankMorris and others come forth with a little more optimistic view. Ourforecast is very close to the staff's forecast. My staff wouldsuggest that the risks are more on the down side than the up side andI guess I don't totally share that view. It seems to me that the two-tiered economy that has been spoken about--not only in Gary Stern'sDistrict but in mine and others that are predominantly agriculturaland mining-related--is certainly there. But looking on a nationallevel, I am more inclined to believe that we have experienced a pausein the first and second quarters. With what the Federal Reserve hasdone in conjunction with the very stimulative fiscal package, it wouldseem to me that we could look forward to some better growth in thelatter half of this year and well into 1986.But I don't want to minimize the impact of the two-tieredeconomy. It seems to me that one of the greatest risks that we mayface is the instability in the financial system. As Jerry has noted,there is a lot of liquidity; but when you look at agriculture andmining and the prospects for a further drop in oil prices, whichimpacts the producers in the United States largely in the Texas,Oklahoma, and Wyoming areas, the prospects for financial instabilitythat can throw this forecast askew seem to me to be very great. Andthat is one of my greater concerns--not whether 3 percent is right or2-1/2 percent is satisfactory, but what may happen in these other-14-7/9-10/85areas, particularly in the financial area. I am not at all convincedthat what we have done up to now isn't about enough to stabilize thesituation; to do more may translate into prices rather than stabilityto that system. In other words, I am not sure that the Committee cando a lot to fend off those kinds of uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the staff's view that the risks are more on the down side than the up side. They believe that the Federal Reserve's actions and the fiscal package will lead to better growth. However, they also express concern about the two-tiered economy and the potential instability in the financial system. They are not convinced that the Committee can do much to address these uncertainties.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 112.
MR. PARTEE. Would you think things are still deterioratingin agriculture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is a disagreement or contention about the condition of agriculture. The speaker asks if the person being addressed thinks that things are still deteriorating in agriculture, indicating a difference in opinion or perspective.


Passage number 113.
MR. GUFFEY. Indeed they are, Chuck. As a matter of fact, ifI may, let me give you some facts. As far as the crops, wheat isbeing harvested now and is largely out in the mid-section, going onnorth. But the commodity prices are falling. For example, thecommodity price of corn was some 21 percent below the price of a yearago; the price of soy beans is down 15 percent from a year earlier;winter wheat, which is just now being harvested, is down 9 to 10percent from a year earlier; fat cattle are down 18 percent from ayear earlier. It's these falling commodity prices that are worseningwhat has happened in the farm credit area, which has been fairlystable over the last month or two. You haven't heard much about it.It's simply because they are in the field and the real crisis isn'tgoing to surface until the fall. But my own view is that that crisishasn't passed and is indeed going to worsen as fall and winterapproach. We are going to find that growing back in spades in thefinancial sector, particularly in agricultural banks and the FarmCredit System.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting facts and offering their own opinion about the situation.


Passage number 114.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin, you can tell us about theenergy business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply proposes Mr. Boykin to provide information about the energy business.


Passage number 115.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, [when Roger] was talking aboutcommodities, he didn't mention cotton. We grow a lot of cotton downour way, but the price of cotton is down from 70.6 cents a pound inMay of last year to 49 cents a pound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing additional information or a different perspective by mentioning that cotton was not mentioned in the previous discussion and highlighting the decrease in price.


Passage number 116.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All those inflationary pressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit mention of disagreement or contention in the passage. It simply mentions "inflationary pressures" without providing any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 117.
MR. PARTEE. That's a big drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's a big drop" is a simple observation that does not involve any disagreement or debate.


Passage number 118.
MR. BOYKIN. That is a big drop. On the energy side, the rigcount numbers were down about 25 percent from a year ago, which isfairly significant. I noticed in the staff's forecast [an oil pricedrop from] $26 to $24 a barrel. The talk among the bankers--those whoare lending in the energy business--is that they think they couldmanage fairly well down to $25 a barrel or possibly $24 a barrel.Now, last year they were saying that was extreme--that they'd have ahard time going down that far. Now they have decided that they couldmanage a little better going down there. But the energy side is very,very uncertain. My own view is probably a little more optimistic thanthe Board staff's. I am inclined to line up more with Frank Morris; Idon't know whether it's just out of habit. Our problem is that we areadjusting mentally--or I am adjusting--to what's happening in the restof the country. We are about where the rest of the country is, whichputs us in a rather unusual position--at least for the last ten yearsor so.I think a lot has been done in terms of interest rates and interms of money growth. I personally don't have a great deal of-15-7/9-10/85concern that we are going to fall into a recession. What is anacceptable rate of growth. I know we are not debating that, but 3percent or so certainly by historical standards has been close to thelong-run trend. It seems to me that, given where policy has been, theBoard staff's forecast is reasonable. As I say, I'd probably put itslightly higher and I think most of the reasons already have beenstated, one way or another. I still have some confidence in theconsumer; I have confidence on the housing side.Now, commercial real estate construction I obviously have alot of concerns about. All I know is that I still see holes beingdug--figuratively speaking, probably. I hear about the concessionsthat are being made in real estate. We have been sampling the localmarket because we are going to have to lease some more space. Atleast on the first go-round, it doesn't seem that optimistic when wetalk to them. Now, we haven't gotten down to horse trading, so that'sprobably different. I remember we were looking for space this timelast year and we will be for a number of years. [Laughter.] Lasttime, I made three final decisions. When you talk the first time,everybody tells you what their deal is; then when you tell them youare not going to take it and you are ready to take another deal all ofa sudden they say: "Yes, but you haven't heard the best deal." Wefinally had to shut it off because we had to go ahead and make acommitment. I do agree that there are going to be some seriousproblems. But at least in terms of construction activity, it iscontinuing to show some strength. If you talk to an individualdeveloper, he will tell you his project is all right: There is a lotof equity in it and his firm is prepared for the long term and he isworried about the fellow down the street. And I haven't run into thefellow down the street yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What equity in it. The equity is a loanfrom the bank. We have a strategy for you, Mr. Boykin: You are goingto take one of those deals where you get three years called "freerent" and then we'll let you build a building three years from now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is providing information and suggesting a strategy to Mr. Boykin without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or disagreements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 120.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree that there seems to besome conflict between the anecdotal evidence and the figures as youtry to make some sense out of them. On the anecdotal side, most ofthe people I talk to and most of what I read suggest that the economyis a lot weaker than one would expect. On the other hand, trying tomake some sense out of the figures, one gets the impression of lessweakness and some improvement, at least in the short run. While myforecast is on the weak side of the range, I should explain that itdoes hide what I see going on between [now and year-end]. My forecastwas influenced by what happened in the first part of this year: thefirst two quarters of the year came in very low. But in the secondhalf of the year, I see the economy expanding at least at a 3 percentrate and maybe as high as 3-1/2 percent. The reason for that is that,looking at the numbers, it appears to me that it is hard to find anylarge component that is going to be weak for the next six months. Thebusiness fixed investment outlook is pretty good for the rest of theyear. Business plans seem to be pretty firm, from 9 to 10 percentnominal. Despite the overbuilding in office buildings, the numbersfor non-residential construction are strong and contracts for non-residential construction seem to be holding up their strength. Soapparently growth in that area is going to continue at least foranother six months. And I am not at all convinced that consumption-16-7/9-10/85expenditures are going to slow down to the extent that the staffforecasts; I am not entirely convinced that the pent-up demand hasbeen entirely satisfied. There has been a very strong increase inemployment in the first half of this year and that may well influenceconsumption expenditures through the rest of the year, so consumptionmay well hold up higher than the staff forecasts. So, my forecast isupbeat for the second half of the year. Averaging it with the firsthalf of the year brings it out on the low side. And this strength inthe second half, in my view, carries over into the first half of 1986.But then as 1986 proceeds, I [would expect] increasing weaknessbecause (1) the expansion matures, and (2) as time goes on consumptionexpenditures are more likely to fall in line with disposable income,which has been declining and probably will continue [to decline].Eventually, non-residential construction is going to peter out as wemove toward the second half of 1986. And in the absence of anystimulus--and of course the net new fiscal stimulus gets weaker andweaker as time goes on--it is hard to see where stimulus for continuedgrowth along a 3-1/2 percent path will come from, especially in thelast half of 1986. So, I would expect the economy to be expanding inthe 3 percent range in the first half of 1986 and petering out verynoticeably in the second half. Again, averaging the two halves, 1986comes out low as well. So, my overall forecast for 1985 and 1986looks low, but it does mask fairly credible performance for the secondhalf of this year and the first half of next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is a conflict between the anecdotal evidence and the figures when trying to make sense of the economy. They state that most people they talk to and the things they read suggest that the economy is weaker than expected, but when looking at the figures, there seems to be less weakness and some improvement. The speaker's forecast is on the weak side, but they believe that the economy will expand and that consumption expenditures will hold up higher than the staff forecasts. However, they also acknowledge that there may be increasing weakness in 1986 and it is hard to see where stimulus for continued growth will come from. Overall, there is a difference in interpretation and outlook for the economy.


Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to suggest that everybody hasto defend their differences in forecasts here; they are all in a verynarrow range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a narrow range of forecasts and it is not necessary for everyone to defend their differences.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 122.
MR. WALLICH. Having listened to the forecasts, which is theprincipal function, I do think that we haven't done a great deal interms of evaluation of what these forecasts mean. The rate of growth,at 2-1/2 to 3 percent, is not great. It's not going to get us back tofull employment. But it's at about our long-term potential; at thatrate we are going to continue to expand more or less with a constantrate of unemployment. The rate of unemployment of a little over 7percent is not good, but it is not very far from what most peoplethink is the so-called natural rate of unemployment, the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment. We can gain maybe 1/2 or3/4 of a point to 6-1/2 percent or so, but that is all. Now, the onenumber that I think is totally unsatisfactory is a 3-1/2 to 4 percentrate of inflation. That is quite abnormal in terms of the historicalinflation level of the American economy. It's abnormal in terms ofthe inflation levels that are tolerated in industrial economiesabroad, if they regard themselves successful in this respect. I thinkthe inflation rate cannot be accepted as satisfactory--inflationsimply defined as a continuation of a going rate with the going ratebeing, in effect, acceptable. I think the main shortfall in thesethree variables we are looking at--the rate of growth, the level ofunemployment, and the rate of inflation--is the rate of inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, disagrees with the rate of inflation and believes it is unsatisfactory. He argues that the inflation rate cannot be accepted as satisfactory and that it is abnormal compared to historical levels and other successful economies abroad.


Passage number 123.
MR. PARTEE. A lot of people would say unemployment, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention regarding the topic of unemployment. It simply states that "a lot of people would say unemployment."


Passage number 124.
MR. WALLICH. There isn't much to be gained; unemployment ishigh in structural terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is not expressing any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating a fact or observation about the high unemployment rate in structural terms.


Passage number 125.
MR. PARTEE. Well, if it came down to 6-1/2 percent, we wouldhave a very considerable increase in the number of employed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a hypothetical situation about the impact of a 6-1/2 percent increase in employment.


Passage number 126.
-17-7/9-10/85MR. RICE. I agree with you, Henry, but what do you do aboutit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses agreement with Henry's statement and seeks a solution or course of action.


Passage number 127.
MR. WALLICH. Well, we're evaluating risks. The risks on thedown side seem rather impressive; the possibility of a breaking-out onthe up side in real terms doesn't strike me as very likely.Nevertheless, given the unsatisfactory inflation rate, I think weshould not back away from the risks on the down side in order to get alower rate of inflation--or particularly avoid getting a higher rate[of inflation], which is likely to be the consequence of aiming for ahigher rate of growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich acknowledges the risks on the downside and expresses skepticism about the possibility of a significant uptick in real terms. However, he also suggests that the risks on the downside should not be ignored in order to achieve a lower inflation rate or avoid a higher rate of inflation.


Passage number 128.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The comment made about the budget earlieris reinforced by the fact that I now read that Mr. Stockman hasresigned as Director of the Office of Management and Budget. It's notencouraging to think that we'll have striking new vigor toward budgetcuts. We are going to have a difficult arithmetic job, if nothingelse, to explore everybody's ideas and where all of these targetsshould be. There are umpteen different variations; I am a bitconcerned about the time. I think perhaps we ought to spend time thisevening having Mr. Axilrod explain to us all about the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It primarily expresses concern and uncertainty about the budget and the need for further explanation.


Passage number 129.
MR. AXILROD. I'm afraid I may not shed any more light thanwas in the 40 or so pages of various documents dealing with thisproblem that were circulated to the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 130.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Your report] might be more condensed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 131.
MR. AXILROD. It will be more condensed. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the information will be more condensed in the appendix.


Passage number 132.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that we should not try to get intoa discussion of just where to set these targets for the short-runpolicy at the moment, given the time [of day]. But I think we have alittle more time for any questions or comments people want to makeabout the kinds of issues that were raised in the paper that Stevedistributed and touched upon in his comments as a kind of aphilosophic background to the discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's opinion and invites questions or comments on the topic at hand.


Passage number 133.
MR. WALLICH. Could I ask a question, not having read thepaper as carefully as I should have, because I just came back. Theprincipal conclusion seems to be that we have had another shift in thedemand function for money, that we have no strong reason to think thatit will move back, and that we should in a sense let by-gones be by-gones. My question is: How likely is it that this was an episode suchas we have had at times in the past and that from here on out therewill be a higher degree of stability in the relationship of M1 to theeconomy--not necessarily at the old velocity, but maybe at a velocitythat is rising less rapidly than before. Is it likely that we mighthave that so that we could go back to targeting M1 at moderate rates,or would we have to anticipate continued or repeated incidents of thiskind that would make the variable quite useless.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 134.
MR. AXILROD. Well, as a minor point, I think you have toanticipate it in the third quarter, given what has happened. It's notimpossible to have it, but it would take a very sharp drop in demanddeposits in July or August to produce a third quarter that isn't ashigh as the roughly 10 percent that we are projecting. That assumes 57/9-10/85or 5-1/2 percent growth, month by month. So I think you have toanticipate an unusual looking third quarter in terms of velocityunless the GNP comes roaring back. Over the long run, GovernorWallich, it is true that the paper implies that this could be a one-time drop in velocity. It didn't say for certain, obviously. Andthat was really on the assumption that the present level of nominalinterest rates would not be reversed and that inflation wouldn'toccur, which would bring them up--or in effect that the economy wasn'tso strong that that would drive them up either way. In that case,there would be no reason to reverse this velocity. We would go backto trend and not to 5 or 6 or 7 percent velocity to offset that. Idon't think that the trend will occur if you did that until the fourthor first quarter or some time like that; it wouldn't occur right away.But there are two other points I would make, one on bothsides. One is that it is not absolutely clear that this present levelof real and nominal rates will be sustained on the high side. Itcould very well drop; it is hard to think of real rates of return ashigh as these present real market rates seem to be. On the otherside, however, we have done various charts using various lags relatingmoney to GNP showing that they correspond reasonably well; and we havehad times of large money growth followed by large GNP growth. Thatdid happen in the 1982-1983 period, but we were operating at such alow level of the economy that we had more in real GNP and very littlein price. Now we are operating at a much higher level of capacity, asyou mentioned or implied. If this were going to be followed by aburst, one would expect it to have a little real effect but a littlemore price effect. So having looked at those charts, I felt somewhatambivalent. I would not in any way want to think that it was anabsolute dead certainty that we had a one-time drop in velocity thatwas not going to be at least somewhat reversed. I just don't feelthat certain about it in my own mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any significant contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting different perspectives and considerations on the topic but does not indicate any strong disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 135.
MR. BLACK. Just a question of clarification, Steve. Ithought at first that you were referring to a shift in the demand formoney, but as I read it more I thought you were talking about amovement on the existing demand curve for money, weren't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply seeking clarification and confirming his understanding of Steve's point.


Passage number 136.
MR. AXILROD. That right. The models don't explaineverything. In fact, if you read the residuals, you could say toyourself that there's a 2 or 3 percentage point upward shift in demandfor money. But I wasn't stressing that. I was stressing the impactof the interest rate decline itself in relation to the elasticity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their perspective on the models and the impact of interest rate decline.


Passage number 137.
MR. BOEHNE. I have just a few comments. One is that Ithought the paper was excellent; it was very thought provoking. Ihave a couple of questions. As I read it, I came away feeling thatyour conclusions were more tentative than Henry implied--that you hada feeling and a fair amount of circumstantial evidence that there issomething wrong with the relationship of M1 and the economy, but thatis was fairly difficult to prove that with any great certainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing his positive views about the paper and is seeking clarification by asking questions.


Passage number 138.
MR. AXILROD. That's what I was trying to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses an intention to clarify their previous statement.


Passage number 139.
MR. BOEHNE. My other comment is that you based a good bit ofwhat you are thinking [on the view] that we are moving from one levelof real interest rates down to another level and that that isaffecting velocity, which is quite plausible. Is there some symmetry-19-7/9-10/85to this on the other side. In other words, in the 1970s and early1980s when real interest rates were rising did we also see movementsin the opposite direction in velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question posed by Mr. Boehne regarding whether there is a symmetry in the movement of velocity during the rise of real interest rates in the 1970s and early 1980s.


Passage number 140.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I am not sure it looked that dramatic. Ireally haven't checked it out in the detail that you are suggesting.We saw it to a minor degree in late 1983: the movement in velocity wassomewhat higher because of the interest rate increase, and it wasrather consistent with what our models were saying. If you look overthe whole postwar period, where I feel a little more secure than themodels, we tend to believe that about a point or more of the trendvelocity over that period of 3 points or so is explained by the risein interest rates over that period. They enter the model with thosesorts of effects. In any particular period we'd be off because of themodel misses and the shifts. But I can't really respond to the veryparticular period of the 1970s and early 1980s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are not sure about the specific details being suggested and that they haven't thoroughly checked the information. They then go on to discuss their beliefs and findings based on their models and observations.


Passage number 141.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, my main point is not such a specificquestion. It is that it would strengthen the argument, I think, ifthere were some symmetry to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement without any opposing views or conflicts.


Passage number 142.
MR. AXILROD. I think there probably is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage as it is a personal opinion stated by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 143.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The model is symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 144.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, the model is symmetrical. I was trying tothink of history. The basic issue is that if you go from 10 percentprice inflation to zero and the interest rates go from 13 to 3 percentconsistently, you would expect a big increase in the willingness tohold cash. The question is how to satisfy those cash holders who nowfeel that the opportunity cost is such--3 points instead of [13]--thatthey might as well hold cash. It seems to be happening lumpily as wephase down. So, if we ever get to price stability--it may not happenbut if we ever did--I would expect another instance or two of thiskind as the nominal rates dropped down, unless in 1986 when we free upthe ceiling rates on NOWs and super NOWs we get just parallelmovements in those rates. They won't ever be just exactly parallelrates because of reserve requirements. But if you had actuallyparallel movements in the offering rates and the market rates, youmight not get this phenomenon. It's that possibility that makes usthink the interest elasticity will become less as you go on, so thatthis phenomenon might not be so pronounced when you get into thatperiod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own thoughts and observations about the potential effects of decreasing interest rates on the willingness to hold cash.


Passage number 145.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer, first I would like to take theopportunity to welcome you to these deliberations. We look forward tosome clarification of all these doubts that others have expressed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage reflects a positive and welcoming tone, expressing an expectation for clarification and resolution of doubts.


Passage number 146.
MR. MELZER. Thank you. Steve, I had a question in terms ofcomparing the present situation to the 1983 period--where we not onlyhad a decline in rates but also had the account innovation--whetherthat represents a substantive difference in terms of the analysis. Iwould think, certainly in terms of the perceptions of a rebasing, thatit might be more difficult at least from a layman's point of view torationalize a rebasing at this juncture than it was at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Melzer is asking a question and expressing his opinion, but there is no disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 147.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we were closer to the account innovationthat affected M1 at that time but it had gone on for some time. In-20-7/9-10/85any event, now we are a little further away except for the drop from$2500 to $1000 in the minimum balance, which we don't think had asignificant effect. I think the economics of it are roughly the same;whether the public relations of it are the same is [another question].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

In this passage, there is only one speaker and they are expressing their thoughts and opinions about a certain matter. They mention that they were closer to the account innovation that affected M1 at some point, but now they are further away. The speaker also mentions a drop in the minimum balance, but they do not believe it had a significant effect. They acknowledge that the economics of the situation are roughly the same, but question the potential difference in public relations. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 148.
I am not sure that it is all that different, even though you probablycan--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We claimed at that time when there was alot of innovation that it affected M2 and M3 more than M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing uncertainty about the difference in impact between innovation on M2, M3, and M1.


Passage number 149.
MR. AXILROD. We had that February-March base for M2 and M3and we said that we now had a build-up of nationwide NOW accounts andit was beginning to have this effect. This wasn't the introductoryperiod; it already had been built up and, being there, it was havingthis effect. But, of course, the very latest strength in M1 is incurrency and demand deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the factors that contribute to the strength in M1.


Passage number 150.
MR. PARTEE. There is not much innovation to refer to thisyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 151.
MR. AXILROD. That is the point of this paper: it wasn't the[current] innovation per se that might have increased the elasticity;it was the impact [of declining interest rates] on the elasticity thatcould do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the impact of declining interest rates on elasticity is the main point of the paper, rather than the innovation itself.


Passage number 152.
MR. PARTEE. Yes. It could just be an argument that with therate of inflation down and inflation expectations declining, why, itis a better bet to hold money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement about the possibility of holding money as a better bet considering the decline in inflation expectations.


Passage number 153.
MR. MARTIN. And interest rates [down].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that interest rates are down.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 155.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Steve said a minute ago that thesemodels don't explain everything. I think of that as an understatementof some proportion. I am not sure that they explain anything to meanymore. But looking at M1 right now, it seems to me, abstracting atleast a little from all the models, that one can draw one of severalconclusions. One is that history is history and down the road we'regoing to get more nominal GNP or more inflation or both; but none ofus seems to see that. The second conclusion is one that Pres justmentioned: that what we are seeing is an adjustment taking place,reflecting fundamentally the shift going on in the economy to lowernominal interest rates and lower rates of inflation, which could quiteconceivably be very plausible in the context that it leads to somelower secular growth of velocity. That, in turn, would mean thatwhatever we thought to be an optimal growth in M1 is now higher insome permanent way than it once was. The third explanation is thatthere is something to these technical shifts, whether due toinnovation, or to changes in spread relationships, or even tosomething like this E.F. Hutton situation. I personally do not ruleout the possibility that the Hutton situation has had an impact. Iwon't say that other firms' practices are exactly parallel to Hutton,but anyone who thinks that those types of cash management practices asa general thing are limited to one or two firms is being quite naive.And anybody who thinks that those firms who might have been doing thesame general kind of thing are going to tell you about it is verynaive. But I think that one has to allow for those types of-21-7/9-10/85possibilities, whether due to financial innovation or other types ofphenomena. Of course, the difficulty with those things, if they arethere, is that we can't quantify them; we can never be sure what theymean. And in the short run they certainly do mean that velocity anddemand for money, neither of which is quite the same thing, are goingto bounce around. And at the extreme, the conclusion that you have todraw is that this velocity or money demand relationship is just shotand money is no longer any good as a policy variable. As a practicalmatter, I don't think we can afford that conclusion even though someof us may like it. Because if you don't like money, you have to findsomething else to use as a policy variable. Where I come out is thatboth for practical and what I at least would consider to betheoretically attractive reasons we have to work with some combinationof the second and third things that I mentioned. And within thatframework I agree with Tom that it may be more difficult today than itwas in 1983 to make the case for jiggling around ranges or bases orsomething. But as a practical matter, I come out to the view that wedon't have any choice but to be thinking in that broad direction,without prejudging exactly how that should be done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is an individual's explanation and analysis of different possible conclusions regarding the models and the impact of various factors on the economy.


Passage number 156.
MR. PARTEE. It's potentially dangerous to change the base,isn't it. If I understood Steve, we don't know that this--whatever itis that is occurring--is over. If it is occurring, it may continue;and in fact it seems likely to reflect itself in the third quarter.What is [M1 growth for the quarter], 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing concern about the potential dangers of changing the base, and he is also speculating about the possibility of the situation continuing in the future. He then asks a question about M1 growth for the quarter.


Passage number 157.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that is in large part a carry-over of thesecond quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement.


Passage number 158.
MR. PARTEE. I understand that. And then it could be muchhigher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their understanding of a situation.


Passage number 159.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to get too deeply into thoseprecise questions now. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not want to discuss certain specific questions at the moment.


Passage number 160.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I would like to set forth the casefor rebasing--and I think there is a pretty good case for it--and thenask Steve a question. Admittedly, the circumstances are different nowthan they were in 1983 and the technical justifications for therebasing may be somewhat different, but I think it is still prettysolid. We have had extraordinary circumstances here; in part, therapid growth that we had in the first half of this year in M1 could beviewed as a catch-up from unusually low growth in the second half of1984. Certainly, in the case of the San Francisco analysis, the dragon the economy caused by the net imports was much bigger than we hadanticipated. That, in turn, has depressed activity and required, Ithink, an extra surge of money to take care of it. But given that setof biases or set of preconceptions that I have and given the tough jobthat you have--you would have to explain to the Congress and hence tothe whole world why we are rebasing or raising the range--I would liketo put a question to Steve. If it is putting you on the spot, Steve,just say so. In terms of the adverse risk of either raising the rangeor rebasing--adverse in the sense that it might cause some people inthe country such as savers, investors, and so forth, to view the Fedas now off on a kick of monetizing the federal debt or giving upsomewhat on its battle against inflation--which would you view ashaving the least risky impact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the circumstances are different now than in 1983 and that the technical justifications for rebasing may be different, but overall the case for rebasing is solid. The speaker then asks a question to Steve, indicating a desire for his input.


Passage number 161.
-22-7/9-10/85MR. AXILROD. I found it impossible to try to discern a bigdifference in public psychology. I think the main risk is in doingeither and not hitting it. Just to remind the Committee: In 1983, the[range] at the beginning of the year was 4 to 8 percent; growth in thefirst half was 11.9 percent; it was rebased to QII to QIV to a 5 to 9percent growth rate and that was hit. By the time we reseasonalizedand everything, the growth in the second half was 8.4 percent and forthe year was 10.4 percent. Then, the next year, the range of 4 to 8percent was hit. So, the Committee wasn't repeating the experienceafter the mid-1970s where it was rebasing every quarter and the rangewas missed every quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating historical data and facts about growth rates.


Passage number 162.
 To me, the main problem wouldn't be whetherto raise the range or rebase; the problem would be that it would bevery desirable to hit it if you do [either], so that it does not setin motion--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We said that was only a monitoring range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing a personal opinion and discussing a problem without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 163.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, but it was hit nonetheless.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply confirms that something was hit, without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 164.
MR. MARTIN. I think it has been very well said by Tom andothers that we do not have quite the rationale in this period of timethat we had in 1982-83 with regard to the number of new instruments,new minima, new rates, and less rate control. On the other hand, wehave had the passage of time and we are aware that cash managementtechniques continue to be employed--perhaps some ways outside thethree sigma limit, as in Hutton's case. At any rate, thoseinstitutional commentators who are likely to react to a rebasing, Iargue, are themselves cash managers, and they themselves are shiftingfunds, even as individuals, between and among their firms' interest-bearing or noninterest-bearing accounts. So, I think there is achance to appeal to the day-to-day experiences of the financialmanagers and the financial commentators that there is indeed thisrelationship between the holding of assets with varied degrees ofliquidity as a characteristic and the changes in the levels ofinterest rates. Furthermore, I think there is the Hutton phenomenonthat is more widespread than perhaps is obvious. I agree with Jerryin that regard. Furthermore, we rebased to take into account changesin institutions and interest rates once before, in very recentexperience. This rebasing was not followed by an augmentation ofinflation; indeed, if anything, there has been a little--I'm agreeingwith Henry that it's unsatisfactorily little--disinflation thatfollowed. So it seems to me that there can be an appeal made to whatpeople and institutions and financial managers are doing themselvesfollowing changes in interest rates. There is a common sense kind of[case] that can be made to justify and explain and communicate therebasing that I think is necessary here. And I think it is importantthat that be done because I am hopeful that there will be additionalchanges in the interest rates. While the elasticity may diminish--Ihave no problems with that as the spreads and the increments getsmaller--nevertheless, there may well be an additional impact upon V1and the other velocities, which we will be able to explain if we aresuccessful in this rebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mainly discusses the need for rebasing and appeals to the experiences and actions of financial managers and commentators to justify this decision.


Passage number 165.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have someone distributing some prettylittle charts here; I keep expecting someone to comment on them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker is anticipating a comment or response to the charts, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 166.
MR. MORRIS. That's me. You didn't call on me. Norm wassupposed to tell you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is expressing dissatisfaction or frustration because he was not called upon.


Passage number 167.
-23-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Perhaps I can call upon you and we canpronounce the benediction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The mathematical expression (-23-7/9-10/85) and the suggestion of calling upon someone and pronouncing the benediction are unrelated ideas and do not present any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 168.
MR. MORRIS. I'd like to refer first to the table at therear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Morris is expressing a desire to refer to a table, but this does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 169.
MR. PARTEE. When I first saw that table, I figured thesewere your charts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply stating what they initially thought upon seeing a table.


Passage number 170.
MR. MORRIS. We have been trying to describe the deviation ofthe aggregates from their traditional historical behavior in terms oftwo things: one, financial innovations; and two, the decline in theinterest rates. This table suggests to me that there are otherfactors of major consequence involved in this situation that we don'tunderstand. I refer you to total liquid assets, L, and call yourattention to the fact that the behavior--the deviation from the 1970-1980 trend--is very similar for total liquid assets as it is for themonetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply pointing out that there may be other factors at play that are causing the deviation from the traditional historical behavior, and he is directing attention to the behavior of total liquid assets to support his observation.


Passage number 171.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't understand what these numbers are;perhaps you can explain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their inability to comprehend the numbers and suggesting that the person they are talking to might be able to explain them.


Passage number 172.
MR. MORRIS. This is a cumulative deviation of the velocityof these various aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Morris, with no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 173.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Cumulative deviation from the trend lineestablished earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply refers to a mathematical concept of cumulative deviation from a trend line established earlier, without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 174.
MR. MORRIS. Right, from the 1970-1980 trend line. Now,total liquid assets should not be affected by financial innovationbecause all of these new instruments are presumably included in theaggregate and switches among them really don't have any effect.Secondly, I have not been able to figure out any reason why a declinein interest rates should lead people to want to hold more liquidassets relative to nominal income. In fact, I think you could argue--thinking back to my investment days--that you would get the oppositeeffect; that is, the decline in short-term rates should lead people topush into longer-dated assets in order to try to maintain theiryields. But the fact is that the movement of M1 velocity, althoughthe amplitude is greater, is year to year very similar. We have, Ithink, in the case of total liquid assets a deviation from historicalexperience that cannot be explained by anything that I have been ableto think of, which suggests to me that from a philosophical point ofview, something is going on here that we don't know much about. Thisshould lead us to conclude two things. One, I think, is to try toexplain to the public that we can't run a sensible monetary policy byblindly following any of these [monetary aggregates] because we don'tknow what rate of growth in them is going to be compatible with areasonable economic performance. The second is, that if we have topublish ranges, we should have a propensity to broaden the ranges,because I think quite clearly that we have a problem in trying to useany of these, blindly, as a guide to monetary policy.Now, my second point: Steve's paper--and I thought the paperwas very well done--argues that super NOW accounts have tended toreduce the interest elasticity of M1. My conclusion is quite theopposite: that the way the banks have priced them in fact has led tosuper NOW accounts increasing the interest elasticity of M1. The-24-7/9-10/85first graph shows that the banks have been fairly responsive inadjusting the money market deposit account rates to changes in themarket rate. I'm comparing them here to the money market mutual fundrate. Therefore, I think you can conclude that M2 is now much lessinterest sensitive than it used to be. And I think the behavior of M2recently has suggested that. If you look at the way the banks havepriced super NOW accounts, you would have thought there was aRegulation Q ceiling of 7-1/2 percent on super NOWs because there wasno response to this big run-up in interest rates. Now, if the banksare going to continue to price super NOW accounts in this fashion,then you can expect that the super NOW is going to increase interestelasticity of M1. If you look at the last chart, the top shows theinterest rate spread between super NOW accounts and money marketmutual funds and the bottom shows the growth rates of super NOWaccounts. During the summer of last year the spread had reachedaround 3 percent against the super NOW; super NOWs were priced about 3percent below money market mutual funds and the rate of growth ofsuper NOWs dropped to a 3 percent annual rate. These are over threemonth spans. When the spread closed up again, with a decline inmarket rates, the rate of growth of super NOWs moved from a 3 percentto a 45 percent annual rate. I submit that, at least until the banksstart pricing their products differently, the super NOW account isgoing to increase the interest elasticity of M1 rather than reduce it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a discussion of the author's thoughts and observations.


Passage number 175.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're permitted a brief rebuttal, Mr.Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply giving Mr. Axilrod permission to provide a brief response or counterargument to a previous point or statement.


Passage number 176.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we're in some sense talking about thelong-run not the very short-run elasticity. In the very short run,there are obviously lags. Secondly, they have been adjusting the ratedownward even though they don't adjust it upward and I don't know whatpoint they are going to get. Thirdly, they are adjusting it and thatis different from the NOW account ceiling rate, which isn't adjusted,so you get a bigger impact on that, which compares to super NOWs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 177.
MR. MORRIS. But if they were only adjusted downward, theeffect is going to be much like the old Regulation Q ceiling. If theydon't respond when market rates rise, we should expect that theregular super NOW will drop very sharply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a hypothetical scenario and making a prediction based on that scenario. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 178.
MR. AXILROD. I do not know what would happen if market ratesbegan rising from the current level. I suspect that might be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is expressing uncertainty about the potential consequences of rising market rates, indicating that he does not have enough information to make a conclusive statement.


Passage number 179.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are permitted to discuss that betweenyou men. I would like to make one observation in closing for theevening: What we are struggling with is not exactly unique in thecentral banking world these days, or recently. In many ways oursituation resembles what the Swiss had in 1978 when they said theSwiss franc, in their judgment, was getting way overvalued. Andfinally they said: The heck with monetary targets; we will operateunder the exchange rate. M1 went up 21 or 23 percent that year; I amnot sure whether they are happy in retrospect or not. They still havea pretty good inflation record relative to others. I am sure there isno cause and effect but the Bank of Canada, for the inverse reason Iguess, gave up monetary targeting a couple of years ago and theirinflation rate promptly sank for the first time in 10 years. TheEnglish are apparently debating right now whether to abandon themonetary targets or not, again in favor of the exchange rate. This-25-7/9-10/85 -26-debate is proceeding on an international scale. We will see you at 9o'clock in the morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply providing examples and observations about the use of monetary targets and exchange rates in different central banks around the world.


Passage number 180.
MR. BERNARD. 9:30 a.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any content or disagreement. It simply states a time ("9:30 a.m.") associated with someone named Mr. Bernard.


Passage number 181.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we better make it 9 a.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a suggestion or opinion about when to schedule something.


Passage number 182.
[Meeting recessed]7/9-10/85July 10, 1985--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I sat here and listened yesterday, Idid not detect enormous differences about the short-run outlook,although I think there are a lot of uncertainties. I do think that wesomewhat neglected in our discussion the rather large problems of why,as a practical matter, we have some enormous disequilibria in theeconomy that we are dealing with. We can't save enough to finance allof our investment and we have a government deficit; we are buyingabroad much more than we sell. I don't think either of thosephenomena can last forever, and all of these nice projections that wehave assume that the expansion is going to go along rather smoothlywithout any great discontinuity. That may be right for the next yearand it may be right for the next 18 months. I don't think it'll beright forever and I wouldn't count on it for the next year.We face a very sluggish picture abroad, as near as I can see,with no great growth. I think we will see some growth, but not enoughto reduce appreciably their unemployment or increase appreciably ourexports. I don't see many signs of change in policy there. We have alot of financial strains around, whether internally or externally, andthey are going to take a long time to cure. We may even break an axleas we proceed in the financial markets. Henry Wallich tells us westill have an inflation problem. People from the farms tell us wehave deflationary problems. In the oil area, we have a deflationaryproblem. Mr. Corrigan tells us we have lots of liquidity. When Ilook around at all the figures, it looks to me like we have a lot ofbankruptcies, which isn't exactly consistent with overflowingliquidity in the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 183.
MR. PARTEE. Bad distribution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply describes bad distribution without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 184.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wild distribution; I think that's right.Everybody, seat of their pants, was telling me that the economy isn'tgoing anyplace. The M1 figure tells you it is going to zoom, if youbelieve M1. So, we have a lot of questions and I don't know how wecontribute to the answer to all of these problems. I think the answeris that we don't. We can't magically deal with the budget problem,the trade problem, and the financial problems and cure them all veryeasily. We can maybe avoid aggravating them. But when I look aroundand think about what to do in the short run for the moment, I am notsure that we can do much differently than what we have been doing.And I approach the long-run targeting from that standpoint. I wouldsuspect, from what I heard yesterday--you tell me if I'm wrong--thatI am not going to be hearing any proposals for radical changes inoperations in the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and uncertainty about how to address various economic problems, but there is no mention of opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 185.
MR. BLACK. How do you define radical, Mr. Chairman. I wouldlike to see that M1 slow down a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. Mr. Black is simply asking for a clarification or an explanation of the term "radical," without expressing any opposing views or disagreeing with the Chairman's statement about M1.


Passage number 186.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would all like to see it slow down.The question is whether anybody wants a tightening action to slow itdown. These long-term ranges all depend upon the unknowns of M1 inthe short run. If we had one month of zero [M1 growth], it would lookbetter. But we are entering [the third quarter], as you know, at avery high trajectory off of June; and any number we put down is goingto be above [the long-run range] in the short run. Well, that's afact we face. So long as we don't have the base as June--we could do-27-7/9-10/85that, I suppose--we wouldn't be above in the short run. I don't knowas anyone proposes that. We could have a base of two months, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing different scenarios and possibilities related to economic factors such as M1 growth, long-term ranges, and potential actions to slow down the economy.


Passage number 187.
MR. WALLICH. The logic of Steve Axilrod's paper--that theremay be successive future bursts of M1--suggests that even if wesomehow got around the recent bulge by rebasing, the same thing mayhappen again. That suggests that we should put M1 back where it was ayear or two ago, on sort of a probation status.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing agreement with Steve Axilrod's paper and the suggestion that M1 should be put back where it was a year or two ago. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 188.
MR. MARTIN. A probation status after rebasing as we did justa couple of years ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about rebasing that occurred a couple of years ago.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 189.
MR. WALLICH. I would just suspend it, so to speak, becausethere is no point in rebasing M2 and M3 and we are almost forced togive those more weight, even though we don't think very highly ofthem, because of the failure of M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker states that they don't think very highly of M2 and M3, but they are forced to give them more weight due to the failure of M1. This suggests a disagreement or contention between the speaker's opinion of M2 and M3 and the necessity to give them more importance.


Passage number 190.
MR. MARTIN. I think if we put M1 in the penalty box now, wewill have difficulty getting the door open to extricate it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am a little uncertain as towhether we should discuss the short run or long run first becauseobviously they are interrelated. Let me just test my assumption thatnobody wants any radical changes in the short run--maybe Mr. Black isan exception. A radical change I assume is a change in the borrowingtarget by more than $50 or $100 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about the order in which to discuss the short run and long run, and then speculating about the opinions of others regarding radical changes in the short run.


Passage number 192.
MR. BLACK. I could probably live with $100 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is expressing his acceptance or agreement with a certain amount of money.


Passage number 193.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will have you on the other side;you want a change. Does anyone else want a change of that magnitude.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement and asking if anyone else shares that desire for change.


Passage number 194.
MR. RICE. I would like to see the borrowing number raised.I could live with less than $100 million, but I would like to see itgo up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, is expressing his personal preference and does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 195.
MR. KEEHN. I would like to see it up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker merely expresses their interest in seeing something.


Passage number 196.
MR. PARTEE. I think it ought to be higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply shows a personal opinion or suggestion by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 197.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You all want to tighten policy right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement does not mention any conflicting viewpoints or opposing stances. It simply states that everyone wants to tighten policy at present.


Passage number 198.
MR. MARTIN. I think it should be the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is expressing his agreement with something, but there is no indication of any opposing views or contradictory statements.


Passage number 199.
MR. RICE. Whether the policy is tightened depends upon whathappens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply suggests that the tightening of the policy is dependent on an unknown outcome.


Passage number 200.
MR. PARTEE. Well, my observation is that we are getting fartoo much money with the borrowing number we have and, therefore, weought to nudge it up a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his observation and suggesting a slight adjustment, but there is no opposition or conflicting point of view presented.


Passage number 201.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You don't like to talk about thesethings, but in some ways the best of all worlds would be to find anopportunity to lower the discount rate and then raise the borrowing upa little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply suggesting a course of action, stating that it would be ideal to lower the discount rate and increase borrowing slightly.


Passage number 202.
MR. PARTEE. There almost would have to be an announcement onthat--that would be such an extraordinary thing to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 203.
-28-7/9-10/85VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I wouldn't do it quite as boldly asI just stated it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a math equation and a statement regarding how the author would approach solving it.


Passage number 204.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You really don't want to tighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement or opinion.


Passage number 205.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "That's right" is a simple statement affirming the correctness or accuracy of something, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 206.
MR. RICE. Well, I don't want to tighten either. I want toslow down the rate of growth of M1. I don't want to tighten in thesense of raising interest rates. I don't think raising the borrowinglevel somewhat at this time actually would have much effect on marketrates in the short term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice is expressing his intention to slow down the rate of growth of M1 without raising interest rates.


Passage number 207.
MR. BLACK. Actually, the level has been above our target forsome time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about the level being above their target for some time without opposing or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 208.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The actual level has been way above thetarget a good part of the time. So have free reserves. Who could saythat wouldn't happen if we did the same thing again. I've heard fromthree people saying that they would like to tighten. Does that meanthat the other nine don't want to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "I've heard from three people saying that they would like to tighten. Does that mean that the other nine don't want to?" indicates that there is disagreement among the people mentioned. Some want to tighten while others may not want to.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 209.
MR. MARTIN. I don't want to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrase "I don't want to" which implies a disagreement or opposition to something that is being discussed or proposed.


Passage number 210.
MR. FORRESTAL. I certainly wouldn't want to tighten at thispoint. In fact, I would tilt a little on the other side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses their opinion about not wanting to tighten at the current point and suggests tilting a little on the other side.


Passage number 211.
MS. SEGER. I would too. I would tilt toward something toreduce rates below where they are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 212.
MR. MORRIS. I think we are in a situation similar to 1982where we looked around the economy and the only thing that we couldfind that was really strong was M1. We concluded at that time that M1was not giving a proper signal and it seems to me that we ought todraw that same conclusion today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is making a comparison and drawing a conclusion based on his analysis of the economy in both 1982 and the present.


Passage number 213.
MR. PARTEE. We have had a very considerable increase inbusiness activity [since] then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by MR. PARTEE is a straightforward statement about a significant increase in business activity.


Passage number 214.
MR. MORRIS. We wouldn't have if we had followed the M1target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is suggesting that if they had followed the M1 target, they wouldn't have encountered any problems.


Passage number 215.
MR. PARTEE. That's true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee agrees with the statement being made, indicating there is no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 216.
MR. MORRIS. We would have had a world depression.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a statement by Mr. Morris, suggesting that there would have been a world depression. This implies disagreement as there may be differing opinions on whether or not a world depression would have occurred.


Passage number 217.
MR. PARTEE. That's true. But the question is: Can we affordthat much of an increase in business activity now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement and a question about the affordability of an increase in business activity.


Passage number 218.
MR. MORRIS. I think we can afford quite a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is expressing his opinion that they have the financial capability to afford something.


Passage number 219.
MR. MARTIN. With 2 percent real growth, we could affordsomething, surely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a belief that with 2 percent real growth, they could afford something.


Passage number 220.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's certainly true. Can we afford 10percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee agrees with the statement being made.


Passage number 221.
-29-7/9-10/85MR. MARTIN. A 10 percent increase over the two percent.Sure. That gets you to 2.2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is simply agreeing that a 10 percent increase would result in a total of 2.2 percent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 222.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would not have thought anyone wouldthink 10 percent was likely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "I would not have thought" indicates that the speaker holds a different belief or opinion than someone else, suggesting disagreement or contention.


Passage number 223.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think it's likely. It's very difficult.One would have to disregard M1 altogether.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee expresses his own opinion and doubts regarding the possibility of a certain situation, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 224.
MS. SEGER. That's a good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the suggestion given is considered to be a good idea. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 225.
MR. PARTEE. No, I don't think it is a good idea. I don'tthink the experience of the postwar period suggests that it is a goodidea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Partee's opinion about a certain idea. There is no clear contention or disagreement stated in the passage. It is simply stating Mr. Partee's personal belief or conclusion based on his interpretation of past experiences.


Passage number 226.
MR. MORRIS. I question the relevance of the experience ofthe postwar period. I think the experience of recent years shows thatit has taken more money, more liquid assets, and more debt to generateone dollar of nominal GNP. The old relationships are not holding up,and at some point in time we've got to recognize that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is questioning the relevance of the experience of the postwar period and stating their opinion that recent years have shown a change in the relationships between money, liquid assets, debt, and nominal GNP. However, there is no direct indication of contention or disagreement with another person or viewpoint in this passage.


Passage number 227.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. First of all, I would say that I don'tknow what the answer is. Obviously, we went off course in May andJune from what was expected. Maybe that will continue and maybe itwon't. The best staff input that we have says that roughly unchangedreserve paths will be reflected in a markedly lower M1 growth rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 228.
MR. RICE. It's still unacceptably high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker expresses an opinion about the current state of something being "unacceptably high." However, there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 229.
MR. MARTIN. I think we have to be very careful with May andJune, particularly June. We go back and revise, revise, and revise.My goodness, that June could be like May or whatever it was last year:it could come down when we revise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker ("Mr. Martin") is expressing a cautious approach and raising concerns about the potential outcome of June based on past experiences. This suggests a potential disagreement or difference in opinion among the individuals involved in the conversation.


Passage number 230.
MR. PARTEE. What's the first six months: 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of a fact, without any conflicting opinions or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 231.
MR. AXILROD. 11-1/2 percent from December to June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The statement simply provides a statistic without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 232.
MR. KEEHN. What's the outlook for, say, July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions an inquiry about the outlook for July without any conflicting views or opposing opinions expressed.


Passage number 233.
MR. AXILROD. Well, our estimate--and it is subject to quitean instant revision because we are getting more data here veryquickly--is on the order of 7 percent. A range of 6 to 7-1/2 percentor something like that is a good way to think about it, given what Iknow about the very first week. But I will know more shortly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an estimate and acknowledging that it is subject to revision as more data becomes available. They also mention that a range of 6 to 7-1/2 percent is a good way to think about it.


Passage number 234.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fact is that we don't know; we neverknow. But it would not be unlike all experience if we had a monthhere of something [near] zero at some point. I don't know why demanddeposits are so high; it's the most intriguing part. Good ole demanddeposits seldom jump around that much. I don't know whether it hasanything to do with E. F. Hutton or not. There is no evidence for it,but one wonders a little. If it does, we ought to allow for it. Ifit doesn't, past experience would suggest that it is going to go downat some point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is merely stating that there is uncertainty and lack of knowledge about certain topics.


Passage number 235.
MR. RICE. Didn't that happen in 1980.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question.


Passage number 236.
-30-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Didn't what happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The expression -30-7/9-10/85 is a mathematical equation, and "Didn't what happen" is a separate question or statement that does not relate to the equation.


Passage number 237.
MR. RICE. Well, we had this big jump in the money supply andthen we said it couldn't possibly slow down enough. I may be wrong onthis but, as I recall, money started expanding very rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Rice about the expansion of the money supply.


Passage number 238.
MR. GUFFEY. That was when we had credit controls--in thespring of 1980, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement that provides information about a specific time period related to credit controls.


Passage number 239.
MR. RICE. Yes, we did have credit controls.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply confirms that credit controls were implemented.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The latter part of 1980 was certainly aperiod where we kept underprojecting the money supply; it kept risingmore rapidly in the latter part of the year than we anticipated.There's no question about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing a factual situation and there does not appear to be any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 241.
MR. RICE. That's right. It was the opposite. We said thatit couldn't possibly increase at the rate it turned out to increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and acknowledging that the rate of increase was unexpected.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct. Last fall it keptincreasing less than we anticipated. So you can take your pick ofexperiences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any form of disagreement or contention. It states a fact ("Last fall it kept increasing less than we anticipated") and offers options for experiences without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 243.
MR. BOEHNE. One prudent way to move forward, if we reallydon't know quite what to do, is to go forward staying about where weare, keeping a very open mind about what we do three, four, five weeksfrom now, depending on how the economy comes in and the money numberscome in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a statement suggesting a cautious and open-minded approach to the future actions, considering uncertainty and fluctuating economic conditions.


Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's about the way I would read it, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The phrase "That's about the way I would read it" suggests agreement or alignment with the previous statement, rather than contention or disagreement. The "yes" at the end reinforces this agreement.


Passage number 245.
MR. MARTIN. I'd certainly concur.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 246.
MR. WALLICH. I would agree with that. It seems to me it's amistake to chase half-heartedly after M1. If we really believed init, we would have to do something very drastic. If we don't believein it, it makes no sense responding to it at all. The other two[aggregates] and debt are still high, so maybe a little firmness isjustified; but I think that it would be a mistake to subject ourselvesto the need to work off the overshoot at a time when the economy isclearly not very strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is expressing agreement with a previous statement and offering his own opinion.


Passage number 247.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't hear any suggestion yesterday--now, I'm just reading into the comments--that anybody was talkingabout working off the overshoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they didn't hear any suggestions about working off the overshoot.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 248.
MR. BLACK. I think the best solution, Mr. Chairman, is torebase this. It probably surprises a lot of people that I say that.But I'd rebase, in a sense forgiving part of this on the basis thatthere is probably some substance in what Steve is saying. If we wereto rebase, for example, and keep the 4 to 7 percent range and hit thetop of that, that would result in an 8.9 percent rate of growth in M1for the year, which seems adequate even if M1 has changed in meaning.I would think that would be enough liquidity to keep the economy goingpretty well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: Mr. Black suggests rebasing as a solution, while acknowledging that it may surprise many people. He believes that there is substance in what Steve is saying. This suggests that there is a difference of opinion or disagreement among the participants about the best approach to address the issue at hand.


Passage number 249.
MR. PARTEE. My problem with rebasing is that we don't knowthat we have run the end of this string.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his concern or skepticism about rebasing, stating that the end of the string is unknown. However, this does not necessarily imply a disagreement with anyone else's perspective or idea. It is simply a statement of his own uncertainty.


Passage number 250.
7/9-10/85MR. BLACK. No, we don't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage "7/9-10/85MR. BLACK. No, we don't" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of denial by Mr. Black.


Passage number 251.
MR. PARTEE. If we could rebase on the third quarter--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing a hypothetical scenario of rebasing on the third quarter.


Passage number 252.
MR. BLACK. That's one thing--delayed rebasing--that wehaven't considered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is simply stating that delayed rebasing is something that they haven't considered.


Passage number 253.
MR. PARTEE. But I think there is a very great danger that ifyou rebase, it sounds as if you are serious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 254.
MR. BLACK. Of course, that's part of my motive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the speaker's motive.


Passage number 255.
MR. PARTEE. And it very well may be that we'll start rightout on the high side of any rebased numbers, assuming we rebase on thesecond quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 256.
MR. WALLICH. That is why I think we not only have to rebase,but in some sense qualify [M1] or suspend it because this may repeatitself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is expressing his own opinion and suggesting that a certain action should be taken. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 257.
MR. STERN. Yes, why not put M1 back on a monitoring status.In a sense, I would argue that that is where it has been the lastcouple of months anyway, looking at the directive and the way we havenot responded. It's already there, essentially, in my mind; and Isuspect market participants have reached that conclusion as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Stern is simply expressing his opinion that M1 should be put back on a monitoring status, as he believes it has been in that state for the past couple of months based on the directive and lack of response. He also speculates that market participants may have reached the same conclusion.


Passage number 258.
MR. BLACK. It would be hard not to; it grew over twice asfast as our target. Of course, they don't know what the target was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is simply expressing an objective statement about the growth rate of something compared to a target.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 259.
MS. HORN. I would support the point of view also that we putM1 on a monitoring basis. That may come as a surprise to some of youwho know that I believe in targeting M1 and in its relation to pricesand in its usefulness in the past. I also think it will be veryuseful to us in the future in the long run in the fight againstinflation. But I do think that rebasing or revising the currenttargets is an indication that we are serious about pursuing thosetargets. Or at least I believe that when we do set targets for M1, weought to be serious about them because I think it's that important.And at this point, at least speaking for myself, I don't know where Iwould like M1 to be in the fourth quarter of this year. It is tooearly, I think. We don't have the kind of information I would like tohave to set the serious M1 target that I would like to set. So, itseems to me that it is most appropriate to say M1 is a monitoringvariable right now. The rest of what I would like said is that we areserious about the long-term battle against inflation and about comingback to M1 as soon as practicable. Our experience the last time wedid this was that it was after something like a year that we found wecould indeed reemphasize M1. We could indicate that we would hopethat at least by the fourth quarter of this year we might have enoughinformation to then reemphasize M1 and conclude on that. For thatreason, I would not do anything with the 1985 targets but for 1986 Iwould reduce the target for M1 to a range of 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent,slightly below the 1985 range, to indicate our seriousness in comingback to this kind of strategy as soon as we have some moreinformation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage because the speaker, Ms. Horn, supports putting M1 on a monitoring basis while also expressing her belief in the importance of targeting M1 and its usefulness in fighting inflation. She disagrees with setting specific targets for M1 in the near future due to insufficient information, while still advocating for the long-term battle against inflation and a return to emphasizing M1.


Passage number 260.
MR. BALLES. Before we go too far down the road onmonitoring, I would just like to raise the question: What do we do-32-7/9-10/85instead. What kind of guides do we have. Are we going to startfollowing M2. Or are we going back to taking the funds rate orrelying on money market conditions or--going back 30 years--the toneand feel of the market. We have to have something in lieu of M1, andI think that question needs to be answered before we make a decisionon just monitoring M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles is simply raising a question and suggesting that it needs to be answered before a decision can be made.


Passage number 261.
MS. HORN. Isn't the answer "All of the above," John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and inquiring about the correct answer.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 262.
MR. BALLES. I'm not sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. While it is not explicitly stated what the disagreement is about, the use of the phrase "I'm not sure" suggests that Mr. Balles has a different opinion or is uncertain about something that the speaker has mentioned.


Passage number 263.
MR. BLACK. Of course, we are not going to know whether M1really has lost its meaning until several quarters down the roadanyway. I think there's a good possibility that it has lost a goodpart of it, so my inclination is to hedge the bets and assume it haslost some but not all of it. That gets me to this rebasing. But ifwe are wrong and it means what it used to mean, then we are in for alot of trouble. I hope it has lost a lot of its meaning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and uncertainty about whether M1 has lost its meaning. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 264.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's do the easy part first. What do wedo with M2, M3, and debt. The obvious thing is not to change theranges for this year. The argument, I guess, revolves around M2 andwhether we give ourselves a little more room on M2. We're a fewtenths above the range now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different options and considering the argument for potentially adjusting the range for M2.


Passage number 265.
MR. MARTIN. We are not above the parallel lines. We areabove the cone. We are something like $11 billion under the parallellines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their belief or understanding that they are below the parallel lines and above the cone. They also mention their position in relation to the parallel lines as being $11 billion under them, which does not imply any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 266.
MS. SEGER. But our forecasts are running 1 to 1-1/2percentage points below what we were talking about back in February.If we thought then that these targets were appropriate, then don'tthey look sort of out of line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that their forecasts were lower than what was discussed in February and questioning whether the previous targets are still appropriate.


Passage number 267.
MR. MARTIN. My only comment about February is that I thinkthe Greenbook had the federal funds rate rising to 9-1/2 percent bythe end of the year. And 200 basis points does make a bit ofdifference in growth rates of the aggregates. Was the funds rate 9 or9-1/2 percent by the end of the year in our February Greenbook. Wehad the federal funds rising over the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is simply asking for clarification about the federal funds rate mentioned in the February Greenbook.


Passage number 268.
MR. KICHLINE. In February, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only mentions the month of February, without providing any information or context that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 269.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, six months ago. You're not assumingthat now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question about someone's assumption, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict between the speaker and the other person.


Passage number 270.
MR. KICHLINE. We are assuming interest rates are about flatat current levels. That's the current assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the assumption being made is that interest rates are about flat at current levels. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 271.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then that's theoretically consistent withM2 being within the target and M3 being within the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply explaining that M2 and M3 being within the target is consistent with a theoretical scenario.


Passage number 272.
MR. MARTIN. My only point is--given the high level of realrates and the difficulty of forecasting the rates and a caveat fromSteve's excellent paper--that from time to time there is at least theprospect of real and nominal rates coming down. I think that arguesfor more flexibility--that is, rebasing to, let's say, a 4 to 8percent range rather than a 4 to 7 percent range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is simply presenting his point and suggesting a possible change in the range of rates.


Passage number 273.
-33-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm on M2 and M3 and debt at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states the financial situation of the person, mentioning the amount of debt they have.


Passage number 274.
MR. MARTIN. Okay. Sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 275.
MR. PARTEE. If we are giving any serious thought to puttingM1 on standby, I think it would be a serious error to raise thetargets on the rest of the aggregates, which have been reasonably wellbehaved. Dropping M1 and then raising M2 and M3 would certainly givethe impression that we are letting [monetary policy] go to the winds.I think the only way we could possibly say that we are going to watchM1 carefully and do that credibly--and we don't know what all that hasbeen going on means--would be to hold to the [ranges for the] otheraggregates that have been expanding reasonably. It's true that creditis above its range; I believe it hasn't increased its excess above therange. And the projection has it generally coming down in the nextyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This is evident in the statement "If we are giving any serious thought to putting M1 on standby, I think it would be a serious error to raise the targets on the rest of the aggregates, which have been reasonably well behaved." The speaker is expressing their opinion that raising the targets on the other aggregates would be a mistake, indicating disagreement with the idea.


Passage number 276.
MR. AXILROD. Our point estimate for credit for the year is12.1 percent. The range is 9 to 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents a point estimate of 12.1 percent for credit for the year and provides a range of 9 to 12 percent. However, this does not indicate any conflict or disagreement, but rather serves to provide more information and account for potential variations.


Passage number 277.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage about Mr. Partee.


Passage number 278.
 And about 1 point of that is the merger--MR. AXILROD. Whatever it turns out to be by the time theyear is over; it may be less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about the merger's contribution to a certain point.


Passage number 279.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're having a little more of that, Ithink, than we assumed at the beginning of the year. Does anyonestrongly object to that conclusion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement or opinion without any opposition mentioned.


Passage number 280.
MR. MARTIN. I certainly don't object strongly to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The statement suggests that the speaker does not have a strong objection to something.


Passage number 281.
MR. WALLICH. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 282.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 283.
MS. SEGER. Can we ignore, though, the changed forecast forthis year. The staff has cut its estimate of real growth from 3.6percent down to 2-1/4 percent for 1985 and has cut it slightly for1986 from 2.7 percent to 2.5 percent. And comparing the estimates ofthe Board members and the Presidents in February to today, those alsowere cut rather significantly. It would seem to me that we would haveto take that into account: that what was appropriate for monetarytargets back in February ought to be reexamined if we are perkingalong that much more slowly and the expectation is for continuedsluggishness, using our own numbers here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the forecast for economic growth has been lowered and suggesting that this should be taken into account when considering monetary targets.


Passage number 284.
MR. WALLICH. In my numbers I took the first quarter as aloss but then pretty much went on with the old quarterly figures Ihad; I think that is what the staff did too. You could argue that,even so, the economy is somewhat smaller because it did not grow inthe first quarter and, therefore, with regard to the money supply thatthere is more money relative to economic activity. That doesn't seemto me to argue that we should further increase the amount of money--M2, M3, debt, etc.--relative to this smaller activity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their perspective on the relationship between the size of the economy and the money supply, without any opposition or conflicting views presented.


Passage number 285.
MR. PARTEE. With the same amounts of the aggregates, Martha,and the smaller GNP, one would expect lower interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a hypothetical scenario and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 286.
-34-7/9-10/85MR. WALLICH. Which is what we got.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a mathematical expression that requires calculation.


Passage number 287.
MR. PARTEE. And that could continue. You could argue thatif we have smaller GNP growth, we don't need as much credit as we didbefore. We get these lower rates, which brings the GNP back up andbrings the aggregates up to our previous ranges.One other comment I would like to make, if I could, Paul: Iknow we haven't talked much about 1986, but I do want to remindeveryone that Reg. Q goes off entirely in the spring of 1986. Thestaff has said that they do not think it will have much effect. But,boy, it is a pretty wild environment out there when you don't have anylimits on anything. All NOW accounts would become super NOWs, bydefinition. Savings accounts would come back into their own. Whoknows what might happen to savings accounts. So, I think we have tohave a certain amount of diffidence in talking about what might happenin the aggregates in 1986 because of that event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own thoughts and concerns about the potential effects of deregulation in 1986.


Passage number 288.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's very tentatively assume thatwe are not going to change M2 and M3 and debt--we'll go back to lookat them--as background to the discussion of M1. Does anybody want tochange the range for the year. I haven't heard any sentiment of thatsort: to go back to the beginning of the year and just raise the rangefor M1 for '85.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is proposing a tentative assumption and asking if anyone disagrees or wants to change the range for the year. The passage is simply seeking input or feedback, rather than expressing a disagreement.


Passage number 289.
MR. RICE. Yes, rather than rebasing. I wouldn't want torebase at the present time for reasons that Chuck stated. I wouldprefer, if we are going to ignore M1, to just ignore it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 290.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying that now. That is anotheroption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply clarifying that the speaker is not currently making a particular statement or suggestion, and instead referring to another option.


Passage number 291.
MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without actually reading it. Please provide the actual passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 292.
 Another option--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Change the range through the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests another option without discussing any conflicting views or presenting opposing arguments.


Passage number 293.
MR. RICE. Yes, change the range for the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply suggests changing the range for the year without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints being expressed.


Passage number 294.
MR. MARTIN. Without rebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement by Mr. Martin.


Passage number 295.
MR. RICE. Without rebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states "Without rebasing" without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not ignoring it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "That's not ignoring it" does not express any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 297.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, there's still the question ofhow much weight to give it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that there is still a question or uncertainty about how much importance or value should be placed on something.


Passage number 298.
MR. PARTEE. I think I would agree with that. I would liketo raise the range on the basis of the experience that we have had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Party states that he agrees and would like to raise the range based on their experiences.


Passage number 299.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Steve, I want to make sure that Iunderstand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing a desire to understand something.


Passage number 300.
 I know these numbers are very slippery, but in light ofyour best estimate for July--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Subject to change in an hour.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is acknowledging that the numbers being discussed are difficult to pin down, but is not indicating any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 301.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If you were thinking in terms ofchanging the ranges and not rebasing, what kind of growth would you-35-7/9-10/85have in M1 over the balance of the year, taking account of July asbest you know it. Would it come in, say, within 9 percent or 8percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is asking for an opinion or prediction about the growth of M1 over the balance of the year. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 302.
MR. AXILROD. What would the growth for the year be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not provide any information or statements that could lead to contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about the growth for the year without taking a particular position or presenting conflicting views.


Passage number 303.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The second half of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the timeframe of the second half of the year.


Passage number 304.
MR. AXILROD. The second half would be close to 7 percent--6-3/4 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 305.
MR. BLACK. 7.1 percent is the way I figured it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it simply states a percentage that Mr. Black has figured out.


Passage number 306.
MR. AXILROD. What we have here is Q2 to Q4, assuming a 5-1/2percent growth from June to September--and we think that is consistentwith July coming in around 7 percent and growth phasing down fromthere. Then growth goes down from September to December to 3-1/2percent, and that would only be if interest rates didn't go down anymore and the effects of the drop since May had worn out. Then thegrowth for the year, Q4 to Q4, would be 8.8 percent; and the growthfor the second half, Q2 to Q4--on that kind of averaging basis--wouldbe 6.9 percent. That then assumes that the average growth, month bymonth, is roughly 4 percent over the balance of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting a projection of growth based on certain assumptions.


Passage number 307.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In June and July you are usingsomething like 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of information.


Passage number 308.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, something like 7 percent for July. Now,if we had a very weak July like we did last year when we had almostzero [M1 growth] in July, and these demand deposits came running off--we have no evidence that that's occurring yet, except a little in thevery first week of July--then you could get a more favorable picture,in a sense. You would get a much weaker third quarter than we areassuming, as the demand deposits unwind, which would make the fourthquarter look a bit better. But we have no basis for that yet. So ourmedian assumption is the one I just gave you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining different scenarios and their potential effects on the third and fourth quarters. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 309.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In the end, I might be agnostic; butI guess I have some sympathy for changing the ranges rather thanrebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states their personal opinion of having sympathy for changing the ranges rather than rebasing, without any contradictory arguments or opposing views being presented.


Passage number 310.
MR. AXILROD. I might add, Mr. Chairman, that all the modelsthat we look at would say that growth in the third quarter, month tomonth, will be more like 7 percent. We have taken 1-1/2 points offthat because of the thought that this bulge of demand deposits in Mayand June simply has to unwind. So if that doesn't happen, there'smore danger of greater growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 311.
MR. WALLICH. I don't quite see the consistency of sayingthat we suspend M1 in some sense and then we fiddle around with theupper margin by 1 percentage point. I think it is better to leave itand say it was a bad job.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Wallich disagrees with the idea of suspending M1 and making adjustments to the upper margin by 1 percentage point. He believes it would be better to acknowledge the mistake and describe it as a bad job.


Passage number 312.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I blow a little hot and cold too,Henry. But the other side of it is that rebasing carries with it thisimplication that the problem is behind us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It shows a personal acknowledgment of a character's own behavior and also discusses the implications of rebasing, suggesting that it implies the problem is in the past.


Passage number 313.
-36-7/9-10/85MR. WALLICH. I wouldn't rebase it either; I would just giveup on it for the time being. When we reinstate it, which I hope we dosomeday, then it ought to be on a rebased basis--after proving itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about not rebasing something for the time being and stating their hope to reinstate it in the future on a rebased basis. There is no contradictory statement or opposing viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 314.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That scares me a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The statement "That scares me a little" expresses a personal feeling or opinion, rather than a contention or disagreement. It does not indicate any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 315.
MR. BLACK. You get very different conclusions because of thearithmetic in this too. If we did raise the upper limit to 9 percent,if I figured right, from the second quarter to the fourth quarter thegrowth rate would be around 7 percent; I think Steve's [estimate] wasslightly different. If you look at June to December, you are lookingat the 5 percent; but if you look at the growth on a quarterly basis,it does not look like that much deceleration from the 10-1/2 percentor whatever it was in the first half. The arithmetic can always be sotroublesome on this; I don't know whether it's better to look at it ona quarterly basis or not. I guess I would like to look at it in achart and put least squares to it; that's the way I tend to think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing different conclusions and calculations based on different scenarios and viewpoints.


Passage number 316.
MR. PARTEE. I wasn't thinking of raising the upper limit 2points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. Mr. Partee is simply stating his thoughts or opinion on not raising the upper limit by 2 points.


Passage number 317.
MR. BLACK. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a direct quote with one person speaking. There is no indication of a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 318.
MR. PARTEE. You said 9 percent; I was thinking of 4 to 8percent. And I would do it on the grounds that there is a great dealof uncertainty about what may happen. Zero is not the onlypossibility for a month; we may have a month that is negative. Wemight find ourselves back within [the range] but running high becausewe have had a cumulation of such high numbers. It seems to me thatsimply a recognition of the fact that it has run so strong thus farthis year and that there seems to be a changed relationship would leadus to say that we would raise the limit because of that. As Henrysaid, we have M1 on probation because we really don't understand whatis going on here. It could come down within the ranges--and it couldin August, say. I don't think July is a likely month, but August is apossibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no direct disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is acknowledging that there is uncertainty and variability in the situation. He presents his own opinion and reasoning, but there is no conflicting viewpoint being expressed.


Passage number 319.
 If that should happen--MR. BALLES. The same point, of course, holds if we go toeight percent. The second quarter to the fourth quarter would be, ifI figured it right, about 5.3 percent and June to December would be2.8 percent. The fact that June is so high is obviously the reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of numbers and calculations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
MR. KEEHN. As I hear the numbers, it appears that if werebase--and I think there are some compelling reasons to rebase--andmaintain the same 4 to 7 percent range, there is a high probabilitythat we would be about in the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "I think there are some compelling reasons to rebase" indicates that there is disagreement or debate about whether or not to rebase.


Passage number 321.
 Or a possibility--MR. PARTEE. Yes. I wouldn't say a high probability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees that there is a possibility, but suggests that the probability is not high.


Passage number 322.
MR. BLACK. What bothers me about raising the upper part ofthe range as opposed to rebasing is that when we get to next year andwe want to work it down a little--if indeed we want to, and certainlyover the long run we have all agreed that we want to--if we start with8 percent, we have to work it back down to where it once was beforeand then down beyond that. And in this political environment in whichwe live, if we had 4 to 7 percent on a rebased basis, it is easy towork it down, if that is what we want to do then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns about raising the upper part of the range as opposed to rebasing, but they do not mention any opposing views or engage in an argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 323.
 If we had a 9 or 8percent top, I think---37-7/9-10/85MR. BALLES. I would like to support Bob Black's point onthat. I think [there is] the historical continuity factor asperceived by the public when we have to announce not only '85 buttentative '86 targets. We might get to the same end results byraising the range to 4 to 8 percent or even 5 to 9 percent versusrebasing and keeping 4 to 7 percent but I think it would make the 1986rationale a lot harder to establish, whatever range we decide on.Either keeping them the same as they were or cranking them down anotch would be my preference. So that led me, Mr. Chairman, to favorrebasing over raising the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a preference for rebasing the range instead of raising it.


Passage number 324.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't see anything wrong with it. Whatwe would be doing is raising the spread too, Bob. If we take it to 4to 8 percent, I don't see anything wrong with 3 to 7 percent nextyear. And I think [M1 growth] might well be very low [next year]because of Reg. Q ending, which I think is going to lead to transfersfrom checking-type to savings-type instruments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and providing their reasoning, but there is no indication of anyone disagreeing or arguing against it.


Passage number 325.
MR. BLACK. That is a good point. I think we probably willend up about the same place at the end of the year, in terms of thelevel, regardless of which course we take. The important thing iswhat we do in the shorter run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black agrees with the previous statement and believes that the chosen course will ultimately lead to the same outcome.


Passage number 326.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I can't speak with certainty, but it justseems to me that as a result of Reg. Q we can get some rebirth in thekinds of instruments that we classify as M2 rather than M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is expressing an opinion about the potential effects of a regulation without inviting any opposing viewpoints or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 327.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody who is going to move out ofsavings deposits already has.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement of fact and does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 328.
MR. PARTEE. But I am talking about moving back in, with newattractive instruments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 329.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How can you make an instrument moreattractive than a money market deposit account already is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a hypothetical question asking for ways to make an instrument more attractive compared to a money market deposit account.


Passage number 330.
MR. RICE. No minimum balance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 331.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no minimum balance on the MMDAnow, is there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is asking a question seeking confirmation, there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 332.
MR. AXILROD. Well, a thousand dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 333.
MS. SEGER. There's a limit on withdrawals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement made by Ms. Seger simply states that there is a limit on withdrawals, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 334.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it is hard to say. NOW accounts could getthe expansion, too, because there would no longer be the 5-1/4 percent[rate] limit on NOW accounts. As I say, I just have no idea. But itis conceivable that M1 could come out low in the range next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is unsure and expresses their uncertainty about the possibility of NOW accounts getting expansion and the potential impact on M1.


Passage number 335.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any information about contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the person "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without any context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 336.
 The principal change next year will be totake the ceiling off the [interest rate paid on] NOW accounts so thatit will increase the transactions--MR. PARTEE. Well, that is a possibility, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers are discussing a potential change to the interest rate on NOW accounts. Speaker 1 mentions that the change will be to remove the ceiling on the interest rate, while Speaker 2 acknowledges that this is a possibility.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 337.
MR. MELZER. One problem that I have in terms of thinkingabout rebasing--and yesterday I thought that was the appropriate way-38-7/9-10/85to go--is not knowing whether the problem is behind us. That concernsme. On the other hand, putting M1 on a monitoring basis also troublesme. As I reflected on some of the activity in terms of the foreignexchange markets and also what is happening to the growth rate in GNPhere in the United States versus overseas economies, I could see asubstantial shift in psychology in terms of what has been driving someof the capital flows in this direction. None of us really knows howthe dollar is going to correct. We have assumed an 8 percentdepreciation for next year, but it seems to me that if we got a moredramatic weakening of the dollar--not even a precipitous one, but amore dramatic one than that--that is going to feed back pretty quicklyinto inflationary expectations here, certainly amongst marketparticipants in the domestic credit markets. At the same time thatwill affect feelings about the ability to continue to finance thedeficit through foreign investments. And at the same time we havewhat we were talking about yesterday, in terms of a less favorableoutlook on the budget deficit. It just seems to me that if we were toput M1 on a monitoring basis against the backdrop of all thosepotential developments, people could question our resolve in terms ofdealing with inflation in the long term. And it could have a verysignificant impact, particularly in terms of the shape of the yieldcurve, I would say. So, as between monitoring or one of the other twooptions, I would do one of the other two. And, as I say, I amtroubled about rebasing because that implies that we know the problemis behind us. As I said yesterday, I think it is a more difficultargument to make in terms of the rationale than it was two years ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Melzer expresses his concerns about rebasing and putting M1 on a monitoring basis. He suggests that a more dramatic weakening of the dollar could lead to inflationary expectations and market participants questioning the ability to finance the deficit through foreign investments. Mr. Melzer argues against putting M1 on a monitoring basis and expresses his preference for one of the other two options.


Passage number 338.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage because only the name "Mr. Guffey" is mentioned. Additional context or dialogue is needed to make a determination.


Passage number 339.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, there has been a good deal ofdiscussion about the uncertainty of what M1 is going to do. I wouldstart from the premise that M1 has a value in that it hasinformational content even now when we are uncertain about it. Wehave seen it return to more normal relationships in the past and Iwould hope that would occur in the future. As a result, I would notwant to do away with M1 totally. But in view of the uncertainty, itwould seem to me that it makes no sense either to rebase or raise thetop limit for the reason that that uncertainty suggests: that we don'tknow whether we can hit the target if we raise the top, for example,or if we rebase. To be sure, it improves the chances. But it alsoimplies to the market, it seems to me, a precision that nobody aroundthis table believes--that we know what is going to happen to M1 in theperiod ahead. Therefore, I come to the conclusion that we should donothing with M1 other than to move it to a monitoring status. Weshould let you describe in the upcoming testimony that velocity anddemand for money have created the uncertainty; that M2, M3, and debtare all within their boundaries; that the economy is chugging along--maybe not to the level that we want, but chugging along nonetheless;and that looking at all things we are setting aside M1, which we don'tunderstand, to a monitoring status but are not totally doing away withit because it does have some information content as to direction ifnothing else. So up or down, if you will, on M1 I would describe whathas happened in the past and the uncertainty, and rely upon the othertouchstones--and I am talking about the aggregates, principally, aswell as the economy and the level of the dollar. I would not want toraise the upper limit or rebase because either one implies precisionthat we don't have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any evident contention or disagreement. It is a discussion of the uncertain nature of M1 and the author's suggestion to move it to a monitoring status rather than raising the limit or rebasing it.


Passage number 340.
-39-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage appears to be a mathematical equation or calculation, which does not involve any contentious or disagreeable elements. It is simply a numerical operation to be solved.


Passage number 341.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly share theuncertainty that has been voiced around the table about theperformance of M1. But I am a little concerned about moving it to amonitoring position at this point. If we do that, in light of whathappened last year, I think the public is going to come to theconclusion that we, in effect, are setting it aside. We moved it intoa probationary status and then we moved it back to a regular targetstatus: now if we turn around and do it again, I am a little concernedabout the public's perception about that. While there is uncertainty,I think there is some evidence, and some possibility, that M1 willreturn to more normal levels. I am inclined to believe, althoughthere are uncertainties, that this is a one-time shift and that wewill get more normal relationships in the future. For that reason, Ithink that rebasing is supportable; and for that reason I would liketo suggest that rebasing is probably the better way to go. Again, Ithink it is premature to put M1 on a monitoring status at this time.If we rebase or if we raise the targets without rebasing and find outon the basis of subsequent experience that M1 is not in fact returningto a more normal level, then I'd move it to a monitoring status or setit aside completely. I would prefer to rebase and leave the targetessentially where it is, at 4 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses some uncertainty and concern about the performance of M1 and the potential public perception of moving it to a monitoring position, but ultimately suggests rebasing as the better option.


Passage number 342.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 343.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I don't think anybody around the tablefeels terribly comfortable with any of the suggestions that have beenmade.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that "nobody around the table feels comfortable with any of the suggestions," indicating agreement among the people present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 344.
MR. GUFFEY. That's not true. [Laughter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of laughter indicates disagreement or contention between Mr. Guffey and the speaker.


Passage number 345.
]MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me that when you find yourself inthat situation, you want to keep your options open and keep someflexibility for movement between now and the time you want to chooseamong those options. As I sit here and read proposal two on page fourof the various options for the directive, it strikes me that thatparticular proposal provides flexibility, keeps options open, and isabout as sure as we can be about anything. As I read it, it puts M1on something of a monitoring range and the only thing that it commitsus to is slower M1 growth in the second half of the year compared tothe first half of the year, which seems to me about as precise as onecan be at this point. It is sort of a fuzzy middle ground, but itseems to me that is about where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Boehne is expressing his own opinion and analysis without any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 346.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say, if this is right in substance,that this is a most peculiar sentence, it seems to me. We reaffirmthe range and then we say it doesn't mean anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses their disagreement and confusion about the sentence, suggesting that if it is meant to convey a specific meaning, it is very peculiar.


Passage number 347.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, we may want to play around with thewording in terms of using the word "reaffirm." But it seems to methat this does capture the essence of where we are; one can playaround with [the wording of] this alternative. I don't think wereally know enough to raise the range or rebase because we just arenot sure what happened during the first half let alone what mighthappen. I think that most of us, certainly, would like to see slowergrowth in M1 during the second half than in the first half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a possible change in wording, but there is no argument or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 348.
-40-7/9-10/85MR. GUFFEY. I would share that [view]. I think proposalnumber 2 does capture what I have in mind: put M1 on a monitoringstatus but don't do away with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement with Proposal Number 2.


Passage number 349.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 350.
MR. STERN. I won't reiterate the reasons I expressed earlierfor favoring putting M1 on a monitoring status. But if it is on amonitoring status, we do need some range; at least in the past we havehad that. And whether we rebase or not I would prefer that we widenthe range a little, maybe to something like 4 to 8 percent. The realreason for doing that, in my mind, is that it gives us a little moreflexibility going into next year. And given all the uncertaintiesboth about the economy and about deposit flows and asset holdings, andgiven further the elimination of Reg. Q, that flexibility strikes meas desirable. For that reason, looking ahead to 1986, I would want totake this opportunity to broaden the M1 range. It seems to me itwould be on the side of prudence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Stern is expressing his personal preference for widening the range of M1 in order to have more flexibility for the future. He also presents reasons why he believes this would be a prudent decision.


Passage number 351.
MR. PARTEE. If it were 8 percent, Steve, what could growthbe from June to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question posed by Mr. Partee regarding hypothetical growth percentages.


Passage number 352.
MR. AXILROD. Recognize that a lot depends on the pattern ofthe months. Assuming essentially a straight line after whateverhappens in July, for 8 percent for the year you would have month-to-month average growth of roughly 2-3/4 percent--not much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a statement or fact without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 353.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And what would growth over thesecond half of the year be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking a question about growth over the second half of the year.


Passage number 354.
MR. AXILROD. Growth from June to December, as I said, wouldbe 2-3/4 percent; on a Q2 to Q4 basis it would be around 5-1/4percent, again depending on how the months bounce around. That, bythe way, given the staff GNP projection and the way the quarterlyaverages work out, still would give you a negative velocity in thethird quarter and then a very strong positive velocity in the fourthquarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and projections based on data and calculations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 355.
MR. MARTIN. Considering the difficulty in predictingvelocity so far in this expansion and considering the difficulty inprojecting interest rates, real and nominal, so far in this businessexpansion, it would seem to me that we would want to give ourselvesthe flexibility that has been alluded to several times here and thatrebasing gives us that flexibility. It also recognizes theunusualness of recent events with regard to both velocity and,therefore, on the other side of that coin, the growth of theaggregates. Why not give ourselves the operational flexibility thatrebasing presents and indicate--to work a word to death--theuncertainty associated with these relationships at the moment. Maybewe ought not use the term "monitoring" and so forth if our goal hereis [unintelligible]. Let us not call it "monitoring;" let us call it"bananas" or something else. But let's give ourselves someoperational flexibility. We don't know what will happen to interestrates; we don't know what the public's attitude is toward holdingvarious kinds of assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is advocating for giving themselves operational flexibility and rebasing to reflect the uncertainty and unusualness of recent events. It can be inferred that there may be others in the conversation who disagree with this viewpoint and believe it is unnecessary or not the best approach.


Passage number 356.
MR. KEEHN. While the objective in proposal 2 as stated--thatwe would expect M1 growth to slow down in the second half--is-41-7/9-10/85obviously something we desire, that proposal seems a bit on the vagueside. Perhaps we do need to be just a bit more specific about what weplan to do and how we plan to do it. Just to say it again: It seemsto me that the arguments for rebasing are compelling and I would be infavor of rebasing; I quite recognize that this may not be the lasttime that we have to do it. I don't think we ought to get into thebusiness of rebasing every other meeting--nor would I expect that tooccur--but I don't see anything wrong with rebasing now and perhapshaving to rebase some time in the future if there is a recurrence ofsome of these events. But I do think that we need to be a little morespecific as to how we are going to be conducting monetary policy. Ithink rebasing is a way of recognizing that something has taken placethat we need to deal with. Reestablishing a range provides someguidance as to what we plan to do, though always being able to usejudgment as we go along. So I would be in favor of rebasing,reaffirming the ranges at least for this year, and going into nextyear very likely with the same ranges in place for next year that wehave for this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Keehn, is expressing his opinion in favor of rebasing and providing more specific guidelines for conducting monetary policy. There is no indication of disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 357.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot answer the question as the provided passage only consists of the name "Governor Rice." More context or information is needed to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 358.
MR. RICE. Well, Gary expressed my view pretty well. Itseems to be me that raising the upper limit to 8 percent simplyrecognizes what has happened already. But at the same time, it putsus in a position to be flexible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Rice agrees with Gary's view and expresses the same opinion.


Passage number 359.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is only providing information by using the name "Mr. Boykin." There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 360.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I am having a littledifficulty following some of the discussion from the standpoint ofrebasing or raising ranges, and so forth. I still don't have a sense--maybe I am missing it--of whether or not we want to address thisvery large growth in M1 and address it forthrightly. I am leaning inthat direction in my own view. It seems to me that once that basicpoint becomes clear, how we structure our ranges then becomes a littleeasier. I am not comfortable at this point in knowing where we reallystand in terms of: Are we going to try to do something about M1 or arewe going to accept it the way it is and just let whatever happenedhappen. And based on what we think [the answer to] that might be,then decide to rebase or change the range. I guess what I am sayingis that I would like to see, however it is constructed, some movementto reduce the rate of growth in M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boykin is expressing his own difficulty in understanding the discussion and his own view on addressing the growth in M1. He is seeking clarity on whether the committee wants to take action to reduce the rate of growth in M1 or not. There is no indication that anyone else in the conversation is disagreeing with him.


Passage number 361.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you like to see some reduced growthin M1--just for instance--if trade problems continue to get worse andthe dollar goes up and the economy is in recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a hypothetical statement presenting a scenario where reduced growth in M1 could be a possible outcome if certain conditions are met. However, there is no explicit disagreement or conflict expressed.


Passage number 362.
MR. BOYKIN. To some extent, I would be inclined to do thatlooking longer term, because I have a very uneasy feeling that we arebuilding major problems as opposed to the difficult problems that wehave right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's personal opinion and concerns.


Passage number 363.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What major long-range problem will you beadjusting by curtailing M1 with the dollar strong and the economy inrecession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about a potential long-range problem and how it would be addressed in a specific situation.


Passage number 364.
MR. BOYKIN. The major problem, it seems to me, would be thepossibility of inflation coming back and coming back very strongly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states a potential problem - the possibility of inflation coming back strongly.


Passage number 365.
7/9-10/85MR. MARTIN. In a recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a date range (7/9-10/85) and mentioning "In a recession."


Passage number 366.
MR. BOYKIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without any additional context or information provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based on the response "Yes" alone.


Passage number 367.
MS. SEGER. Recession/depression.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple statement without any contention or disagreement. It mentions the terms recession and depression without providing any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 368.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I think the argument is that you havebuilt in excess liquidity that then becomes uncontrollable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply presents a statement from Mr. Partee about his own belief or opinion. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement with another individual.


Passage number 369.
MR. BOYKIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. The person simply responds affirmatively by saying "yes."


Passage number 370.
MR. PARTEE. Boy, that's a tough belief to follow right intoa recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is someone's opinion about following a belief into a recession.


Passage number 371.
MR. BOEHNE. Fundamentalist economics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states "Fundamentalist economics" which does not inherently imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 372.
MR. PARTEE. I am sure that Friedman would say that if hewere sitting here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 373.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not what he said ex post in 1933.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact and not expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 374.
MR. BOYKIN. Don't misunderstand me. I am not talking about[unintelligible] it. I am just talking about moving in the directionof some restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply clarifies their statement and expresses their intention to move towards some restraint without contradicting or arguing with anyone.


Passage number 375.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 376.
 We can conclude that everybody would bedelighted if M1 subsided without doing--MR. BLACK. And was accompanied by declining interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that everyone would be happy if M1 subsided and interest rates declined.


Passage number 377.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will stipulate that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statement that can be subject to contention or disagreement. It simply introduces the idea that the speaker is willing to agree or accept something.


Passage number 378.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, I don't think we're coming to a recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their belief that a recession is not imminent.


Passage number 379.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is a heck of a lot moreimportant what we do than what numbers we put down here, myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage expresses an opinion and focuses on the importance of actions rather than numerical values. There is no contention or disagreement present as there are no conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments expressed.


Passage number 380.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, that is what I am searching for--not howwe present it. In the final analysis it will become rathertransparent. I think the big question out there--at least in thelayman's mind--is that we have had this excess of M1 money growth andare we going to do something about it or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. Mr. Boykin is expressing his search for information and acknowledging that the ultimate outcome will become clear. He also mentions a question that is on the minds of the general public regarding the excess of M1 money growth. However, there is no conflicting viewpoint presented in this passage.


Passage number 381.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that's a question in manylaymen's minds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion or belief.


Passage number 382.
MS. SEGER. [Their question is:] Do they have a job.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 383.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, quasi-laymen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply introducing himself as Mr. Boykin and stating that he is a quasi-layman.


Passage number 384.
MR. MARTIN. Interest rates are all they care about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is a definitive statement expressing the author's opinion about what interest rates mean to the subject.


Passage number 385.
MR. BLACK. Well, I sense that the Chairman felt somewhatlike that in posing the question first as to what we do in the shortrun. I think he was saying something perfectly compatible with whatyou are saying, although his answer might not be the same as yours.But I think he was saying that's where one ought to start.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there is mention of different perspectives ("his answer might not be the same as yours"), there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 386.
7/9-10/85MR. BOYKIN. I agree. All I am saying is--and maybe you gotahead of me--that I didn't sense that that really had been answered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boykin states that he agrees with something and then explains that he didn't sense the answer to a question had been provided.


Passage number 387.
MR. BLACK. No, I agree with you. It's just that I didn'twant to be associated with you in any way, so I didn't say that. Idid really; I thought that was your best statement to date, as amatter of fact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows agreement between the speakers. Mr. Black acknowledges that he agrees with the person he is speaking to and even compliments their statement by saying it is their best one so far.


Passage number 388.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the sense of this, I guess, is thatif we don't do anything other than keep the numbers the same, weprobably ought to rebase. We can pick numbers that are the samearithmetically and that are a more forward-looking, easier translationof what we intend, rather than changing the range for the whole yearto take account of what took place in the first half of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a possible course of action (rebase) and explaining the reasoning behind it.


Passage number 389.
MR. GUFFEY. Doesn't that imply to the markets that we areintending to hit those targets if we rebase, or if we raise them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is simply asking a question about the implications of hitting the targets if certain conditions are met.


Passage number 390.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we change the existing targets, it alsoimplies that to the market. It depends on the language surroundingit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that changing the existing targets may have an implication on the market, depending on the language used to communicate it.


Passage number 391.
MR. GUFFEY. That's exactly my point. If we either changethe target or rebase, it implies that we are going to hit it. And Imight just observe that there is a possibility that if we rebase wewon't even hit the bottom end of the target. That's an outsidepossibility, to be sure; nonetheless, the possibility exists. Andcertainly it's going to put us to the test to hit the top of thetarget if we rebase. Therefore, I would opt not to do either of thosetwo things, but describe what has happened and describe what we thinkwill happen in the future and put M1 on a monitoring basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is expressing his opinion and presenting possible outcomes but does not engage in any argument or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 392.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, an alternative is not sayinganything about M1, in effect. I think that that does suspend it. Butthat does not reflect the desire that everybody would like to see itlower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 393.
MR. PARTEE. I think we do maximize our problems if we rebasebecause if things continue as they are, we are going to be over thetop; and if this was some kind of a strange aberration that isreversed, we are going to be below the bottom of a rebased number. Ithink Roger is right: that possibility increases. That exposes us tothe maximum danger of missing it utterly on either side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is agreeing with Roger's point and discussing the potential risks and consequences of rebasing.


Passage number 394.
MR. RICE. It doesn't increase that danger if we just simplymove the range to take into account what already has happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, is stating a simple observation and suggesting a solution.


Passage number 395.
MR. PARTEE. It's obvious that that's my preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply stating his preference, without any indication of opposition or contradictory views.


Passage number 396.
MR. FORRESTAL. If you keep missing the target on acontinuing basis, isn't that the time to set it aside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 397.
MR. PARTEE. We surely have missed it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is suggesting that "we" (presumably a group of people) have missed something. However, the passage does not provide any evidence of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 398.
MR. FORRESTAL. But we haven't rebased. Why not try therebasing and then--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. 

The statement "But we haven't rebased" suggests a disagreement or difference of opinion regarding the course of action to be taken. The speaker is proposing the idea of rebasing but it seems like there may be resistance or hesitation from someone else.


Passage number 399.
-44-7/9-10/85MR. PARTEE. Because we don't know why it is down. We don'tknow what accounts for what happened in May and June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the reason for the decline in a certain variable is unknown and that the cause of the events in May and June is unclear as well. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 400.
MR. GUFFEY. And we don't know whether it is over or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 401.
MR. PARTEE. We don't know whether it is over; we don't knowif it is reversing. We don't really know anything about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there is uncertainty and lack of knowledge regarding a certain topic. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 402.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I would be willing to take that chance:rebase and then see what happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, expresses his willingness to take a chance and suggests rebase as a potential action.


Passage number 403.
MR. GUFFEY. I don't share that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey simply states his personal opinion without engaging in a debate or argument.


Passage number 404.
MR. FORRESTAL. I gathered you didn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not showcase any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 405.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions Mr. Corrigan without providing any opinion or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 406.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would associate myself, at leastin part, with Tom Melzer's remarks that the frequency with which theseproblems come up--no matter how we deal with them--inevitably willraise questions about the philosophy and the practical approach topolicy that we are taking. Somewhere out in the future--I don't thinkthat we are there now--there will be at least a perception, or maybeeven a danger, that we could kind of slide into a degree ofindifference about the speed of money and credit growth, howeverdefined. There could be that danger. Primarily for that reason, Idon't want to end up in a position of altogether disregarding M1,which I think, Roger, is the logical conclusion of your position.Then, looking between rebasing and raising the range, I would have amodest preference for raising the range; I'd put it at 4 to 8 percentor something like that, with some language about probation, as opposedto rebasing. But in the end, [Mr. Chairman,] you are the one who isgoing to have explain it. I wouldn't go to war over one or the other,but I do think the integrity of the process, in a context in which theimportance of M1 for the time being is reduced, is preserved a littlebetter by raising the range rather than rebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 407.
MR. MARTIN. I would like to make the argument for rebasingon a slightly different basis. It is certainly important that thefinancial markets accept what we do here as being operationallydictated and not an abandonment of disinflation as a primary goal ofthis institution. On the other hand, it seems to me that theoperational considerations are important here and that we shouldattempt to adopt those features of a policy which are most likely,with all the difficulty of forecasting, to be attainable. We rebasedin very recent history. There was not a reinflation following thoseactions, and it seems to me that operationally we would have a littlemore flexibility [by rebasing]. We can be careful with the languagein which we ascribe weight to M1, but nevertheless I think it isimportant to reiterate that M1 is an information variable. It doeshave content; most of the time it does have information that isvaluable in the implementation of policy. I think that rebasing andthe right language accomplish this. Why not pick the alternative weare most likely to succeed in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement or contention. The speaker (Mr. Martin) is advocating for rebasing as a way to maintain operational flexibility and utilize the valuable information provided by M1, while also ensuring that the financial markets see it as a necessary operational decision rather than a abandonment of disinflation goals. This could potentially be in contrast to the views or opinions of others in the context of the passage.


Passage number 408.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you can make them arithmeticallyequivalent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 409.
-45-7/9-10/85MR. MARTIN. But we have to raise the top limit so high if wedon't rebase, Mr. Chairman. To be pragmatic, we really ought to use a10 percent top for that range and who wants to go to 10 percent. Idon't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the statement "To be pragmatic, we really ought to use a 10 percent top for that range and who wants to go to 10 percent. I don't" which suggests that the speaker disagrees with the idea of raising the top limit to 10 percent.


Passage number 410.
MR. WALLICH. I wouldn't rebase. I wouldn't change the M1range. I would just let M1 sit there with a statement that it is notmore than a monitoring--whatever the word is--variable. I wouldn'tchange any of the other ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their opinion and stating that they would not make any changes to certain variables. There is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 411.
 That makes for a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not even a monitoring range if youdon't expect to make it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a fact without contradicting any opposing ideas or opinions.


Passage number 412.
MR. WALLICH. Well, we can eliminate M1 totally, but I don'tsee any purpose in doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply stating his opinion that eliminating M1 completely serves no purpose.


Passage number 413.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The hardest thing to explain is why wewouldn't change the range and yet expect to be over it. I can seewhere one can abandon the range. That's easy to explain. If it'swider, that's another question. But I don't know how we can sit thereand say we reaffirmed the range for M1, but expect to be well over it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking an explanation for a certain situation.


Passage number 414.
MR. MARTIN. By 300 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a numerical value without any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 415.
MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The given passage does not provide any information about Mr. Rice or any situation involving contention or disagreement.


Passage number 416.
 How much over we don't know, and that's whyraising the range somewhat gets--MR. PARTEE. I am rather impressed with the integrityargument that Jerry just gave. People who have been around here forsome years know that we are often accused of rebasing any time we getinto trouble. That has been a constant source of friction anddifficulty in discussions of these matters. I think we can rebase ifwe have a good argument for rebasing. My problem with rebasing now isthat we don't know what has happened. In 1982 it was a stab, but itsure looked as if [M1 growth] was running way off. Right now we don'tknow. What we really have is a couple of high months, which happen tobe the months just right now, and we don't know what is going tohappen. And when we rebase, it looks like we are rebasing to make iteasier. That's the old complaint about rebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 417.
MR. MARTIN. Chuck, we have had interest rates come down 400basis points from their peaks and, in somewhat more recent time, 200basis points. That must have some relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is making a statement about interest rates coming down and suggesting that there must be some relationship.


Passage number 418.
MR. PARTEE. I think that's a reason for raising the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Partee is simply expressing his opinion or suggestion without any opposing views or arguments mentioned.


Passage number 419.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say, I don't see much differencebetween rebasing and raising the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker states that they do not see much difference between rebasing and raising the range. This is a personal perspective or opinion rather than a conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 420.
MR. PARTEE. I do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement made by Mr. Partee, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 421.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, there is a cosmetic difference and I thinkPres has put his finger on it. It's just the numbers you look at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Boehne agrees with the point made by Pres regarding the cosmetic difference in the numbers.


Passage number 422.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Cosmetically, I don't see any substantivedifference; arithmetically it is equivalent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they do not see any substantive difference cosmetically and that arithmetically it is equivalent. This suggests that the speaker sees the two aspects as similar and comparable, without any contradiction or argument.


Passage number 423.
-46-7/9-10/85MR. PARTEE. I think the majority have indicated that theyare not prepared to wring out the high M1 numbers. So we are onlytalking about cosmetics. We have given up on substance here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It states that the majority are not willing to address the high M1 numbers and suggests that they have given up on making any significant changes.


Passage number 424.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I just don't see the cosmeticdifference in your own terms between saying we are raising the rangeor we are rebasing. They both amount to the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating that they do not see a difference between two terms (raising the range and rebasing) and believes they both mean the same thing. It is a statement of personal opinion rather than a disagreement with another viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 425.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Arithmetically, obviously you canmake them come out to the same thing. But to my way of thinking--again, this is a highly judgmental thing--[there is a difference].Raising the range and accompanying that with some verbiage along theline that several people, including Mr. Stern, have suggested says: Wedon't know what has happened; we don't know if it's over; we stillthink over time this variable matters; and we still have a view overtime as to what we would like to do, but we are not going to--particularly in these current circumstances--let that view get carvedin stone. Now, rebasing seems to say something that in my judgment isa little different than that. The way that it is different is that tome it does not carry the same conviction in terms of what we aretrying to do over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is a difference in interpretation or perspective between the speaker and others regarding the concept of "raising the range" versus "rebasin


Passage number 426.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You escape me. We raise the [M1 growth]rate for a year and that expresses a great conviction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing that the other person is elusive or difficult to catch or understand. They then suggest raising the growth rate as a means of expressing a strong conviction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 427.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It doesn't express great conviction.I just don't think we can go on in the situation that we have in termsof rebasing when we don't have a good explanation as to why we arerebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage expresses hesitation and doubt about the idea of rebasing without a clear explanation. The speaker indicates a lack of conviction and suggests that there may be disagreement or contention about the situation.


Passage number 428.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's your good explanation as to why youare raising [M1 growth] rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for a good explanation for raising M1 growth rates.


Passage number 429.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Because I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The reason is that the passage is not provided or specified.


Passage number 430.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You lose me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "You lose me" is a straightforward statement indicating that the speaker no longer understands or is no longer interested in what is being said. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 431.
MR. PARTEE. In one case you wipe the slate clean and in theother case you don't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two different scenarios or situations without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 432.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You wipe the slate clean and end up with alower number; you don't wipe the slate clean and end up with a highernumber. I don't think it takes any genius to say that you are at thesame place at the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage presents a logical and straightforward cause-and-effect argument without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 433.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think you can count it either way.All I'm saying is that in my judgment it strikes me a little better,and that's all, to do it that way. But I could live with it the otherway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: 
There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their personal judgment or preference but also expressing openness to considering an alternative viewpoint.


Passage number 434.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't make any difference either way;you end up in the same place, except in the one case you are puttingin higher numbers and in the other case you are not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply presenting two different scenarios where the outcome is ultimately the same.


Passage number 435.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, coming back to both the integritypoint and to Bob's point about what it is that we want to do with M1:Although I have a technical preference that I have already expressedfor not doing anything on the M1 target and declaring it a monitoring-47-7/9-10/85range, it seems to me the real issue here is not so much technicallywhat we do, but the words you use to surround it. The real issue isthat you in fact very carefully describe to people what it is about M1and the uncertainty, what the circumstances are that we find ourselvesin, and what kinds of circumstances we might find ourselves in thefuture that might cause us to do this, that, or the other thing.Those words in the end will be what preserves our integrity, whatevertechnical mechanism we use at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their technical preference but acknowledges that the real issue is how the situation is described to others.


Passage number 436.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The speaker states that they agree with something, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 437.
MR. BLACK. I pretty well agree with you, Mr. Chairman, thatthere isn't a lot of difference, but one minor issue is: Which onewould make it easier for us as we work over the long run to lowerthose ranges. That's why, frankly, I came out in favor of the 4 to 7percent range, rebased. I think it would be easier to get it down, asI assume we are going to have to do over time, if we have a top of 7percent rather than a top of 8 percent. But that is a very minorpoint, probably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black expresses his preference for a 4 to 7 percent range, while acknowledging that it is a minor point and may not have a significant impact. This disagreement is evident in his statement that he believes it would be easier to lower the ranges if the top is 7 percent rather than 8 percent.


Passage number 438.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Rebasing carries a little more implicationthat we think this is probably an exceptional circumstance. If youdon't rebase, you are starting with a higher number, and it's harderto put it down lower the lower you get. That's what it amounts to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement explains the implications and consequences of not rebasing, without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or disagreements.


Passage number 439.
MR. BLACK. That's my point, really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any evident contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or clarification made by Mr. Black.


Passage number 440.
MR. BOEHNE. How do you view this. You are the one who hasto sell this and we are talking a lot about cosmetics here. Do youthink there would be a big problem if we suspended the M1 rangealtogether versus trying to put something in there that we say wedon't know very much about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different options and asking for opinions.


Passage number 441.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the trouble with that from mystandpoint is that if we ever have to tighten, it's good to have thatM1 number out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement presenting a personal opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 442.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The word "yes" confirms that there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 443.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we abandon it completely, we've lost a[unintelligible]. Suppose it runs [above] whatever we put down,whether we change it for the year or rebase. We could always say, ifwe have to, that we have persuasive enough evidence that says we'regoing to run above it. If we don't have it out there at all, and wedon't want to run above it, that's a little hard to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is discussing the potential consequences of abandoning something without providing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 444.
MR. BOEHNE. Good argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 445.
MR. PARTEE. It could be very hard to put back in too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a stand-alone statement and does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 446.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess what the cosmetic issue comes downto is whether we want to say primarily that we think this is anexceptional case or whether we want to build the kind of backgroundfor a permanent increase in the rate of increase in M1. It might beright, if in fact the trend velocity is changing. Maybe it is. Ithink probably it is. Maybe we don't want to move the money supplydown to where we used to think that we wanted to move it, because withthe changed structure, it's going to have to be higher relative to the-48-7/9-10/85nominal GNP. If that's what you think, then change the range for thewhole year and begin getting people used to higher M1 numbers. If theodds are this is once and for all, rebase it. Who knows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is discussing different possibilities and potential actions related to the money supply but does not express disagreement with any specific viewpoint.


Passage number 447.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that, contrary tosome of the views that have been expressed here, there is no greaterimplication of being forced to hit a rebased target than if we didn'trebase. I don't know what experience or earlier precedent wouldcorrespond to that conclusion. Circumstances change and uncertaintiesdevelop that we don't anticipate; I don't think we are stuck with anyrebased range any more than we are stuck with hitting today's range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is expressing his opinion and stating that he does not believe there is any greater implication in hitting a rebased target compared to not rebasing. He acknowledges that circumstances change and uncertainties develop, so he believes they are not stuck with any specific range.


Passage number 448.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I am saying. Thedifferences are relatively minor, but I do think it depends uponwhether you want to get people used to higher M1 figures as a kind ofnorm or not. I think we are getting used to higher M1 figures anyway,because that's probably the fact of the situation. So, it's aquestion of how fast you want to go in that direction. I think it'shard to go from 5 to 9 percent--or whatever we are talking about if wedon't rebase--down to 4 to 7 percent if that's where you want to gonext year. Or less. It's much easier to do that if you rebase anddon't have to go down at all or go down a relatively minor amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the potential consequences of different approaches to handling M1 figures.


Passage number 449.
MR. BALLES. That's the big argument in favor of rebasing, inmy opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting the speaker's opinion in favor of rebasing.


Passage number 450.
MR. BLACK. Mine too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black simply agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 451.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All I'm sure of is that we are going todecide one way or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the future decision but does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 452.
MR. GUFFEY. I would like to ask a question about your laststatement that it is more difficult to go to 4 to 7 percent next yearfrom the 5 to 9 percent. If we rebase or raise the range this yearbecause of an aberrant behavior of M1 that we think is behind us, andwe select the fourth-quarter average as the next year's startingpoint, I don't see that 4 to 7 percent is any more difficult in 1986from either of those two starting points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 453.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That doesn't say that you cannot do it. Ijust say that, marginally, it takes a little more explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying that while something may require more explanation, it is not impossible to do.


Passage number 454.
MR. GUFFEY. And the explanation has to be that it was a one-time aberration that occurred in M1 in 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the given passage. It states an isolated event that occurred in M1 in 1985 without any contrasting opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 455.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. Do you express a one-timeaberration more clearly by rebasing or by raising the range for thewhole year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking whether expressing a one-time aberration is better done by rebasing or by raising the range for the whole year.


Passage number 456.
MR. GUFFEY. I guess I would suggest that we don't do either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Even though Mr. Guffey suggests not doing either of the options, there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the statement.


Passage number 457.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Don't do either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Since there is no passage provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 458.
MR. GUFFEY. Don't do either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because Mr. Guffey is simply advising someone not to do something without expressing any opposing opinion or engaging in an argument.


Passage number 459.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But what I find a little difficult to sayis that we haven't changed our range but we expect to be above it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states a fact about their range not being changed and expresses their expectation of being above it in the future.


Passage number 460.
-49-7/9-10/85MR. GUFFEY. We said at the beginning of the year that we seta range of 4 to 7 percent and that we expected to be at or near thetop. And indeed, we are above the top because of unforeseencircumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that they are above the expected range due to unforeseen circumstances.


Passage number 461.
 I don't see any problem with admitting that andadmitting that we don't know--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will admit that we are above the top.That's where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their perspective and acknowledging that they are in a superior position.


Passage number 462.
MR. MARTIN. If we do neither, every Friday we are going tobe confronted by The Wall Street Journal's bad diagrams showing us notjust above the top of the cone but at an extreme distance above thetop of the cone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Martin about the potential consequences of not taking action. It does not mention any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 463.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we express it strongly enough,they might stop showing the chart. But I take it that that's not whatyou want to do. You want to retain some discipline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating different possibilities and considering what the listener wants to achieve. There is no conflicting opinion or opposition expressed.


Passage number 464.
MR. MARTIN. That diagram looks out of control.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That diagram looks out of control" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is simply an observation or opinion about the diagram's appearance.


Passage number 465.
MR. PARTEE. That's because it is out of control.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply states a fact without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 466.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know quite what words we would useto say our range is 4 to 7 percent but it doesn't mean anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. It simply states that the speaker is unsure of the specific words to use to describe a range of percentages.


Passage number 467.
MR. GUFFEY. You simply would describe in your testimonythat, because of the uncertainty. M1 is on a monitoring basis orhowever else we may describe it; that it has informational content sothat we are going to retain it; and that we don't know what is goingto happen over the remainder of the year but we are still dedicated tothe proposition that we are going to move toward price stability inthe period ahead. And we do that with the 1986 targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply describing their testimony and stating the dedication to moving toward price stability.


Passage number 468.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can explain abandoning M1; that'sstraightforward. But I don't know what the 4 to 7 percent means if weare not intending to--. There is no content.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their confusion and lack of understanding regarding a specific topic.


Passage number 469.
MR. GUFFEY. I think that's correct. But I don't know thatyou can explain any better 4 to 7 percent rebased or raising the rangeto 5 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Guffey acknowledges the correctness of the statement and simply expresses uncertainty about providing a clearer explanation.


Passage number 470.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have to say I think we expect tobe within the range. That's not a promise. We can violate it again,if that's the wisdom. But at least I can say we expect to be aroundthe upper edges. We do think it's once and for all--well, not quiteonce and for all--a step function. I don't find that very difficult.To explain that we don't have an M1 range is simple enough too. WhatI find a little difficult to say is our range is 4 to 7 percent, butthat doesn't mean anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and explaining their thoughts on the topic, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 471.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, I think we can find words to get over thathump, if that's the only hill we have to climb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Guffey expresses a belief that they can find words to overcome a challenge. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 472.
MR. PARTEE. Well, if you feel much more comfortable withrebasing, I'll accept it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing acceptance of the suggestion to use rebasing.


Passage number 473.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, much more comfortable is anexaggeration. I don't feel very comfortable with no change at all.-50-7/9-10/85Probably a better expression of where we want to be is to rebase--assuming that the arithmetic is all the same anyway [and] there is noargument on what it should be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion about being comfortable and discussing the idea of rebasing without any argument.


Passage number 474.
MR. MORRIS. My problem with setting new guidelines is thatif we have every reason to believe that we are going to get stillfurther lagged responses to declines in interest rates that havealready taken place, that's a big uncertainty. It, therefore, makesmore sense to me to set aside M1 as a target variable for this yearand reconsider it again for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is expressing his personal problem and uncertainty with setting new guidelines, but there is no explicit disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 475.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a perfectly coherent approach.Presentationally, it's easy. I don't see any objections to that side.That's a question of substance: whether we want to set aside M1 thatfar, which says we can't come back later in the year and say we thinkM1 is too high, in effect. It makes it more difficult. Do we want tothrow out--throw out is a bit exaggerated--the possibility of sayingthat M1 is just too high and we want to tighten up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing different approaches and considerations related to M1. There is no indication of contention or disagreement between the speaker and anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 476.
MR. MORRIS. Well, if M1 is too high because the economy isstronger, the other measures are going to be too high as well. Idon't see that retaining M1 is that critical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his opinion and stating that he doesn't see the retention of M1 as critical.


Passage number 477.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As a practical matter, I'm not surehow Peter and Steve would go about constructing a framework to operatein, literally, if we just throw it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about how Peter and Steve would go about constructing a framework, which suggests a lack of knowledge or understanding rather than disagreement.


Passage number 478.
MR. MORRIS. We did it in 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that "we" did something in 1982, but does not indicate any opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 479.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We didn't throw it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "We didn't throw it out" is a simple statement of fact without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 480.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In 1982, what did we do--rebase in themiddle of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 481.
MR. AXILROD. 1983.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement with a year mentioned.


Passage number 482.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did we do in 1982. We didn't doanything in 1982. We just ran above it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker first makes a statement about what they did in 1982, then contradicts it by stating that they didn't do anything in 1982. This contradiction does not involve opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 483.
MR. AXILROD. No, I don't think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion without any conflicting views being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 484.
MR. MARTIN. We ran at 8.8 percent against a top of 5-1/2percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker states that they ran at 8.8 percent, which is higher than the top of 5-1/2 percent. This indicates a contention or disagreement in terms of the numerical values or performance being discussed.


Passage number 485.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were within the range at the midyearmeeting, I guess, in 1982 and we just let it run above [later].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement recounting a situation without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 486.
MR. AXILROD. I think you made a statement in September orOctober of 1982 to indicate that that was happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a statement made by someone in the past without any further context or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 487.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we did was: We didn't change ourrange in mid-1982. We ran above it. We set a new monitoring range atthe beginning of 1983, and then we rebased in the middle of 1983.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states a sequence of actions or decisions that were made.


Passage number 488.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement and does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a confirmation or agreement.


Passage number 489.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we said we were going to be moreserious about it. That's the difference. In the middle of 1983 we-51-7/9-10/85rebased and said we were going to get a bit more serious about it, Iguess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they made a decision to be more serious about something.


Passage number 490.
MR. PARTEE. This time we're going to rebase but we're notgoing to get more serious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a decision or plan without any indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 491.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This time we rebase and say but we're notgoing to get more serious. Well, we didn't say much more serious, asI remember. We still called it a monitoring range. Okay. I guess wedidn't get a lot more serious about it in the middle of '83--onlyslightly more; we got more serious about it at the beginning of '84.Well, we'll go to something easy, like next year. Does anybody havestrong feelings about next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a timeline of events but there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 492.
MR. MORRIS. I just have one thing, Mr. Chairman. As I said,the evidence suggests to me that nobody knows whether it's a permanentchange or not. But the fact is that it does seem now to take moremoney, more liquid assets, and more debt to generate a dollar of theGNP. Therefore, it seems to me that there is a strong case formaintaining the ranges and making no change for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and making a suggestion based on their interpretation of the evidence.


Passage number 493.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For M1 for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides information about M1 for the next year without any indication of conflict or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 494.
MR. MORRIS. I'm for [retaining them] where they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I'm for [retaining them] where they are" suggests that Mr. Morris supports keeping something or someone in a certain place, while others may have differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 495.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're for alternative I for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply expresses a preference or choice without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 496.
MR. AXILROD. That retains the ranges for this year for M1and M2 and reduces the range for M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement indicates that there is a reduction in the range for M3, which suggests a disagreement or contention regarding the appropriate range for that particular measure.


Passage number 497.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just reduces the top end of the rangefor M3 by 1/2 percentage point; that's all it does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 498.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without more context, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 499.
 I don't--MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The person simply agrees with what Mr. Axilrod has stated.


Passage number 500.
 It reduces credit and I wouldthink--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It reduces the debt range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a cause and effect relationship without expressing any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 501.
MR. AXILROD. --you would reduce M1 if you move up the rangeor rebase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a hypothetical scenario without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 502.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we're leaving M1 aside for themoment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are temporarily setting aside M1, without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 503.
 The other three--MR. MORRIS. I don't see any case for reducing the M3 anddebt ranges. What rationale is there for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the speaker does not see a case for reducing the M3 and debt ranges and is asking for the rationale behind such a decision.


Passage number 504.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the main rationale is that this tracksthe nominal GNP. The rationale is that there would be less debtexpansion because the increase in spending is lower in '86 than in '85because of the turn in the balance of payments. But that may or maynot happen. And secondly, we expect that there will be less mergeractivity. That's the rationale.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing some reasons or justifications for a certain course of action, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement present.


Passage number 505.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the phrase "MR. MORRIS" does not provide enough context for me to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Please provide more information or the actual passage for a more accurate analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 506.
 Yes, but I think there's going to be---52-7/9-10/85MR. AXILROD. Our point estimate for 1986 is 10.4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage as the speaker begins by saying "Yes" but then introduces a different viewpoint by saying "but I think there's going to be" a different percentage.


Passage number 507.
MR. MORRIS. 1986 will probably have a higher nominal GNPthan 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a prediction or expectation.


Passage number 508.
MR. AXILROD. Well, as I say, one of the questions raised is:Does the Committee like the GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only presents a question without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 509.
 If they don't like the GNP--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's correct. The GNP estimates[of Board members and Presidents]--well, there is a 5-1/2 percent onthe low side and an 8-1/2 percent peak--are bunched in the 6-3/4 to 8percent area, roughly. If you just took that and said there shouldn'tbe any velocity changes, you're more or less satisfied there. And forM2 and M3 and debt you could take alternative I or you could takealternative II too; there isn't much difference. Alternative IIIbegins to look like a squeeze on our projections of nominal GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their opinion and making observations about different economic factors, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 510.
MR. AXILROD. That was our idea, Mr. Chairman. AlternativeII in some sense gives a little looser fit, which would provide someroom if the Committee wanted to express a view of wanting more nominalGNP than is in the staff projection. Alternative III is tighter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any signs of contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply explaining different alternatives and their characteristics without expressing any conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 511.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is so little difference between Iand II that it's negligible, it seems to me. Alternative III doesbegin to be a pretty tight fit, given the nominal GNP figures that areprojected. You can argue that they're too high, I suppose, if youwant to tighten it. I think you have to begin arguing that, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "You can argue that they're too high, I suppose, if you want to tighten it" suggests that there is a potential disagreement about whether the GNP figures are accurate or too high.


Passage number 512.
MR. MARTIN. I think part of that argument, Mr. Chairman,turns on the expectation of what is the real growth trend line. Is itreally 2 or 2-1/2 percent or is it 3 or 3-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the different possibilities for the real growth trend line and does not involve conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 513.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, here I'm just talking about M2 andM3 and debt for which, presumably, in the long run there isn't anytrend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a general observation about M2, M3, and debt, stating that there is no trend in the long run.


Passage number 514.
MR. BLACK. You meant real GNP didn't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 515.
MR. MARTIN. Yes, I'm talking about real GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply mentions Mr. Martin discussing the concept of real Gross National Product (GNP), without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 516.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I'm sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It expresses a polite apology.


Passage number 517.
MR. MARTIN. If 2 to 2-1/2 percent is the trend, then wecould be comfortable with the staff structure rather than our ownhigher projections. But if that's incorrect and the longer-termgrowth line is around 3 or 3-1/2 percent, then the staff model willgive us higher unemployment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing two different scenarios and their potential impact on unemployment, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 518.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where our real GNP average[projection] is. It looks like it ought to be over 3 percent. Well,I don't know; some are more pessimistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker first expresses uncertainty about the real GNP average projection and then mentions that some people are more pessimistic about it. This indicates disagreement or contention between different perspectives or opinions on the topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 519.
MR. MARTIN. Personally, I think it's closer to 3 or 3-1/2percent and, therefore, we're flirting with higher unemployment at 2to 2-1/2 percent real growth. Why should we take that risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Martin, presents his opinion that the real growth rate is closer to 3 or 3-1/2 percent, which would result in higher unemployment. This differs from an opposing viewpoint that may argue for a lower real growth rate and a lower risk of unemployment.


Passage number 520.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it's fair to say by andlarge that the projections for next year cluster around a 3 percent-53-7/9-10/85real growth. So, alternative I and alternative II would allow forthat. You could argue that that's too low, but [unintelligible]probably higher price figures than are likely. Another fall of thedollar--. Well, I'm just looking at the easy aggregates now: M2, M3and debt. Who's for alternative I. Who's for alternative II. Who'sfor alternative III. That knocks out alternative III. Not everybodyraised his or her hand by a long shot. The difference between theseis very small: it's 1/2 percentage point on the upper end of M2 and1/2 percentage point on the upper and lower end in the debt range. M3is the same [in both]. If I don't hear great howls, it seems to methose are nice round numbers; we don't get into halves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting different alternatives and asking for opinions, but there is no expressed opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 521.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, they are nice round numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply affirming that the numbers mentioned are nice round numbers.


Passage number 522.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Alternative I for M2, M3, and debt--that'sall I'm talking about. Now, M1 is another story. That may affectwhat people want to do about this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the discussion is focused on alternative I for M2, M3, and debt, and that M1 is a separate matter.


Passage number 523.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Partee's views or any conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 524.
 With monetary--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The choices given range from 3-1/2 to6-1/2 percent to 4 to 8 percent. Who has a strong feeling about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Instead, it presents a range of choices for an unidentified topic related to monetary rates. The question at the end asks who has a strong feeling about that, indicating a curiosity about people's opinions rather than a dispute.


Passage number 525.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't know how you can have astrong feeling about M1 at all right now. But, again, I would have apreference--not a strong feeling--for the specifications ofalternative I. That's against the background of what I think is oneof the stronger economic forecasts for next year. And I think thereis a very plausible case developing that the velocity of M1 may bemoving lower. Maybe in the current institutional, inflation, andinterest rate environment the kind of trend or expected behavior of M1velocity is more like 1 percent instead of 3 percent. That's what I[tend to factor] into my own thinking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and thoughts about M1 and its specifications based on economic forecasts. They also mention a plausible case for the lower velocity of M1. However, there is no conflicting viewpoint presented or opposition addressed in this passage.


Passage number 526.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe it's even zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Maybe it's even zero" does not involve contention or disagreement as it suggests a possibility without any opposing views or arguments presented.


Passage number 527.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot attend the meeting today.


Passage number 528.
 No,--MS. SEGER. Minus 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The conversation is simply stating "No" in response to a question or statement.


Passage number 529.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I certainly don't have any illusionsabout that judgment, but I think the M1 specifications of alternativeI are quite compatible with growth in the real economy of 4 percentnext year, which is basically what is in my forecast anyway. So,that's where I come out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and there is no mention of conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 530.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] maybe you get 1 percentincrease in velocity with that projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a possible outcome or result without any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 531.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage itself is not provided, so it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 532.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even if you're in the top of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a hypothetical scenario without any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 533.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided so I cannot determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 534.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I like 4 to 7 percent too, because this issupposed to be a tentative indication for next year. We know verylittle about what M1 is doing, as we are going to admit in one way or-54-7/9-10/85another again. So I think tentatively what we should say is that wewould hope to reestablish this range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his personal preference for a 4 to 7 percent range and acknowledges the limited information available about M1. He suggests tentatively reestablishing this range, implying agreement with the idea.


Passage number 535.
MR. BLACK. There is a cosmetic aspect in this. If we voted4 to 8 percent this year, then 4 to 7 percent looks better to me fornext year than if we vote 4 to 7 percent rebased and 4 to 7 percentfor next year. I think we ought to appear to be working toward ourlong-run objectives; I'd like to see it a little lower than whateverwe select.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is expressing his personal preference and opinion regarding the appearance of the vote result.


Passage number 536.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, it gets back to the explanation that wegive for why the ranges in M1 are no longer valid. If we think it'ssomething more permanent, then it's going to be hard to argue to keepdropping the top of M1. If we argue that it's a one-shot deal in1985, then one can make the argument. I find it hard to decide whatto do in 1986 until I have some sense as to which argument you feelmost comfortable giving for whatever we're going to do on M1 in 1985.I think there's a logical consistency here that one needs to pay a bitof attention to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their uncertainty about what to do regarding M1 in 1986 until they have a clear understanding of the argument being made for M1 in 1985.


Passage number 537.
MR. BLACK. But if, by the time we get to 1986 we have thatinformation on the velocity of M1, as I assume we will--and if itlooks as if it has permanently declined--then I would be willing to goup at that point. I don't see that evidence now. When we had thelast episode in '82-'83 we had a decided decline in inflationaryexpectations and there was reason to expect the trend rate to decline.We haven't had that this time, as I read it. So there is less reasonto expect the trend to decline, although there certainly does appearto have been that one-time downward shift in velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of one person's opinion and interpretation of data.


Passage number 538.
MS. SEGER. What if it isn't a one-time downward shift. Whatif it's going to happen again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply posing a hypothetical scenario, without expressing a conflicting opinion or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 539.
MR. BLACK. If it keeps happening, it's going to become moreor less permanent and then I'd be willing to have higher ranges.That's what I'm saying. By that time I think we would have theevidence, and I would favor higher ranges if that is in fact true.I'm a real pragmatist, despite what you may think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is expressing his views and stating that he would be willing to consider higher ranges if certain conditions are met. He also mentions that he is a pragmatist, indicating a practical and flexible approach to the situation.


Passage number 540.
MS. SEGER. You're a purist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement made by the speaker is simply stating a fact or opinion about the person being addressed without any opposing views or conflicting statements being presented.


Passage number 541.
MR. BLACK. I'm a pure pragmatist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply stating that he is a pure pragmatist, without any indication of opposition or debate.


Passage number 542.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose there's something to be said for4 to 8 percent simply on the basis that it's a wider range, given allthe uncertainties we have talked about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply acknowledging that there is value in considering a wider range (4 to 8 percent) because of the uncertainties previously discussed.


Passage number 543.
MR. MARTIN. And given that we will be overshooting--overshooting, changing, rebasing, and so forth for this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating the actions that will be taken for the current year.


Passage number 544.
MR. WALLICH. I would find it hard to understand. It's truethat there's greater uncertainty, but also the number is higher. Theupper number is higher and it sounds as though we are yielding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Wallich mentions that there is greater uncertainty, but also acknowledges that the number is higher. There is no clear contention or disagreement present; it is simply a statement of facts.


Passage number 545.
MR. MARTIN. It's not higher than what actually is going tooccur in 1985. It's much lower; 8 is lower than 10, I believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is simply stating a fact and expressing his belief about a numerical comparison.


Passage number 546.
MR. PARTEE. We don't know what's going to happen in '85.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact, indicating that there is uncertainty about what will happen in 1985. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 547.
7/9-10/85MR. MARTIN. I wouldn't bet on 8 percent for '85.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they would not bet on an 8 percent outcome for 1985.


Passage number 548.
MR. PARTEE. I wouldn't bet on 10 percent either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing his opinion about not betting on a certain outcome.


Passage number 549.
MR. KEEHN. In that this is a preliminary look at next year,it seems to me that establishing a range of 4 to 7 percent now wouldbe appropriate. If the circumstances are significantly changed at theend of the year and we want to have a higher range next year, we willbe perfectly free to do that when we get into the February meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is suggesting that establishing a range of 4 to 7 percent for next year is appropriate and that if circumstances change, they can adjust the range in the February meeting. There is no explicit disagreement or contention present in this passage.


Passage number 550.
MR. BALLES. I happen to agree with Si on that, but I thinkit's time for our semi-annual reminder from Steve. The July figurethat we pick out, as I seem to recall, Mr. Chairman, more often thannot--and probably very more often than not--is never changed by thetime we get to January. For some reason this Committee has felt inJanuary that we ought to stick with what we picked out in thebeginning of July. Am I wrong on that, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles agrees with Si and is simply seeking clarification on a procedural matter from Steve.


Passage number 551.
MR. AXILROD. Well, let us get the figures; I just want tocheck my memory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod is simply requesting figures to verify his memory.


Passage number 552.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 4 to 7 percent looks like aperfectly reasonable figure on the kind of analysis we used to use.Whether that's still reasonable in terms of potential velocity undertoday's conditions is the question; it's an awfully tight fit. And itassumes an increase in velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement and then raises a question related to that statement.


Passage number 553.
MR. STERN. I come out on the other side, given that this isa preliminary number. For that reason I'd start with something like 4to 8 percent. If the economy is doing better as the year progresses--and when we get into 1986 if M1 is looking a little more reasonable--it seems to me that February would be the time to move to 4 to 7percent. I suspect (a) that that's not a big change; and (b) that 4to 7 percent would seem to be appropriate and easily justified underthose circumstances at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing their opinion on the appropriate range for interest rates based on certain economic conditions.


Passage number 554.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how many like 4 to 7 percent. Howmany like 4 to 8 percent. That encompasses the range, unless somebodyelse has some other feeling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for input or clarification on a specific range of percentages.


Passage number 555.
MR. BLACK. Not knowing what we're going to do this year, butassuming we might rebase with 4 to 7 percent, I like 3-1/2 to 6-1/2percent [for 1986]. I think a lot of people are going to say when werebase that in fact we have eased. And if we don't wave the flag andshow some determination to deal with inflation down the road, then Ithink we've got a problem there. That's why I'd put it a little lowerthan whatever we select for [this] year. It might be merely astatement of pious intention, but I think it might be important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is sharing his personal opinion and perspective on the matter.


Passage number 556.
MR. WALLICH. It would be a very [specious] thing, though, tosay we don't know what M1 is doing and now we're going to change therange by 1/2 point. I would try to convey the sense that M1 is insuspense, and that is best done by an unchanged range for 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is expressing their opinion or perspective on the matter but there is no explicit disagreement or argument being presented.


Passage number 557.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, in response to President Balles'question, we really do change the ranges at the February meetings fromwhat was adopted tentatively. Only in one year, 1982, were all the-56-7/9-10/85ranges tentatively adopted maintained. In four other years--this isgoing back to 1981--there were substantial changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the changes in ranges adopted in February meetings over the years. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 558.
MR. BALLES. Oh yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only includes the statement "Oh yes" by Mr. Balles, which does not show any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 559.
MR. AXILROD. Sometimes there were changes in M1. The mostspectacular, of course, was in February 1983 when M1 was deemphasizedto a monitoring range and that monitoring range was raisedsubstantially from the one that had been adopted the previous July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states that there were changes in M1 and mentions one significant change in February 1983. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 560.
MR. BALLES. I take it all back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is taking back their previous statement or retracting it.


Passage number 561.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I find it difficult to work up agreat deal of emotion in assuming what the language is going to be;it's quite tentative anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not present a clear contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the speaker's difficulty in getting emotional about predicting the future of a language, as it is uncertain.


Passage number 562.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The word "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Without any further context, it is unclear what the disagreement is about.


Passage number 563.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we probably ought to do the shortrun and come back to this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 564.
MR. BLACK. This gets back to your point, Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker simply refers to "Bob's point" without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 565.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The situation we have is that the economylooks pretty sluggish and there is not much sign of a breakout on theup side, apart from looking at the M1 figure. If you look at the M1figure you might say that maybe we are going to have a great increase[in GNP]. I don't know where that's coming from. But as a practicalmatter, if you wanted to stimulate, where can you stimulate. You canstimulate housing, which is already high, and maybe consumption andyou would get more distortions in the economy and more imports. It'shard for me to see, particularly in the midst of this, that we shouldtighten up, barring evidence that the economy is expanding [too fast]or further evidence on Ml. So, I conclude that we [should] stay aboutwhere we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply presenting their analysis of the economy and their conclusion based on that analysis.


Passage number 566.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No argument here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 567.
MR. MARTIN. I have no argument with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they have no argument with the topic being discussed.


Passage number 568.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose what that means, just in termsof setting forth specifications, is that we do something likealternative B, with a clear understanding that everybody would bedelighted, I'm sure, if July and August suddenly had a jump downwardin M1. We would not take that as a sign for great easing unless itwere accompanied by very clear evidence that, say, the dollar wasstrong and the economy was weak. Conversely, I certainly would agree,if M1 continued high and there were pretty definite signs--or somesigns anyway--that the economy was expanding more rapidly, we mighthave to react. Even then I'd be a little more tentative about that ifthe dollar turned out to be very strong. I don't think the dollarwill turn out to be strong during this period. Hypothetically, Ithink we could get a combination of a declining dollar, a little moreevidence of business firmness, and a high M1, and then we wouldtighten up. Except we don't make that decision today. We would makethe decision to do that if those circumstances arose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing different hypothetical situations and expressing their thoughts and opinions about them. They mention various conditions and criteria that would need to be met for certain actions to be taken, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 569.
-57-7/9-10/85MR. BALLES. I would support alternative B, Mr. Chairman. Ithink that makes a lot of sense in view of all the uncertainties we'rewrestling with here. I think the other alternatives would be puttingup too big a bet. One of the things about alternative B that I likeis that it's more or less an explicit admission--at least I interpretit that way--that we're prepared to go along with the overshoots inthe first half of the year and we have no intention of trying to getM1 back within that original range. I think that would be a terriblemistake in view of all the uncertainties we've heard around this tablethe past two days. Therefore, I think alternative B would make a lotof sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles expresses his support for alternative B and explains why he thinks it is the best option given the uncertainties they are facing.


Passage number 570.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you say alternative B, you are alsoencompassing something around the borrowing target that's in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining that choosing alternative B includes consideration of the borrowing target.


Passage number 571.
MR. BALLES. Oh, yes.SPEAKER(.). Which is what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles simply agrees with the statement made by the Speaker, indicating that there is no disagreement between them.


Passage number 572.
MR. MARTIN. $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply states a monetary figure.


Passage number 573.
MR. BALLES. Around $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states the amount of money as being around $350 million without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 574.
MR. WALLICH. The principal argument in favor of "B," itseems to me, is that it is clearly and definitively inaction. Anyaction that is possible here is very small relative to the distortionin M1 that has taken place. So, one would seem to be making a half-hearted gesture trying to deal with M1. "B" seems to say we're nottaking M1 seriously and we're suspending judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MR. WALLICH explains his view on the argument in favor of "B" and presents his perspective without conflicting with any opposing ideas.


Passage number 575.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're in favor of "B".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that the person is in favor of "B" without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 576.
MR. WALLICH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 577.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Me too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Me too" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply an expression of agreement or solidarity.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 578.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Corrigan is in favor of "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. More context or information about Corrigan's stance is needed.


Passage number 579.
"MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I would support alternative Balso, for many of the reasons given. I think stimulation of any kindat this point, as you've indicated, would get us exactly where wedon't want to be--stimulating the side of the economy that doesn'treally need it and not doing much for the areas that are really,really distressed. I think it's too early to make a move one way orthe other without further economic indicators. So, I would supportalternative B with the borrowing at around $325 to $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and provides reasons for their position, but there is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 580.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I myself, just in the area of fine tuning,would say $350 million played somewhat cautiously. In other words, itmight be more likely to be higher rather than lower, depending uponhow market conditions develop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is expressing a personal opinion about the potential value of something.


Passage number 581.
MR. GUFFEY. $350 to $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply provides a figure of $350 to $400 million without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 582.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's getting a little narrow,considering what we've gone through. Basically, I would aim at $350million but not put funds in there if the market is very easy and---58-7/9-10/85SPEAKER(.). That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply expressing a viewpoint or making a statement.


Passage number 583.
MR. KEEHN. I would be in favor of that. I'd be a littleclearer in my judgment if I knew what we were going to do with regardto the rebasing of ranges. But basically, I'd be in favor of "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their support for something, but also indicates that they would like more information before forming a complete judgment.


Passage number 584.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's make this all tentative untilwe come back and look at the package as a whole. And we have toconsider the language too. But you're basically "B".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that they should temporarily consider the information as tentative until they have all the necessary factors, such as the complete package and considering the language, to make a final assessment. They also express agreement with the person they are speaking to, who is described as being "B".


Passage number 585.
MR. KEEHN. Right, with a trending up in the borrowing alongthe lines you described.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement made by Mr. Keehn.


Passage number 586.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't say trending up. Trending upif the economy gets stronger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion or perspective on the economy.


Passage number 587.
MR. KEEHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since you only provided the name "MR. KEEHN" and did not provide any accompanying passage or context, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the nonexistent passage. Therefore, the answer is no.


Passage number 588.
 Tolerance of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Tolerance, okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Tolerance, okay" suggests acceptance or endorsement of tolerance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 589.
MR. FORRESTAL. Then does that tolerance include a little onthe down side if the economy turns out weaker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage.
The mention of "a little on the down side if the economy turns out weaker" suggests that there might be differing opinions or concerns regarding the potential consequences of a weaker economy.


Passage number 590.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 591.
 Well,--MR. FORRESTAL. You know, there's not much difference betweenthem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing ideas. It is simply stating that there is not much difference between two things.


Passage number 592.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if the economy turns out weaker,then we have different circumstances. Then, I presume we would writea directive that says if everything comes out weak we would ease andif everything turns out tight, we would tighten. But I'm talkingabout apart from that now; I think the word "tolerance" is for alittle higher [borrowing] depending upon market circumstances. It'swhat we have been doing, basically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply discusses potential actions based on different economic scenarios and states a personal opinion about tolerance for borrowing.


Passage number 593.
MR. GUFFEY. I would support "B" with the caveat on theborrowing. It would appear, just looking back at the historicalnumbers, that the $350 million is pretty low. And we have had thefederal funds rate dropping below the discount rate for some shortperiod of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement expresses support for option "B" with a caveat on borrowing and makes an observation based on historical numbers.


Passage number 594.
 Whatever the number is, I'd start at $350 million askind of the base--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 595.
MR. GUFFEY. --and accept something a bit higher than thatproviding the funds rate is trading around the 7-3/4 percent level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Guffey is suggesting accepting a slightly higher interest rate if the funds rate is around 7-3/4 percent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 596.
MR. BLACK. If we got 5-1/2 percent [M1 growth] from June toSeptember, and then to December, that would mean for the year as awhole it would be something in excess of 9 percent. That seems alittle too rich for me. I just don't think we need quite that muchliquidity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Black, expresses disagreement with the idea that there should be "something in excess of 9 percent" liquidity for the year. He believes it is "a little too rich."


Passage number 597.
MR. PARTEE. The problem is that July is rather high and wecan't affect July; it may be the wrong number but we are not going toaffect it. And then it drifts right down; by September the pointestimate is 4 percent or something, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating that the number for July is high and cannot be influenced, and then mentioning how the estimate decreases by September.


Passage number 598.
-59-7/9-10/85MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no text provided in the passage to analyze and determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 599.
MR. PARTEE. I think that's about as sharp a dampening as onewould want, Bob. And what we would then look forward to is a lowerfourth quarter than the third quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 600.
MR. BLACK. Well, on a quarterly basis, the second quarter tothe fourth quarter would be 7.6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a percentage without any opposing viewpoints or contradictory information.


Passage number 601.
MR. PARTEE. That's continuing in the fourth quarter what thethird quarter--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is stating that the fourth quarter is a continuation of the third quarter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 602.
MR. BLACK. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The response "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the specific content of the passage, it is not possible to determine the nature or subject of the disagreement.


Passage number 603.
MR. PARTEE. I could accept that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee states that he could accept something, without any opposing statements or conflict.


Passage number 604.
MR. RICE. I would like to see some gesture in the directionof less M1 growth, but I don't want to tighten up the interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, expresses a preference for decreased M1 growth but also states that he does not want to tighten up interest rates.


Passage number 605.
MR. BLACK. I think that's where I am, Emmett.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating Mr. Black's location.


Passage number 606.
MR. RICE. So, I could go for alternative B, keeping in mindthat at the next meeting it might be necessary to do something totighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear expression of contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice is simply stating his preference for alternative B and expressing the possibility of needing to take action in the future.


Passage number 607.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, under certain conditions, it may benecessary to do something before then. That would not be to get alower M1, I guess, but in response to a still higher one. Who else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 608.
MR. RICE. A minor gesture for public relations reasons mightnot hurt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that making a minor gesture for public relations reasons might be beneficial.


Passage number 609.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have different public relations inmind than I do, Emmett.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they have different ideas or perspectives on public relations compared to Emmett.


Passage number 610.
MR. MARTIN. I support alternative B with $350 million ofborrowing for reasons already given.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their support for alternative B with $350 million of borrowing and mentions that they have already provided reasons for their support.


Passage number 611.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of Governor Seger does not provide any information that can lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 612.
MS. SEGER. I guess I'm more concerned about the health ofthe economy than most of my colleagues. The sluggishness in someareas is actually almost to be described as a recession, if you lookat certain parts of the industrial sector. And Mr. Guffey's farm areaI would almost call a depression. Looking at the strong dollar andthe effect that it's having on the manufacturing sector, I wouldreally like to push for something that is considered easing; if that'salternative A, then that's what I would vote for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Ms. Seger expresses her concern about the health of the economy and shares her perspective on certain areas being in a recession or depression. She also states her preference for an easing measure in response to the strong dollar's effect on the manufacturing sector. There is no mention of any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement with other colleagues.


Passage number 613.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's alternative A by golly. Doesanybody else have anything. Well, it looks like the center of gravityis at B. Is the coffee out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are simply discussing different options or opinions without expressing disagreement or argument.


Passage number 614.
MR. BERNARD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given passage only consists of a statement made by Mr. Bernard, and there is no evidence of any contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 615.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we have our coffee. We'll comeback and consider what the directive should say for the near term andconsider the longer-run alternatives, working around alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply suggesting getting coffee and discussing the directive, considering different options for both the near term and longer-run alternatives.


Passage number 616.
-60-7/9-10/85[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we might return to this issue ofthe targets for the year. If I am correct, I think the sentiment isto change the targets. Let me assume that for the moment, one way oranother. If we change it to 5 to 9 percent for the year as a whole,that is roughly the same as rebasing it at 4 to 7 percent. Is thatcorrect, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a statement and asking for confirmation from Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 617.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker simply confirms that the statement or information mentioned is correct.


Passage number 618.
 The upper limits would beroughly--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not quite the equivalent, I suppose.If we change it to 4 to 8 percent or 5 to 8 percent with rebasing,what's that equivalent to. That's equivalent to 5-1/2 to 9-1/2percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement making a comparison between different percentage ranges.


Passage number 619.
MR. AXILROD. Well, 8 percent is roughly 9-1/2 percent and 5percent is roughly 8 percent for the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states numerical equivalences without any indication of disagreement or disagreement.


Passage number 620.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I assume we're going to do something inthat area with some language fuzzing up M1 to some extent. Those arearithmetic equivalents, so I think it's purely a presentationaldifference. Let's talk about the substance for a moment, which I willsay whichever way you [want me to] present it: Is it 5 to 9 or 5 to9-1/2 percent, which are the equivalents of 4 to 7 and 4 to 8 percent,[respectively]. Is it the lower or the higher of those that we'retalking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is not contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and discussing the different ways to present the information.


Passage number 621.
MR. MARTIN. It's the higher, to give ourselves operatingroom when the expectation, I think, on balance still is for a higherrather than a lower rate of growth in M1, even given the decisionsmade in the short run. I don't think we should set ranges that wefeel have a higher probability that we can't obtain them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, expresses his opinion that they should set higher ranges for the rate of growth in M1, even if they may not be able to achieve them.


Passage number 622.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm confused.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 623.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not discussing whether we rebase ornot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any discussion or disagreement about rebasing.


Passage number 624.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Oh, I know. I'm confused becauseyou've lost me on the numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is admitting their own confusion and lack of understanding about the numbers mentioned by the other person.


Passage number 625.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Looking at it in annual terms, the issueis whether we make the high number--which is the relevant one--9 or9-1/2 percent; they are equivalent on rebasing to 7 or 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting two options (9 percent or 9-1/2 percent) as equivalent and discussing how they would be rebased to 7 or 8 percent. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 626.
MR. MARTIN. I'm arguing for 8 or 9-1/2, Mr. Chairman,depending on which way the Committee goes. It's operational; I'lljoin the pragmatists. We heard from a pragmatist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin states that he is arguing for either 8 or 9-1/2, depending on which way the Committee goes. This suggests that there are different viewpoints and potential conflict within the Committee regarding the decision.


Passage number 627.
MR. BLACK. Well, as another pragmatist, I'll take the otherside on that because I think that that 9-1/2 percent, even with allthese things going on, might be a little too much liquidity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply expressing an alternative perspective as a pragmatist.


Passage number 628.
MR. PARTEE. It's the same amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It's the same amount" does not indicate any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 629.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The given passage only provides a name, "Mr. Black," without any context or information that would suggest contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 630.
 No, you see---61-7/9-10/85MR. WALLICH. The symbolism is tremendous, it seems to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "No, you see" indicates that the speaker disagrees or wants to present an opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 631.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Mr. Black" without providing any context or information that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 632.
 Yes, but it's not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to talk in terms of therebased numbers so we don't have to keep talking in terms of both,without in any way prejudging that decision. Let's just refer to therebased number or the other number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests using rebased numbers as a way to avoid confusion or bias, without expressing a preference for either option.


Passage number 633.
MR. MARTIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: Based on the provided passage, there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 634.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let's do that. Rebased.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is agreeing to a suggestion or proposal.


Passage number 635.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's use the rebased number, which givesus two round numbers. We're talking about 7 percent or 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting two options (7 percent or 8 percent) using the rebased number format.


Passage number 636.
MR. MARTIN. 8 percent.SPEAKER(.) 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a statistic (7 percent) in response to Mr. Martin's statement (8 percent).


Passage number 637.
MR. BLACK. 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of a percentage without any room for disagreement or contention.


Passage number 638.
MR. BOEHNE(.). 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a percentage without any conflicting statements or opinions.


Passage number 639.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many do we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any context or information that could cause contention or disagreement. It is a simple question that lacks any contentious or disputable content.


Passage number 640.
 One 8 percent--MR. WALLICH. 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions two percentages, 8 percent and 7 percent, without any conflicting statements or opposing views.


Passage number 641.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the given passage.


Passage number 642.
MR. KEEHN. 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 643.
MR. FORRESTAL. 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement of a percentage, which does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 644.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who am I hearing 7 percent from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking from whom the speaker is hearing 7 percent.


Passage number 645.
MR. PARTEE. The problem is that 7 percent is very tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact about the tightness of the 7 percent.


Passage number 646.
MR. MARTIN. Very, very tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states that something is "very, very tight," without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 647.
MR. PARTEE. That's the trouble with rebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Partee without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 648.
MR. MARTIN. Not with 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage only contains a numerical statement, "Not with 8 percent," and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 649.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 650.
 Well, it's the same--MR. BLACK. That's no tighter than 9 percent if we don'trebase. It's the same; well, it's 1/10th of 1 percent different, if Iread it right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the numerical value of a percentage and acknowledging a small difference in their interpretation.


Passage number 651.
MR. PARTEE. I think if we're going to rebase that we oughtto have a figure that we can have some reasonable presumption ofhitting, so I'm for 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating his opinion or suggestion.


Passage number 652.
MS. SEGER. I'm for 8 percent also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: No contentious or disagreement is evident in the given passage. The individual simply states their preference for 8 percent without any contradictory or opposing statements.


Passage number 653.
MR. RICE. If we rebase, we may as well make it 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Rice is a suggestion or proposal, rather than a point of contention.


Passage number 654.
7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm assuming people want to be consistentarithmetically whether or not we rebase. So, I'm automaticallyassuming anybody that says 8 percent is for 9-1/2 percent on M1 if wechange [the range] for the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is stating an assumption about people's consistency in arithmetic calculations.


Passage number 655.
MR. RICE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Rice simply acknowledges or agrees with the previous statement or question without expressing any opposing views.


Passage number 656.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I would take 9 percent. I'd skip the 1/2point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 657.
MR. RICE. No, no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be determined by the repetitive use of the word "no" and the lack of opposing viewpoints or contradictory statements.


Passage number 658.
MR. BLACK. Well, that puts you back down to 7 percent then,Chuck, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is made in a matter-of-fact manner without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 659.
MR. PARTEE. The 1/2 point does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage does not explicitly mention any disagreement or contention, but the presence of Mr. Partee's statement suggests a potential disagreement or differing opinion. The use of the phrase "The 1/2 point does" also indicates that there may be an opposing view or argument being presented.


Passage number 660.
MR. BLACK. Yes, it does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Yes, it does" does not contain any contention or disagreement as it simply affirms the previous statement or question made by someone named Mr. Black.


Passage number 661.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To repeat: The arithmetic equivalents, Ithink, are 9-1/2 and 8 percent and 9 and 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I think" indicates that the statement is an opinion or personal belief. It does not present any opposing views or contradict any previous information.


Passage number 662.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I can live with 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 663.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, cosmetically, people may think it'sdifferent. They may be happy to do 4 to 8 percent but not 5-1/2 to9-1/2 percent, even though they're the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that some people may have different perspectives on percentages, even if they technically represent the same values.


Passage number 664.
MR. MARTIN. The media will talk about the top of the range;the media will talk about 8 percent. They've done it again and again.I think, cosmetically, we will have them talking about rebasing forone day and it will be forgotten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is expressing his belief that the media will briefly discuss rebasing before moving on to other topics, without indicating any disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 665.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I've heard from everybodyhere. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses uncertainty about whether everyone in the group has spoken.


Passage number 666.
MR. BALLES. Oh, I guess to give us a little room I'd go for8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is simply expressing his opinion or preference.


Passage number 667.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage just states the name "Mr. Black" without providing any additional information or context to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 668.
MR. BLACK. 7 percent for me, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a percentage that Mr. Black is requesting for himself.


Passage number 669.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well I've heard from all the Committeemembers. Do I want to hear from anybody else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing that they have already received input from all the committee members and is considering if they want to hear additional perspectives.


Passage number 670.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It depends on what they want to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 671.
MR. BLACK. The Committee members didn't do a particularlygood job; maybe you ought to listen to them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply expressing an opinion and suggesting that the listener should heed the input of the Committee members.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 672.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any non-Committee members have a strongfeeling that they want to affect this narrow balance here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The reference to "non-Committee members" suggests that there are individuals who may have a different perspective or desire to influence the stated "narrow balance." This implies a potential disagreement or contention between the non-Committee members and the existing balance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 673.
MR. MORRIS. They both seem unrealistic to me, Mr. Chairman.One is growth of 1/2 to 1 percent June to December and the other is2.8 percent; and both of those seem improbable. No, that's not right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris disagrees with the growth percentages presented and expresses his disbelief in their probability.


Passage number 674.
-63-7/9-10/85MR. PARTEE. 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple calculation of subtracting two fractions and a whole number.


Passage number 675.
MR. BLACK. It's 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It's 5 percent" is simply stating a fact without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 676.
MR. MORRIS. I thought you were talking about 7 or 8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I thought you were talking about 7 or 8" is a simple clarification or misunderstanding, rather than a sign of disagreement.


Passage number 677.
MR. PARTEE. This is quarter 4. We're talking aboutrebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the topic of discussion is rebasing in quarter 4.


Passage number 678.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is if we rebase, which is theequivalent of 9 or 9-1/2 percent if we do the full year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a potential percentage value depending on a certain action being taken.


Passage number 679.
MR. PARTEE. That's a little more than 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement without any conflicting opinions or contradictory viewpoints.


Passage number 680.
MR. MORRIS. I could take it; I was looking at the wrongnumbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris simply admits that he made a mistake by looking at the wrong numbers.


Passage number 681.
MR. BOEHNE. If we're going to take the heat of rebasing orupping the range, it seems to me we ought to go far enough to give ussome breathing room. I wouldn't want to go six months and every weekget hit on the head because we have gone over target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a personal opinion.


Passage number 682.
MR. PARTEE. Rebase again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply suggesting to "rebase again."


Passage number 683.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll just add that we're going tostart off high and we're just stuck here. Unless we rebase on thefirst week in July, we're going to start out above. I don't know thatwe start out above the parallel lines, but the parallel lines close uppretty fast; we've only got six months. But we're going to start offwell above the cone simply because the trajectory was so sharp inJune. It's not going to look appreciably different whether we pick 7or 8 percent because it doesn't make any difference when we're thatclose to the origin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing their own analysis and explanation without contradicting or challenging any previous statements.


Passage number 684.
MR. PARTEE. What about 3 to 8 percent, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is asking about a specific range (3 to 8 percent), and there is no indication of any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 685.
MR. BLACK. That's a little sneaky.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 686.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 687.
 At least that says that--MR. PARTEE. If it comes back down, why, we'll accept it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The statement is a simple assertion or acceptance of a future possibility.


Passage number 688.
MR. WALLICH. Yes, that they're not taken to be quite soweighty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their agreement with the idea that the issue being discussed is not considered to be very serious.


Passage number 689.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are so many permutations andcombinations. What we have is a slight majority for 8 percent at themoment. Now, let's see whether this has affected where you are onrebasing or not. Let me just ask the Committee members; we'llprobably be 50/50. Now, all of this is going to have some kind oflanguage that depresses the importance of M1, probably somewhat shortof calling it a monitoring range, if I understand this [discussion]correctly. It won't be demoted all the way to a monitoring range butit will be deemphasized a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 690.
MR. PARTEE. With a certain amount of diffidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. The use of the word "diffidence" suggests that Mr. Partee is speaking with hesitation or lack of confidence, but there is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 691.
-64-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. Who wants to rebase. One,two, three, four, five, six. [Secretary's note: Messrs. Balles,Black, Forrestal, Keehn, Martin, and Ms. Seger.] Did I count thatright. Yes, just what I figured.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply counting a group of people and confirming that they have counted correctly.


Passage number 692.
MR. BLACK. Well, you could break the tie, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that the chairman could break a tie.


Passage number 693.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We don't have a tie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply states that there is not a tie. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 694.
MR. MORRIS. Now ask about the other one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 695.
MR. PARTEE. Ask about the other one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply suggests asking about something else without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 696.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you mean: Who doesn't want to rebase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question stating a common desire, without implying any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 697.
MS. HORN. If you want [to be] certain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that would indicate contention or disagreement. It seems to be a straightforward statement or question about wanting certainty.


Passage number 698.
MR. PARTEE. You definitely want to rebase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Partee is expressing his stance or opinion, but there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 699.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You think that some are indifferent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that "You think that some are indifferent," without any indication of disagreement or contention. It seems to be a neutral statement, describing a belief or perception without expressing any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 700.
MR. RICE. Probably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not present any conflicting opinions or arguments. It is a straightforward statement.


Passage number 701.
MR. BLACK. There are 6, and if the Chairman is going withit, there would be 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply stating a fact about the number of people involved.


Passage number 702.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who doesn't want to rebase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking who does not want to rebase.


Passage number 703.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I'd go with rebasing provided we staywith the 4 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement and preference.


Passage number 704.
MR. PARTEE. The reason I asked is that I'm going to votewith you. I would prefer not rebasing; but if you want to rebase,I'll rebase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee states that he is willing to vote with the person he is speaking to, indicating a willingness to compromise even though he may have a personal preference.


Passage number 705.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think this is the most crucialissue in the world. Let me ask the question somewhat differently.Who feels strongly that we should not rebase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It expresses a personal opinion about the importance of a certain issue and seeks to understand the feelings of others without indicating any conflicting perspectives.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 706.
MR. GUFFEY. I'm not a voting member, but I would prefer notto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I would prefer not to" indicates that Mr. Guffey holds a different opinion or preference.


Passage number 707.
MR. PARTEE. You could hardly be strong about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a neutral observation about the speaker's lack of strong conviction or confidence.


Passage number 708.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who feels strongly that we should rebase.That was 3 or 4 members. We have more qualitative strength of feelingon that side. Now, we'll lose them all when we put the numbers on.The majority was for 4 to 8 percent if we rebased. Or we could makeit 3 to 8 percent. Does that help. Would people like to make it 3 to8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 709.
MR. MELZER. That might give a little more room to toleratemuch slower growth toward the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply suggesting that tolerating slower growth towards the end of the year could be a possible solution.


Passage number 710.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody object to saying 3 to 8percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is asking if anyone has an objection to the suggested range of 3 to 8 percent, but it does not provide any contradictory or dissenting opinions.


Passage number 711.
MR. PARTEE. It gives you a little better average too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 712.
-65-7/9-10/85MR. BLACK. I don't object to the 3 percent; I object to the8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 713.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who's in favor of 3 to 8 percent, rebased.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 714.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's a landslide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "That's a landslide." This is a simple observation or statement of fact.


Passage number 715.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, I don't think we're going toget any combination that's better than that, but the floor is open foranybody who wants to try another number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and offering others the chance to suggest a different number.


Passage number 716.
MR. FORRESTAL. I said 4 to 7 percent originally, but I don'tfeel strongly enough about 3 percent on the down side; it seems to meto be fairly unimportant given the state of M1 at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Forrestal is simply expressing his opinion and indicating that a 3 percent decrease is not significant in the current state of M1.


Passage number 717.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a way we could face that, I suppose,is if the dollar were weak, quite weak, and we felt it necessary torespond to it. If we began getting low money supply numbers, we mightwant to say that's fine--with that big increase we had in the firsthalf of the year and the dollar weak, the economy is going to getbetter. That's the kind of conditions. It may be a very outside[chance], but I don't think it's absolutely impossible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a hypothetical scenario and expressing their opinion that it is unlikely but not impossible.


Passage number 718.
MR. FORRESTAL. [Unintelligible] on the high side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 719.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more context.


Passage number 720.
 If this May-June increase is reversible, wecould get--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, just as a kind of natural reflux plussomething else. As soon as we want to be pretty restrictive we mightrun into a low number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting a scenario and discussing the potential outcome.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 721.
MR. KEEHN. What's the message that moving the band from 3points to 5 points conveys to the markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests there may be contention or disagreement about the message conveyed by moving the band from 3 points to 5 points in the markets. The mention of the question and the potential implications of the change indicate differing perspectives or potential debate.


Passage number 722.
MR. PARTEE. Some uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply mentions uncertainty but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 723.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that probably is fair enough,isn't it, given all the uncertainty we've expressed. That seems to beconsistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a fair and consistent viewpoint based on the uncertainty mentioned.


Passage number 724.
MR. KEEHN. It's a fairly heavy change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a "fairly heavy change," without any conflicting opinions or opposing arguments.


Passage number 725.
MR. AXILROD. That gives you approximately 7 percent for theyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. It simply states a figure or statistic without indicating any conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions.


Passage number 726.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided a passage for me to analyze. Could you please provide the passage you would like me to assess for contention or disagreement?


Passage number 727.
MR. AXILROD. It makes it approximately 7 percent, 6.8percent, for the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states a numerical figure without presenting any conflicting views or contradictory information.


Passage number 728.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: not having access to education do to children's future prospects?

No. This passage merely poses a question and does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 729.
MR. AXILROD. The 3 percent lower limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement by Mr. Axilrod regarding the 3 percent lower limit, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions presented.


Passage number 730.
MR. PARTEE. If we happen to get 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It only mentions Mr. Partee and indicates a potential outcome of "getting 3 percent."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 731.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The use of the word "Yes" by Mr. Axilrod suggests that he disagrees or is in conflict with something mentioned or implied before this statement.


Passage number 732.
 Therefore, this involves no change---66-7/9-10/85MR. PARTEE. I could buy the top with a 3 percent [lowerlimit].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement that implies a lack of change or disagreement.


Passage number 733.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, there have been an awful lot of double-digit months followed by zero months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement conveyed in this passage as it simply states a fact without any opposing opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 734.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions the title/position of Chairman Volcker and does not provide any information or context about any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 735.
 I think it's very unlikely we would get 3percent, but I don't--MR. PARTEE. I do too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers express agreement by saying they believe it is unlikely to achieve a 3 percent outcome.


Passage number 736.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we had a combination of a desire totighten some plus a kind of natural reflux, I don't think it'sabsolutely impossible. I don't think it would be very hard from aJune base, but it's awfully hard from a second-quarter base, given howhigh we start out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 737.
MR. GUFFEY. But with only a 6-month horizon we ought to havea wider band.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 738.
 A 3 to 8 percent range would be a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that. I don't know what thearithmetic is, but to get 3 percent for the year we'd have no growthfrom now on, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker agrees with the proposed 3 to 8 percent range but expresses doubt about achieving 3 percent growth for the year.


Passage number 739.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod simply acknowledges that the statement being made is correct.


Passage number 740.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's pretty low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 741.
MR. AXILROD. It means after July it would be negative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or contradictory statements. It simply states that after July, the situation would be negative without any disagreement expressed.


Passage number 742.
MR. KEEHN. Then what do we do about the range for next yearif we have 3 to 8 percent for the rest of this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question about what to do regarding the range for next year's performance, based on the projected range for the remainder of the current year.


Passage number 743.
MR. PARTEE. 3 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a range of percentages.


Passage number 744.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was 4 to 7 percent that we were talkingabout, wasn't it. Well, is there a preference for 3 to 8 percent asopposed to 4 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply raises a question about the preference for the percentage range.


Passage number 745.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, I have a preference.SPEAKER(.) Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 746.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I've found a fair amount of supportfor 3 to 8 percent, all things considered. Does anybody have aproposal that they think will attract more support. We were going tokeep the other aggregates unchanged, right. Well, let's try somelanguage. Let me suggest something like this--and this is surely notwritten in concrete--looking at the language on page 20 [of theBluebook]: "In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at thismeeting reaffirmed ranges for the year of"--whatever they are for M2and M3. What is it, 6 to 9 percent--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about finding support for a proposal and suggesting language for it.


Passage number 747.
MR. BERNARD. 6 to 9 percent for M2 and 6 to 9-1/2 percentfor M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states two different percentages for M2 and M3 without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 748.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --"and 6 to 9-1/2 for M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 749.
 The associatedrange for total domestic nonfinancial debt was reaffirmed at"--7/9-10/85MR. BERNARD. 9 to 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The information provided is a specific range for total domestic nonfinancial debt that has been reaffirmed. There are no conflicting opinions or opposing arguments present.


Passage number 750.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --"9 to 12 percent." Now, if we changethe base we would say: "The base for the M1 range was moved forward tothe second quarter of 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about the changing base for the M1 range.


Passage number 751.
"MR. PARTEE. And the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their name and acknowledging the subject of discussion.


Passage number 752.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "--was moved forward to the second quarterof 1985 and established at 3 to 8 percent, tentatively, in theexpectation of a return of velocity growth toward more usual patterns,following a sharp decline of velocity during the first half of theyear." I would insert something like "the appropriateness of the newrange will continue to be reexamined in the light of evidence withrespect to economic and financial developments, including foreignexchange markets." That is an attempt to say that we'll look at thiswith some flexibility but not use the term "monitoring range." Andthen I would leave that last sentence, I think: "The Committee agreedthat growth in the aggregates generally may be in the upper parts oftheir ranges, depending on continuing developments with respect tovelocity and provided inflationary pressures remain subdued.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a slight change in wording and clarifying the flexibility in monitoring the ranges, but there is no disagreement or conflict with the original statement.


Passage number 753.
" Howdoes that package--MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine as the passage provided is incomplete.


Passage number 754.
 Would you read that last part about--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me read the whole thing again.This has some preliminary boilerplate sentences, if you go back to getthe whole thing, to the effect that the Federal Open Market Committeewishes to do wonderful things. "In furtherance of these objectivesthe Committee at this meeting reaffirmed ranges for the year of 6 to 9percent for M2 and 6 to 9-1/2 percent for M3. The associated rangefor total domestic nonfinancial debt was reaffirmed at 9 to 12percent. With respect to M1, the base was moved forward to the secondquarter of 1985 and a range was established at 3 to 8 percent in theexpectation of a return of velocity growth toward more usual patterns,following a sharp decline in velocity during the first half of theyear. The appropriateness of the new range will continue to bereexamined in the light of evidence with respect to economic andfinancial developments, including foreign exchange markets. Moregenerally, the Committee agreed that growth in the aggregates may bein the upper parts of their ranges, depending on continuingdevelopments with respect to velocity and provided that inflationarypressures remain subdued.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses the decisions and ranges set by the Federal Open Market Committee for various economic indicators.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 755.
"MR. AXILROD. "At an annual rate" [should be added] after the3 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The disagreement is indicated by the phrase "should be added" which implies that Mr. Axilrod believes there is a missing information that should be included after the range of 3 to 8 percent.


Passage number 756.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Established at an annual rate of 3 to 8percent". It sounds awkward. That's the way to make it sound lower:"established at 1-1/2 to 4 percent". I guess we say "at an annualrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The provided statement does not present conflicting viewpoints or opinions. It seems to be a comparison or suggestion for expressing a lower rate. It is a matter of style or preference, rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 757.
"MR. BLACK. I guess so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Black "guesses" something without any opposing or conflicting statements.


Passage number 758.
MR. PARTEE. It might take some a while to pick that up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that picking up a certain thing might take some time for some individuals.


Passage number 759.
-68-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, if we change the range for theyear we have to have a somewhat different sentence here, taken offfrom the other sentences in the directive. But how does that sound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is discussing a potential change in a sentence based on a modified range for the year, but there is no conflicting opinion or argument present.


Passage number 760.
MR. AXILROD. That would be followed I assume, Mr. Chairman,by that paragraph that we didn't repeat on the top of page 20. "TheCommittee understood that policy implementation would require..." andall that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the order of information being presented.


Passage number 761.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Where is that." The statement is a standalone question that does not express any contrasting viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 762.
MR. AXILROD. It's on the top of page 20. That's the nextparagraph in the structure of the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement indicating the location of a specific paragraph in a document.


Passage number 763.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why do we need that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement. It is a simple question asking why something is needed.


Passage number 764.
MR. PARTEE. We had that, didn't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee, which is followed by an incomplete sentence. Without further context, it is not possible to determine if there is disagreement or contention.


Passage number 765.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We already have it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "We already have it." It is a simple statement suggesting that something is already present or available.


Passage number 766.
MR. AXILROD. You can take it out with the new wording.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is suggesting a revision or amendment to a particular wording without expressing any argument or opposition.


Passage number 767.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Answer: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The sentence "MR. PARTEE" does not convey any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 768.
 Yes, I should think that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's in the short-term part. Why can't wejust take that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The phrase "Yes, I should think that" indicates agreement or affirmation rather than contention. The second sentence about taking something out does not introduce any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 769.
MR. AXILROD. I think the way this is reworded, you certainlycan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is expressing his opinion that the statement has been reworded in a way that allows for a certain possibility.


Passage number 770.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the way I've just written thissentence, what I inserted has some of that sense. The appropriatenessof the new range just applies to M1. If that general language seemsall right, this of course assumes that we rebase. It also containssome numbers. I don't think there's any dispute with the numbers forM2, M3, and debt. I don't know that anybody has any better number toput in for M1. Does anybody have anything further to say aboutwhether we rebase or not. If not, maybe we better vote on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation and input from others on the topic of rebasing and the numbers involved.


Passage number 771.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 772.
 This is for the 1985 ranges:Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black NoPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let us go on to the 1986 ranges; I'm notsure I remember what we decided on before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents the positions of various individuals without indicating any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 773.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Could be good reason for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Could be good reason for that" merely suggests the possibility of a valid explanation behind a certain situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 774.
-69-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there was agreement on M2, M3, anddebt. It would be: "The Committee agreed on tentative ranges ofmonetary growth measured from the fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourthquarter of 1986--". Well, the first question that arises is whetherwe want to leave M1 in that same sentence or deal with it separately.The numbers anyway are: 6 to 9 percent for M2; 6 to 9 percent for M3;and the associated range for debt was 8 to 11 percent. I think wepretty much agreed on that part. Now, whether we leave M1 in thissentence or not, I think we probably would want to say somethingseparately about M1. Wasn't that the sense of where we were. Or wecan just leave it. I don't know. What do you think. There was somedisagreement about whether it should be 4 to 8 percent or 4 to 7percent, with a majority at 4 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The disagreement arises on whether the range for M1 should be 4 to 8 percent or 4 to 7 percent.


Passage number 775.
MR. PARTEE. Well, all of these are tentative. Is there someword like "tentative" in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply introduces the idea that all of the mentioned items are tentative but does not express any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 776.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It starts out by saying "tentativeranges." I think that's the question: whether we somehow want to tryto indicate that M1 is even more tentative than usual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement in question is about indicating that M1 is more tentative than usual, which suggests a subjective perspective or opinion rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 777.
MR. PARTEE. Especially tentative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the mentioned passage.


Passage number 778.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context to indicate contention or disagreement related to Chairman Volcker.


Passage number 779.
 "Agreed on tentative ranges for M2 and M3and an even more tentative range--"MR. WALLICH. I think there's something to be said forstaying with 3 to 8 percent and carrying that forward. But if wedon't, then at least the midpoint should be preserved so that 4 to 7percent is the logical thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a discussion of different possible ranges for M2 and M3. The statement by Mr. Wallich suggests a consideration for staying within a range of 3 to 8 percent, but also suggests preserving the midpoint if that range is not chosen.


Passage number 780.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 3 to 8 percent was not in theballpark when we discussed it earlier. I'm not saying we can't do itnow. I just have the feeling, in light of the earlier discussion,that if they're all left in the first sentence that way, which may beall right, we should put in a sentence saying that the Committeerecognized that the behavior of M1 velocity was subject to particularuncertainties that would require reexamination at the beginning of theyear or something. Does that thought make sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 781.
MR. MARTIN. Yes, that makes sense; and then preserve the 3to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging that what was stated makes sense.


Passage number 782.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It cuts the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage alone does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 783.
MR. RICE. Or we can say 4 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents two options without any evident contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 784.
MR. MARTIN. But I want to go from 3 to 8 percent to 4 to 7percent, you see, eventually. And I want to start at 3 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker wants to start at a range of 3 to 8 percent, while they eventually want to move to a range of 4 to 7 percent. This indicates a disagreement or contention about the initial range they should start with.


Passage number 785.
MR. KEEHN. Again, this is preliminary. What if we did go to3 to 8 percent now and 4 to 7 percent but use some caveats that if thenormal relationships didn't reemerge, we might consider a wider band.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is proposing a hypothetical scenario and suggesting the use of caveats.


Passage number 786.
MR. MARTIN. But they haven't reemerged. Why startbackwards.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion or curiosity about the reason for starting backwards.


Passage number 787.
MR. KEEHN. Well, they might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by Mr. Keehn is simply an observation or possibility.


Passage number 788.
-70-7/9-10/85MR. MARTIN. They might, and then we can narrow the range.That's when you narrow the range--when you know something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is stating that if they have more information, they can narrow the range, which is a logical and agreeable statement.


Passage number 789.
MR. KEEHN. But in the interim, don't you think it would beuseful to have a message out there that we intend to continue movingtoward price stability. This is a way we can accomplish that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 790.
MR. PARTEE. Well, if we use 3 to 8 percent, it seems to methat it ought to be picked out of the first sentence and put in thesecond sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply suggesting a change in the placement of a percentage in a sentence.


Passage number 791.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I apologize, but I cannot provide an answer without the passage you are referring to.


Passage number 792.
MR. MARTIN. Yes, I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker explicitly states that they agree with something, indicating a lack of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 793.
MR. PARTEE. I must say that I think there's some merit tothat argument that we need a little more certainty before we collapsethe range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the argument that more certainty is needed before collapsing the range.


Passage number 794.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, but we're not really collapsingit. The backdrop of even a tentative range for 1986 is going to bevery, very rapid growth in 1985. I do think that in a context inwhich we emphasize uncertainty, the direction of the M1 range and thetime to [unintelligible] should be set a notch lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 795.
MR. PARTEE. The fact of the matter is that if we need the 8percent in M1 to keep the economy going, we're going to have 8 percentin M1 as a practical matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is stating a straightforward fact about the relationship between the 8 percent in M1 and its impact on the economy.


Passage number 796.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, since you have not provided a passage, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement within it. Please provide the relevant passage so that I can assist you further.


Passage number 797.
MR. PARTEE. But we [unintelligible] going to read the paperswith interest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee states that they will read the papers with interest, indicating a neutral and interested attitude.


Passage number 798.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I just wrote a sentence here. Wecould leave M1 in the same sentence at the beginning but then say:"With respect to M1 particularly, the Committee recognized thatuncertainties surrounding the recent behavior of velocity wouldrequire careful reappraisal of the target range at the beginning of1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information and explaining the Committee's recognition of uncertainties.


Passage number 799.
"MR. MARTIN. Good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 800.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever number we put in there--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The phrase "Whatever number we put in there" does not imply any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests that a value is being considered without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 801.
 If weput in 3 to 8 percent, we can just say: "With respect to M1, thebreadth of the target range reflected the uncertainties surroundingvelocity, which would require--MR. MORRIS. We could preface it, Mr. Chairman, by saying inthe light of the fact that in 3 out of the past 4 years we have setaside or rebased the M1 target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply discussing the reasoning behind setting a target range for M1 and acknowledging past actions related to M1 targets.


Passage number 802.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think we want to say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply an expression of the speaker's own opinion or uncertainty.


Passage number 803.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right: '82 and '83.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the years '82 and '83.


Passage number 804.
'84 is the only one--MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not include any conflicting statements or opposing views. It simply states that 84 is the only one without any further context or information.


Passage number 805.
7/9-10/85MR. BALLES. Unless there's been a [unintelligible], thatdoesn't help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 806.
MR. AXILROD. In '81, we sort of ignored it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they ignored something in 1981.


Passage number 807.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what number do you want to put infor M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is simply asking for a number to be inserted for M1.


Passage number 808.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 3 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The numbers stated, "3 to 7 percent," are simply facts or data without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 809.
MR. MARTIN. 3 to 8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple statement of numbers.


Passage number 810.
MR. KEEHN. 3 to 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a numerical range.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 811.
MR. FORRESTAL. 3 to 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. 

This is indicated by the use of the phrase "3 to 7," which suggests that there is a range of possibilities or opinions. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, is likely referring to a specific topic or issue that has multiple viewpoints or differing thoughts within that range.


Passage number 812.
MR. PARTEE. 3 to 8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Partee without any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 813.
MR. WALLICH. 3 to 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "Mr. Wallich" and a range of numbers (3 to 7), which could refer to any subject without indicating disagreement or contention.


Passage number 814.
MR. BLACK. 3 to 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 815.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 3 to 7 percent, let me note, is[unintelligible] low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing a percentage range and does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 816.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 4 to 7 percent, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "4 to 7 percent." It is a factual statement providing a range of numbers without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 817.
MR. BLACK. 4 to 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The passage simply states "MR. BLACK. 4 to 7" without any indication of disagreement or conflict between individuals.


Passage number 818.
MS. SEGER. 3 to 8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention among individuals. It is just providing a statement without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 819.
MR. RICE. 4 to 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not contain any statements or arguments that would indicate contention or disagreement. It simply provides a numerical range for a response.


Passage number 820.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the choice is between 4 to 7percent and 3 to 8 percent. Who's for 3 to 8 percent. One, two,three, four. [Secretary's note: Messrs. Martin, Partee, and Wallich,and Ms. Seger.] Who's for 4 to 7 percent. And we'll see how many areindifferent here between them. One, two, three, four, five, six.[Secretary's note: Messrs. Balles, Black, Corrigan, Forrestal, Keehn,and Rice.] I guess that says we make it 4 to 7 percent. Do we leaveit in the same first sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply taking a poll to see which option is preferred by the individuals present. There is no argument or conflicting opinions expressed.


Passage number 821.
MR. PARTEE. Particularly if it's 4 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states a percentage range without any conflicting opinions or conflicting ideas being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 822.
MR. RICE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The word "yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement present in the passage. However, without additional context, it is not possible to determine the specific nature of the disagreement or the parties involved.


Passage number 823.
MR. MARTIN. I'd rather see it treated special.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It is a statement from Mr. Martin expressing his preference without any conflicting perspectives or disagreement.


Passage number 824.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's partly special now because we put ina special sentence. It's a great subtlety as to whether it's doublyspecial or half the same and half special. I don't detect any groundswell to take it out of the first sentence. So it would read: "For1986 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges for monetary growth,measured from the fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of1986, of 4 to 7 percent for M1, 6 to 9 for M2, and 6 to 9 for M3. Theassociated range for growth in total domestic nonfinancial debt wasprovisionally set at 8 to 11 percent for 1986. With respect to M1particularly, the Committee recognized that uncertainties surrounding-72-7/9-10/85recent behavior of velocity would require careful reappraisal of thetarget range at the beginning of 1986." We better change that lastsentence. "Moreover, in establishing ranges for next year, theCommittee also recognized that account would need to be taken ofexperience with institutional and depositor behavior in response tothe completion of deposit rate deregulation early in the year." Doesanybody want to suggest any modification of that language. Well, I'llget the question: Does that mean it's a monitoring range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a potential change in language and asking for suggestions or modifications.


Passage number 825.
MR. PARTEE. I should say the whole thing's up for grabsgiven the two sentences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that "the whole thing's up for grabs," indicating that there is an uncertain or open situation.


Passage number 826.
 They both suggest to me that it's possiblethat [unintelligible] things could be done for--MR. BALLES. I thought we were going to stop short of amonitoring range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating their interpretation of two suggestions without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints present.


Passage number 827.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. One way is to say that it couldbecome one but it is not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that something has the potential to become something else in the future, but currently, it is not that thing.


Passage number 828.
MR. MARTIN. I don't think you need it. I don't think youneed the word "monitoring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin is expressing his personal opinion, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented or addressed in the passage.


Passage number 829.
"MR. PARTEE. I don't either. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the previous statement by saying "I don't either."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 830.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, you don't need it here, but I will beasked. That's pretty fuzzy, so I will be asked: What do you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that "Oh, you don't need it here," implying that the listener doesn't require something in a certain context. However, they follow it with "but I will be asked," indicating a disagreement or contradiction between the speaker's perspective and the speaker's expectation of being questioned about their statement. This reveals a potential point of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 831.
MR. PARTEE. It's pretty muddy. It might be one of thoseoptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The statement made by Mr. Partee is simply describing the situation as muddy and suggesting that it could be one of the various options.


Passage number 832.
MR. KEEHN. It's too early to form a judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply suggests that it is too early to come to a conclusion or make a judgment about something. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 833.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If nobody has any improved language topropose here, I think we have 4 to 7 percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6 to9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting different numerical ranges without expressing any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 834.
MR. BERNARD. And 8 to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "And 8 to 11 percent" is a continuation of a thought or statement, rather than a conflicting view or argument.


Passage number 835.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 8 to 11 percent [on debt].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a range of percentages without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 836.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot attend the meeting because he is out of town.


Passage number 837.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin NoGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger NoGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Now we get to the operationalpart. Forgetting about the language for the moment, what we weresaying I think fits this definition of "maintaining the existingdegree of pressure," to be interpreted arithmetically, I suppose, as$350 million plus. We have a week this week that started out with a-73-7/9-10/85high level of borrowings and we're saying we won't drive the averagelevel of borrowings down to $350 million and push a very easy moneymarket simply to meet that target. We make allowances on the up sidemore than on the down side, depending upon market developments.That's what we're doing initially. Heaven knows what happens from nowon. If the money supply continues to rise fast, that certainly is afactor pushing us toward a tighter direction. That's easy to say, butsuppose that is combined with a tone of worse business news; we'd bepretty cautious about it, I suppose. What we may have is a decidedweakening of the dollar here. We may have broken through this threemark level of the dollar and we may see a continuing decline, whichsooner or later probably has to come. But if it begins gettingmomentum, I think that's a factor on the tightening side. It's easyto say any one of these things singly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information and discussing various factors that could influence monetary policy decisions.


Passage number 838.
 When they go in oppositedirections at the same time--MR. MARTIN. Which they will.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that when they go in opposite directions at the same time, without presenting any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 839.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They probably will. I don't think we cansay much except that if this gets extreme enough, we will have aconsultation. We get a nice clear picture if the dollar is weak, theeconomy is strengthening and M1 is high; we clearly would be leaningon the tightening side. But if things don't all go in that direction,we have a bigger mess. I don't know what more we can say about it,really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing uncertainty and acknowledging that more information is needed before making any definitive statements.


Passage number 840.
MR. GUFFEY. That kind of description precludes easing,except when everything runs in the opposite direction that you justdescribed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the previous description does not allow for easing, except in the case where everything operates in the opposite direction of that description.


Passage number 841.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a matter of degree. If theeconomy looks soft, the other aggregates are behaving, and M1 iswithin the general range here, we might ease, particularly if thedollar were strong. Apart from that, we don't have a lot of room foreasing anyway, on reserve pressures. [The Board] can easily make achange in the discount rate, but we can't get borrowings a heck of alot lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the possibility of easing the economy under certain conditions and acknowledges that there is limited room for easing due to reserve pressures.


Passage number 842.
MR. MARTIN. We can reduce the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement or suggestion about reducing the discount rate, but there is no opposition or debate present.


Passage number 843.
MR. BLACK. Does this mean you would say somewhat lesserreserve restraint "might" be acceptable rather than "would," Mr.Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain visible contention or disagreement. It is a question asked by Mr. Black to seek clarification from the Chairman.


Passage number 844.
MR. PARTEE. In the end of the second part of the sentenceI'd be tempted to say "would" instead of "might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a personal inclination or suggestion by MR. PARTEE.


Passage number 845.
"MR. BLACK. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. It is a simple response acknowledging agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 846.
 I usually like "would" on both of them, butthis time I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to say "might" and "would".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification on whether they should use "might" and "would" in a specific context.


Passage number 847.
MR. BLACK. That's what I would prefer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black simply expresses his preference without contradicting or opposing anyone else.


Passage number 848.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] change the order. "Inthe implementation of policy for the immediate future the Committeeseeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve7/9-10/85conditions. This action is expected to be consistent with growth inM2 and M3 at annual rates of"--what is that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It seems to be a statement or description of a policy action, without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 849.
MR. BLACK. 7-1/2 percent and 7-1/4 percent, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Black's opinion without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 850.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but we don't want 7-1/4 percent inthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 851.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, make it 7-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It seems like someone is agreeing with a suggestion or making a statement.


Passage number 852.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Continuing: "of around 7-1/2 percentduring the period from June to September and with a substantialslowing of M1 to a rate of 5 to 6 percent." We could put that first,if you wanted to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 853.
MR. PARTEE. Consistent with what we've been saying, put itsecond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply presenting a consistent point of view.


Passage number 854.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Well, I just changedsomething. Instead of just putting that number in parallel [with theothers], I said "with a substantial slowing of M1 to a rate of 5 to 6percent." And then the rest of it would be "might" and "would."There's nothing else there that needs to be changed particularly, isthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a change they made to a certain number and stating that there is nothing else that needs to be changed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 855.
MR. PARTEE. Would you like to change that funds rate rangeto 9 percent at the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement is a question that suggests a potential disagreement or differing opinion about changing the funds rate range to 9 percent.


Passage number 856.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could. But where are we now. We'renot quite at the midpoint of a 6 to 9 percent range; well, we'repretty close to the midpoint. We could if you wanted to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest disagreement or contention. It primarily consists of statements about the current position or possibility of doing something.


Passage number 857.
 I don't--MR. PARTEE. Certainly people would be getting excited if itran over 9 percent, wouldn't they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by someone expressing their opinion followed by a question seeking confirmation or agreement.


Passage number 858.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, they surely would. I might even geta little excited if it went to 6 percent, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their anticipation and excitement about a hypothetical situation where something might happen.


Passage number 859.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it seems to me some evenness--. I dislike[unintelligible] of the extreme numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 860.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the only argument against that--and I don't even know that it's against it--is that a month from nowwhen this is published the press will play that as an easing, despitewhat we said earlier. I don't know if that's a big deal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about whether a potential argument against their point of view would be significant.


Passage number 861.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Better leave well enough alone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Better leave well enough alone" suggests that it is better to not make changes or interfere with something that is already satisfactory or sufficient. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 862.
MR. MELZER. It was okay last month; it ought to be okay now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Melzer, is expressing his opinion that something was okay last month and should still be okay now.


Passage number 863.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6 to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply presents a numerical range of 6 to 10 percent without any conflicting views or contradictory statements.


Passage number 864.
MR. PARTEE. We will have a telephone call if it gets to 10percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a potential action to be taken if a certain condition is met.


Passage number 865.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I would have one somewhat beforethat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "I think I would have one somewhat before that" does not directly contradict or challenge any previous ideas or statements.


Passage number 866.
-75-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If it gets to 10 percent, Chuck, youwon't need the telephone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a hypothetical scenario and there is no conflict or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 867.
MR. BLACK. Some other people might be calling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that other people might be calling.


Passage number 868.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it gets to 10 percent, I may not behere to make the telephone call. If nobody has any further commentsto make, we will vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The first sentence indicates a possible consequence if a certain condition is met, and the second sentence proposes voting in the absence of further comments. There is no indication of conflicting opinions or opposing stances.


Passage number 869.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot see the passage you are referring to. Please provide me with the passage and I'll be happy to help you determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 870.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles NoPresident Black NoPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger NoGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we seem to have worked our waythrough this. Maybe you ought to get some clean typed copies of this[directive], Mr. Secretary, and we'll leave the record open for anyeditorial changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The differing responses from Chairman Volcker, Vice Chairman Corrigan, President Forrestal, President Keehn, Governor Martin, Governor Partee, Governor Rice, Governor Seger, and Governor Wallich indicate disagreement on the matter.


Passage number 871.
MR. PARTEE. Would you like us to reconsider our projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply asking if the projections should be reconsidered.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 872.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in the normal course of events, youought to reconsider the projections at this point. I would remind youthat these are explicitly projections of members of the Committee andare presented on that understanding to the Congress. Theseprojections are closer than they usually are, I think. There isusually an array of different numbers. Under the assumptions made,some of these inflation numbers look high to me. I think we have asubstantial risk of inflation and worse when and if the dollar goesdown, but that's not the assumption of these projections. And we willhave a real mess on our hands if the dollar goes down sharply. Wewill have a real mess on our hands if it doesn't, which is unpleasant,and which is the measure of our difficulty. But I don't know how weturn around this trade balance without overtaxing at this point theindustrial side of the economy, apart from the direct effects of thelower exchange rate on higher prices. We haven't got 10 percent ofspare capacity and that's what it takes--probably more than 10 percent--to produce a trade balance in the course of three or four years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about inflation numbers and the risk of inflation, as well as the potential negative effects of a declining dollar. They also highlight the difficulty of turning around the trade balance without overtaxing the industrial side of the economy. These points suggest a disagreement or disagreement with the current projections and assumptions.


Passage number 873.
MR. TRUMAN. 2 percent of GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact that 2 percent of GNP belongs to Mr. Truman.


Passage number 874.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 2 percent of GNP. And manufacturing is 20percent of the GNP; it's more than that value added.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a percentage of GNP and then states that manufacturing has a higher value added percentage.


Passage number 875.
MR. TRUMAN. We're presuming we'll get some of this out ofagriculture as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that agriculture may contribute to the mentioned outcome.


Passage number 876.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 3 percent of GNP.SPEAKER(.). That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement that "3 percent of GNP" is correct.


Passage number 877.
7/9-10/85-76-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Three, or more than three. We face theprospect of some indefinite number of years ahead of having lowerdomestic consumption than GNP, lower domestic demand than GNP. Idon't know how you manage that except by budgetary policy and eventhen it's not very happy. Barring an equally violent shift in fiscalpolicy from what we've had, I literally don't know how it getsmanaged. If you try to do it by monetary policy, you tighten moneyand you hit the investment side of the economy--which is precisely theside that has to expand to meet the foreign demand. The tax reformbill hits the investment side of the economy and not the consumptionside of the economy. And you say some of it is in agriculture; Ithink part of the problem is agriculture. The major part of theproblem is that people aren't eating enough or the crops are too goodin the rest of the world, depending upon which way you want to put it.In a residual supply you have a little difficulty in selling to asurplus market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It primarily presents the speaker's perspective and analysis of the situation, outlining potential challenges and discussing possible solutions.


Passage number 878.
MR. TRUMAN. Not necessarily on quantity, but you might getsomething on price. That will help you too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that focusing on price rather than quantity might be helpful.


Passage number 879.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's a ways off too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that something is "a ways off," indicating distance or time.


Passage number 880.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Kichline, have you heardanything about these normal GNP revisions--the historical revisionsthat come up later in the year--pointing in the direction of asubstantial downward revision in the deflator over the past severalyears.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply asking if Mr. Kichline has heard anything about the normal GNP revisions and if they point towards a downward revision in the deflator over the past few years.


Passage number 881.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, the whole national income accountsstructure will be revised in a major way in December. The last majorone of this significance was in 1975.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the revision of national income accounts in December, comparing it to a previous revision in 1975.


Passage number 882.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The provided passage, "Right," does not contain enough context or information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 883.
MR. KICHLINE. And they will be rebasing the deflators to1982 instead of 1972 dollars. That will make major changes. One areawhere they are struggling, of course, is in the computer area wherefor the last decade they held the price at $100 and the assumption isthat the right price is something like one-fifth of that. But whenthey rebase, a lot of these things will disappear. There is a hintthat they'll probably find more output along the way. There have beensome upward revisions to income. The IRS has had a program trying totrack down income growth and it appears that the numbers that IRS hascome up with are much higher than incorporated in the national incomeaccounts. So it appears at the moment that there will be some upwardrevisions to income in this set of revisions coming out. But it'sgoing to be so major, any of the numbers you now remember willdisappear as a result of the base changes and other things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 884.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When does the next GNP, or whatever theycall it, number come out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking a question about when the next GNP number will be released. There is no expression of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 885.
MR. KICHLINE. The first preliminary. It comes out July18th, a week from tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact about the release date of the first preliminary. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 886.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The day before I testify, so I'll knowwhat that is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the speaker's plans for the day before they testify.


Passage number 887.
-77-7/9-10/85MR. BOEHNE. What date do you testify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for the date of a testimony.


Passage number 888.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. July 19th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any information or statements that could indicate contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a date.


Passage number 889.
MR. BOEHNE. The 19th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 890.
MR. BLACK. I thought it was the 17th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply stating his understanding or recall of a specific date.


Passage number 891.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The 17th. Oh, it's the day after Itestify. I'll get asked what that figure is and I'll have to take astab. Who does that now. Who's the head of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a series of statements and questions without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 892.
MR. PRELL. At BEA Allen Young is Acting Director.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply provides information about who is currently acting as the director at BEA Allen Young.


Passage number 893.
MR. KICHLINE. Allen Young.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a simple statement of someone's name.


Passage number 894.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a terrible day. I'll say I thinkit's really going to be low and then they'll raise it. They'lltestify the next day with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the speaker's negative opinion about the day and predicts that others will have a different perspective and testify about it the following day.


Passage number 895.
MR. BOEHNE. Is it the House side first or the Senate side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 896.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. House side first. I don't know whetherthe sandwiches are out there. Will somebody investigate.SPEAKER(.). They are out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they are unsure if the sandwiches are outside and asks for someone to investigate. Another person then confirms that the sandwiches are indeed outside.


Passage number 897.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess the Open Market Committeemeeting is over. I declare it over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply expresses the speaker's assumption that the Open Market Committee meeting is finished, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 898.
MR. KICHLINE. Mr. Chairman, the Board is scheduled to reviewdrafts of this Humphrey-Hawkins report on Friday morning, so if thereare revisions to projections we really would need them by tomorrowevening.SPEAKER(.). Here's one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of information and request for deadlines.


