Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 12-13, 1985A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 12, 1985, at 2:30 p.m. andcontinuing on Wednesday, February 13, 1985, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMs. SegerMr. WallichMessrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey and Morris, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City and Boston,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Kohn, Lang, Lindsey,Prell, Siegman, and Stern, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account-2-Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Jones 1/ and Teplin 1/, Economists, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Gainor and Garbarini, First Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Minneapolis and St. Louis, respectivelyMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. Balbach, Bisignano, T. Davis, Parthemos, Scheld,and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco, Kansas City,Richmond, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectivelyMs. Clarkin,FederalBoston,Messrs. Judd and McNees, Vice Presidents,Reserve Banks of New York, San Francisco, andrespectively1/ Attended portion of meeting on Tuesday and Wednesday related toconsideration of the Committee's longer-run objectives for monetaryand credit aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the individuals present at a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.


Passage number 2.
Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofFebruary 12-13, 1985February 12, 1985--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we can come to order, the first item ofbusiness is electing the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the first item of business is electing the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 3.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, after surveying the membership ofthis group and thinking of various outsiders who might[unintelligible] a change in the law, I conclude that I wish tonominate Gerald Corrigan as the Vice Chairman of the Federal OpenMarket Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. MR. Martin expresses his conclusion and intention to nominate Gerald Corrigan as the Vice Chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee.


Passage number 4.
MR. RICE. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides a statement from Mr. Rice without mentioning any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 5.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That second came awfully quickly. Arethere any objections. I haven't heard any, so Mr. Corrigan is dulyelected and the Secretary will so record. We have to approve theminutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 6.
MR. MARTIN. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "So moved" is a common statement made during formal meetings when a motion is proposed and another member of the meeting wishes to support it. It indicates agreement and support rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 7.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I second that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "I second that" indicates agreement or support for a previous statement or suggestion. It does not indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 8.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Why are the reports onforeign currency and domestic open market operations separated [on theagenda]. We will go to foreign currency operations first, anyway.Are you prepared to report on domestic open market operations, Mr.Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Without objection" indicates agreement or consensus among the participants. The subsequent question about the separation of reports and the request for Mr. Sternlight's preparedness does not imply any disagreement.


Passage number 9.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes I am. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Sternlight simply agrees with or affirms a statement or question that was made.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll go to Mr. Cross first and yousecond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the order in which they will go to Mr. Cross and the person being addressed (presumably "you").


Passage number 11.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a single statement without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 12.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is not presenting any conflicting or opposing ideas.


Passage number 13.
MR. WALLICH. Sam, after listening to the conversations inBasle, would you get the impression that if sentiment on interventionis moving in any direction at all, it's moving in the direction ofdoing something more drastic--perhaps without the United States--[say], accumulation of some resources from interest and hitting themarket hard when the dollar is already declining.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing the potential sentiment on intervention in regard to the United States and the possible actions that could be taken, but there is no clear contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 14.
MR. CROSS. Well, it's very difficult to say what they mightdo. I would think that the desire, obviously, is very much to havethe United States: (a) take the lead; and (b) certainly, participate.Now, whether they will bring themselves to very large intervention inour absence--if we are out of the market entirely--looks prettydoubtful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a hypothetical situation and expressing uncertainty about the potential actions of another party.


Passage number 15.
MR. BOEHNE. What kind of money are they talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification about the type of money being discussed.


Passage number 16.
MR. CROSS. I don't know that anybody is talking about anyspecific amount of money. I think there is a problem in that the2/12-13/85operations that have been undertaken during this period--certainly onthe United States side on the occasions that we have operated--havebeen limited to fairly modest amounts. On one occasion it was $40million and on another occasion $48 million; the most we did was closeto $150 million. There certainly is a feeling that one needs to actboth in greater amounts and also with a greater forcefulness, as itwere. They understand the U.S. view about not wanting, as I said, tobash the currency; but they do feel that something needs to be done todeal with these exchange rates more forcefully than has been done.There was certainly some uncertainty in the market after the G-5announcement about what it meant. As time has gone by, that hastended to fizzle out and there has been the feeling that theintervention, while not insignificant, really hasn't been of aforceful and large nature, given the magnitude of the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their observations and the opinions of others about the amount and forcefulness of the interventions in the foreign exchange market. They are acknowledging that there has been some uncertainty and a feeling that more needs to be done, but there is no disagreement or conflict among different parties.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] go about intervention inthe least effective way--in fact, I would say a counterproductive way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that the intervention is being carried out in a counterproductive way, indicating disagreement or contention.


Passage number 18.
You can follow up on--MR. WALLICH. Well, if I may pursue this a minute. Didn'tyou get the impression--I did myself--that the German intervention ofSeptember [1984], which was massive and to us appeared very heavyhanded and clumsy at the time, is regarded much more positively overthere as having been a really successful operation. Maybe that's[why] they seem to think it's the way to go--to wait until the dollaris softening and then push it down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a perception of the German intervention in September 1984.


Passage number 19.
MR. CROSS. Yes, I certainly think that. Absolutely. As atactical move, the German operation of September did introduce aconsiderable amount of two-way risk and uncertainty in the market. Itwas very heavy and it is seen as having been a very useful andattractive operation. Now, in subsequent times when they have takensimilar kinds of actions, they have not been as effective. But Idon't disagree with you. I think it had a very powerful impact on themarket; for some period of time it had the market wondering whether itwas going to be hit again one of these days. That certainlyintroduced a certain caution in the market and I would think that thatis a useful thing to do. There is certainly, on the part of some ofthe Europeans, a strong desire to see if tactics of that sort couldnot be used again with the same impact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees and agrees with the statement made by the other person. They also provide additional support and explanation for their agreement.


Passage number 20.
MR. PARTEE. But it inevitably runs out of steam, doesn't it.Where was the mark then. What was the mark/dollar rate when they didall that intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement and a question about the mark/dollar rate and the intervention.


Passage number 21.
MR. CROSS. Yes. It went up on the day that they hit it[hard]; at its height it was 3.17 and it went down about 4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 22.
MR. PARTEE. And where is it today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple question and does not contain any contentious or disagreement elements.


Passage number 23.
MR. CROSS. It's at 3.29, but between September and Februaryit went up. It certainly was an element that introduced a great dealof caution into the market and I think it did have a lasting effectfor some period of time. On that day I believe they spent about $400million; we're not talking massive amounts in the billions that werespent. I think everybody is fully cognizant of the limitations ofintervention; in fact, maybe too much so. No one expects it by itselfto solve all the problems in Europe or here. But certainly there is a2/12-13/85view that, properly and forcefully used, it can be one additionalweapon that can be very helpful in keeping this quite troublesomeexchange market situation perhaps a little less volatile--I meanvolatile in the upward sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their own perspective and there is no mention or indication of any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 24.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. On the other side of the coin,though, Henry, if nothing happens to the exchange rate, I think it ispretty clear that there's likely to be more pressure on interest ratesin a number of those countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: This passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply presenting their opinion and stating that there may be more pressure on interest rates in certain countries if nothing happens to the exchange rate.


Passage number 25.
MR. WALLICH. Yes, that's the point that several of themmade.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging and agreeing with a point that multiple individuals made.


Passage number 26.
MR. CROSS. I think all, or certainly a lot, of the Europeansare going to be under upward pressure on their interest rates if theirexchange rates continue to depreciate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that European countries will face upward pressure on their interest rates if their exchange rates continue to depreciate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 27.
MR. AXILROD. Governor Wallich, if I may add a [different]and maybe minority view on that operation: I would tend to deny itssuccess. I think it was rather a hit and run operation and that thefailure of the dollar to go up--if that's a failure--subsequently, hada lot to do with the drop in interest rates in this country throughthe winter. And I think the expectation that that [decline] wascoming to a halt was instrumental in the dollar turning around. Whenit turned around and got to that point it just went right through it;it kept going, as there was no intervention of significant size anddetermination forthcoming at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, presents a different view and disagrees with the previous operation being described as a success. He argues that it was a hit and run operation and suggests that the drop in interest rates in the country, rather than the failure of the dollar to go up, was the cause. He also suggests that the expectation of the decline coming to a halt played a role in the dollar turning around.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 28.
MR. WALLICH. I'm simply saying that we took a negative viewof that operation; we viewed it as being contrary to good practice ofnot driving the rate but leaning against the wind. They seem to takea more positive view of it. And they seem to be of a mind to repeatit even though they know that they wouldn't get our cooperation on anoperation like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests a disagreement or contention between Mr. Wallich and someone else who holds a different view regarding the operation mentioned. Mr. Wallich expresses his negative view of the operation, while noting that the other party holds a more positive view and may consider repeating it despite the lack of cooperation from Mr. Wallich.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 29.
MR. BOEHNE. Looking back over the last 4 weeks, if we aregoing to do something like this, what's the strategy of doing it theway we have done it. If we're going to do it, we ought to do it withsome conviction or it's hardly worth the trouble at all. It seemsthat we're intervening as though we're kind of being forced to do itand we really don't want to. Our intervention doesn't strike me asbeing very convincing to anybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, expresses a disagreement or contention with the current strategy of intervention. He believes that if they are going to intervene, they should do it with conviction and not reluctantly. He also suggests that their current intervention is not convincing to others.


Passage number 30.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you answering that question, Mr.Cross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a direct question asking if Mr. Cross is answering a specific question. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 31.
MR. CROSS. I don't think anyone will disagree with whatyou've said. I think you're right: that we need to act moreforcefully if we're going to go in there, and show that we meanbusiness and that we are prepared to do something in other than tokenamounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they don't think anyone will disagree with what has been said and agrees with the need for more forceful action.


Passage number 32.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are several cooks in this broth andsome are from rather provincial provinces.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply states that there are multiple cooks in this broth, some of whom are from provincial provinces. There is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement between the cooks mentioned.


Passage number 33.
MR. GUFFEY. Just to follow that up: As we talk about ourintervention, how much control do we have over it at this point. Any2/12-13/85at all. Do we have any say, unilaterally, as to what the central bankwill do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the level of control they have over intervention.


Passage number 34.
MR. PARTEE. We [unintelligible] the central bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a incomplete sentence and does not provide enough context to determine if there is disagreement.


Passage number 35.
MR. GUFFEY. Okay. It may be that unless others change theirminds we don't have any choice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that there may not be any choice unless others change their minds.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't operate unilaterally.Neither does the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both parties are stating the same position or approach.


Passage number 37.
MR. PARTEE. Is this episode about over, Paul. As I recall,on the [FOMC telephone conference] call you said it was [to last] fora few weeks. A few weeks have gone by. Has it terminated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for an update or confirmation about the duration of an episode or event.


Passage number 38.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we're bound by that,particularly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion, but there is no indication of any disagreement or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 39.
 Obviously, we haven't been acting effectively at all--MR. PARTEE. Not at all, recently. That's why I asked thequestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The two speakers are in agreement that they have not been acting effectively.


Passage number 40.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --in the burst of the last couple of days.But I wouldn't say minds couldn't change [if] this [dollar] movementgets pretty strong. But I think it had better get strong enough sothat--. I personally am sick and tired of doing ineffectual things.I want to be effectual, or at least have a chance of being effectual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their desire for the dollar movement to become strong enough to make a real impact, indicating a personal frustration with ineffective actions. There is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement presented.


Passage number 41.
MR. FORRESTAL. Sam, do you get the impression that theBritish are going to resist pretty forcefully allowing sterling tocome into parity with the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 42.
MR. CROSS. Well, resist. We're almost there. They areconcerned about the exchange rate. They have raised their interestrates by an enormous amount and they have a very soft economy. So inthat sense, they really have moved very, very strongly. They have notdone an enormous amount in intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeable statements. The speaker is simply providing information about a country's actions regarding its exchange rate and interest rates.


Passage number 43.
 They have done some, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have done very little intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that "they" have done some intervention but very little overall.


Passage number 44.
MR. CROSS. --very little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Cross is simply stating that there is very little of something.


Passage number 45.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At one point they put their interest ratesup 4 percentage points. Do you consider that a strong action in thespace of about 3 days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the increase in interest rates and asks for opinion on whether it is a strong action.


Passage number 46.
MR. FORRESTAL. But the question was: How much further arethey prepared to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question.


Passage number 47.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Up another 4 points. They may not beprepared.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Up another 4 points" is a neutral statement indicating an increase in points. The second part "They may not be prepared" is also a neutral observation about the possibility of being unprepared. Overall, there is no conflicting information or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 48.
MR. PARTEE. How likely would it be that we would put oursdown 4 points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a simple question asking about the likelihood of putting a certain number of points down.


Passage number 49.
MR. CROSS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 50.
 I think they feel that the 4-1/2 points that theyhave done is really quite a response to the downward exchange rate--2/12-13/85MR. WALLICH. Well, I think there is something to be said forwhat we've done so far. Yes, it would be better if we could operateeffectively; but after a long time of doing virtually nothing we'venow taken a few small, modest steps. It seems to me that that'ssomething one could build on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers agree that the steps taken so far are a positive response to the downward exchange rate and can be a foundation for further action.


Passage number 51.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can see the essay now: "In Defense ofIneffectiveness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without more context.


Passage number 52.
"MR. WALLICH. Well, before you become effective you have tobe ineffective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a condition or requirement that needs to be met before becoming effective.


Passage number 53.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will accept that. You just gave therationale for what we've been doing: We have to go through this periodof ineffectiveness. Would you like to ratify these ineffectivetransactions.SPEAKER(.). So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, both speakers are in agreement that they have to go through a period of ineffectiveness. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection" implies that there is consensus among the participants.


Passage number 55.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement provided is attributed to Mr. Sternlight without any opposing views or conflicting statements mentioned.


Passage number 56.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much of [the $6 billion leewayauthorized for the intermeeting period] did you use.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for the amount of money used out of the authorized $6 billion.


Passage number 57.
MR. STERNLIGHT. At the maximum, $4.4 billion. It wound upat just $4.3 billion, but we had so much uncertainty, particularlyabout what was going to happen to Continental's borrowing, that Ithink it was useful to have that flexibility during the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 58.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, because there is no passage provided.


Passage number 59.
MR. PARTEE. Do you mean on the [leeway] recommendation [oron his report].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a question asking for clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Either one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage.


Passage number 61.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I wanted to ask a question of Peter.Perhaps everybody else in the room knows this, but I don't. Early onyou were talking about how you were running compared with thenonborrowed reserve path and you said that at year-end you were $300million above it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 62.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states "Mr. Sternlight" without providing any context or conflicting statements, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 63.
MR. PARTEE. But then later you came closer to thenonborrowed reserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 64.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage because the use of the word "Yes" by Mr. Sternlight suggests that he is expressing disagreement with something that has been said or a point that has been made.


Passage number 65.
MR. PARTEE. Now, does that mean that the path called for a35% increase. We've had a very large increase in nonborrowedreserves. Or does it mean that you adjust that path week by week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification about the intended meaning of a statement.


Passage number 66.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The path gets adjusted as we proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions that the path is adjusted as they move forward, without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 67.
2/12-13/85MR. PARTEE. So, unless we know what the adjustments are, wedon't really know what [unintelligible] an operation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that without knowing the adjustments, it is difficult to determine the nature or effectiveness of an operation.


Passage number 68.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The guiding principle in drawing the path isto accommodate required reserves and the estimated demand for excessreserves and then the allowance for borrowings that comes out of theCommittee's discussion. And if, as we proceed through a period, wefind that required reserves are growing more substantially, we foldthat information--when we get it--into a revision of the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the guiding principle for drawing the path in terms of accommodating required reserves, estimated demand for excess reserves, and allowance for borrowings. Additionally, it mentions the potential revision of the path based on new information about growing required reserves.


Passage number 69.
 Mostof those revisions--MR. PARTEE. So, if you have strong monetary growth, you'llraise the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a statement about the topic being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 70.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 71.
MR. PARTEE. Okay. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing gratitude.


Passage number 72.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless we increase borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 73.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I understood him to say that it will raisethe path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating someone's understanding of what was said.


Passage number 74.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I can't provide an answer without a passage or context to analyze. Please provide the passage so I can help you further.


Passage number 75.
]MR. STERNLIGHT. That would have been an alternative andcould come into the discussion also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests an alternative option for discussion.


Passage number 76.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I just thought somebody might misinterpretit when you said you came so close to path. One needs to understandthat you're constantly revising that for the larger growth [inrequired reserves], because otherwise one would think you wereshooting for a very large rise in nonborrowed reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a clarification and an attempt to ensure accurate interpretation.


Passage number 77.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions the name "Mr. Sternlight," and provides no information or context that would suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 78.
 Well, we're shooting to accommodate requiredreserves--MR. PARTEE. Whatever is called for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are aiming to accommodate the required reserves, without expressing any disagreement or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 79.
MR. STERNLIGHT. --at that level of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight's statement appears to be presented as a straightforward fact or observation without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 80.
MR. PARTEE. On the [leeway] recommendation: I have noproblem with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker clearly states that they have no problem with the leeway recommendation.


Passage number 81.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage does not present any contrasting viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 82.
MS. SEGER. I just have a question. Hearing your commentsafter hearing Sam's, I wondered: How much coordination is therebetween the two--[the foreign and the domestic operations]. I heardyou talk about tilting, which would lead to a higher fed funds rateetc.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question asked by one person to clarify the extent of coordination between foreign and domestic operations.


Passage number 83.
, and yet I heard [Sam talk] about the problems of the dollar andhow when rates ticked up the--MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there's close coordination in theoperational sense of Sam and his people being aware of what we'redoing each day and vice versa. And on something like the drawing ofthe paths--whether we're talking about up to $300 million with a biason the accommodative side or later modifying that bias--that is all2/12-13/85coordinated through conversations with senior staff here and ensuingdiscussions that keep the Board informed. Certainly, we are keepingthe Committee informed in our reports on the market: the morning calland the weekly reports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that there is close coordination between Sam and his people and the senior staff, and that the Board and Committee are kept informed through reports on the market.


Passage number 84.
MS. SEGER. I guess what I'm saying is: If, as you saw thefed funds rate tick up you also saw a rather immediate impact in theforeign exchange markets, if we're concerned about a super dollar andwe're concerned about whether or not we're intervening enough, I justwondered if we ever close the loop or get any feedback in here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement and a question regarding the impact of the fed funds rate on the foreign exchange markets.


Passage number 85.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, certainly we were aware of what washappening day-to-day on the dollar. And there were some individualdays when the strength of the dollar had a fair input into the timingof our operations--the decision of just when to go in to put reservesinto the domestic market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the strength of the dollar had an impact on the timing of operations, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 86.
MS. SEGER. But it never made you think that it might beinappropriate to allow the fed funds rate to continue to move upward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a statement made by MS. SEGER without any opposition or conflicting views mentioned.


Passage number 87.
MR. STERNLIGHT. No. I think that we did have some concernabout what was happening when funds were getting up to 8-1/2 to 8-3/4percent, and we [began] shaping our operations in a way that I thinkhelped to bring it down to 8-1/4 percent, though I wouldn't say thatthat was specifically a target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and actions regarding a specific situation.


Passage number 88.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is not a complete answer, but thedomestic operation is very inflexible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is not expressing disagreement or contention. It is providing a partial explanation and stating that the domestic operation is inflexible.


Passage number 89.
 They operate--MS. SEGER. I'm just trying to educate myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's intention to educate themselves.


Passage number 90.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a good question. But [in thedomestic market, generally] we operate at 11:30 to 11:45 a.m. Once wehave made that decision [after the morning call], it's over. It's arevolution if we operate at 2:30 in the afternoon because at thatpoint if the market sees the funds rate going up, that raisesquestions about whether we're pegging the funds rate. So, it's aperfectly reasonable question. But the fact is that the opportunities--just on an operational basis--during the day to take account of[exchange market developments] are limited. If we miss it becausemaybe the market wasn't acting that way at 11:30 a.m., we've missedit. Now, maybe that's not the way we should operate, but that is theway we do operate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of their operational procedures and acknowledging that there are limitations to their ability to take account of exchange market developments throughout the day.


Passage number 91.
MR. WALLICH. If we have a money supply target and at any onetime in any one day we don't act--in order not to drive up the fundsrate because of what that might do to the dollar--then that has to bemade up some other day. Otherwise, we miss our target and it may thenmean a larger funds rate increase than if we had done it right away.We can't tell in advance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is merely describing a potential consequence of not acting immediately to maintain a money supply target.


Passage number 92.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may also find out after the fact thatit wasn't necessary to operate that day at all because the forecasthas changed. That's not unusual; I suppose there's a 50-50 chance ofthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating that there is a possibility that it may not have been necessary to operate on a certain day due to a change in the forecast. The mention of a 50-50 chance is simply an estimation.


Passage number 93.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If there were any systematic effort,as opposed to these issues of finesse, to place more direct2/12-13/85significance, say, to the exchange rate in terms of Peter's day-to-dayoperations, I think that's the Committee's decision, not Peter's--withall due respect to Peter. I think there is room for the finessefactor from time to time, and I think he uses it. But I interpretyour question as being a little more fundamental than that. I thinkif it's a more fundamental question like that, that's a decision wehave to make, not him.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion and addressing a question in a respectful manner.


Passage number 94.
MS. SEGER. Just hearing the one presentation following onthe heels of the other made me connect the two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that hearing the two presentations one after the other made them connect the two.


Passage number 95.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A very good question. Are there any othercomments. If not, do we have a motion on this [intermeeting] limit.SPEAKER(.). So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking if there are any other comments and then asking for a motion on a specific topic.


Passage number 96.
MS. SEGER. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only mentions the speaker's name, followed by the word "second," which does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We need to ratifythese transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection" implies that there is unanimous agreement or consensus among the people involved in the decision-making process.


Passage number 98.
MR. MARTIN. Move to ratify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The sentence is a standalone statement without any indication of disagreement or contention. It simply states a motion to ratify without any opposition or debate mentioned.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No objection. Mr. Kichline.MESSRS. KICHLINE, PRELL and TRUMAN. [Statements--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individuals mentioned are simply being addressed or called upon.


Passage number 100.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm puzzled here. In July we projected areal GNP increase, 4th quarter to 4th quarter, of 3 to 3-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing confusion or uncertainty.


Passage number 101.
MR. KICHLINE. That is correct--for 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement agreeing with the previously mentioned information.


Passage number 102.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, for 1985. Well, now is the time tocomment on the business and price situation. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that it is the time to comment on the business and price situation. It does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 103.
MR. WALLICH. You have a near doubling--well, maybe not quitea doubling--of unit labor costs but very little increase in [the rateof] inflation. Is that the effect of offsetting factors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is making a statement and seeking confirmation or explanation from the speaker.


Passage number 104.
MR. PRELL. Governor Wallich, the unit labor cost increaselast year was 2 percent and, as I said, goes to 3-1/4 percent and thento about 3-1/2 percent next year. A quick inspection of that chartindicates that there has been a very large gap between price increasesand unit labor cost increases over the past couple of years. Theincrease in markup that has occurred is extraordinary in historicalterms; and we're basically just seeing a narrowing of this gap in theperiod ahead. The unit labor cost [increases] will still be running alittle lower than the price increases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating facts about the unit labor cost increases and price increases over the past years and how they are expected to change in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 105.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask you a question following thatquestion. In terms of these projections, we center on 4 percent forprices this year, which is an increase in the rate of price increasefrom last year. I get a little concerned about presenting price[projections] of an increasing rate of price increase--which show agreat faith in Federal Reserve policy--particularly when it's notclear to me why that should be. You have this decline in the dollarin your projection--I'm not talking about your projection; basically,2/12-13/85I'm talking about other peoples' projections--but I don't know whetherpeople assumed a decline in the dollar. Last time we used theconvention that we would not; I think we assumed some general range offluctuation within historical experience, which seems to me areasonable convention. It turned out to be a lot better, because thedollar was up, than if we'd assumed a depreciation. The actual priceresults have been at the very lower edge of our projections. And Iwonder why we're so pessimistic on prices this coming year when thewage trend looks good, the dollar continues to appreciate, the profitmargins have widened, as was suggested already, and the unemploymentrate doesn't go down much. One can argue about productivity; thestaff doesn't have terribly buoyant productivity estimates and maybeeverybody else is very low on productivity. But I would like to hearwhy [people think] prices are going to be worse this year than lastyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about presenting price projections that show an increasing rate of price increase, and questions why people believe prices will be worse this year than last year. They mention factors such as a good wage trend, an appreciating dollar, widened profit margins, and a relatively stable unemployment rate, which they believe should lead to better price outcomes. This suggests a disagreement with others who hold a more pessimistic view on prices for the coming year.


Passage number 106.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it's very little. I have a 4 percentprojection and I guess I would say it's a much better projection thanI had at midyear for this year. There's only so far you can go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement of opinion by Mr. Partee regarding his projection for the year.


Passage number 107.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your philosophy is to catch up to realityslowly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply describes a philosophy of catching up to reality slowly.


Passage number 108.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I also would be inclined to think thatthis rise in unit labor costs will have more effect on GDBP--pushingit up a little--than is shown in this chart. I don't think I wouldhave allowed for that kind of compression in the difference betweenunit labor costs and GDBP and I did have in mind some kind of adecline in the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 109.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Apart from the decline in the dollar, Ipresume over a long period of time unit labor costs go up the same asprices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement suggests a correlation between the decline in the dollar and the increase in unit labor costs over time. It does not present conflicting opinions or contradictory information.


Passage number 110.
MR. KICHLINE. I think the relationship is quite closelyconnected. I would say also, in response to Governor Wallich, thatour general view in looking at the price situation is that one wouldtake some standard measure of productivity and, in a sense, assume amarkup by corporations over some standard unit labor cost measure--sothat the cyclical gains that you get early on are rather quicklytranslated into additional profits. But this rise that we see in unitlabor costs we would not translate immediately into an attempt bycorporations to add on to that; rather, they would be taking a longer-term view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own view and perspective on the relationship between productivity, unit labor costs, and corporate profits. They mention that their general view is that the cyclical gains in productivity are quickly translated into profits by corporations, but the rise in unit labor costs would not immediately lead corporations to add on to that. This is their own viewpoint and they are not debating or contradicting any other viewpoints.


Passage number 111.
MR. WALLICH. At lower profits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is simply stating a fact or making an observation about lower profits.


Passage number 112.
MR. KICHLINE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline acknowledges that the statement is correct.


Passage number 113.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not a lower profit. There's no [change]in margins.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement expresses that there is no change in margins and does not contradict or argue against any other idea.


Passage number 114.
MR. KICHLINE. Lower than if they priced higher. We had moreinflation with the same unit labor cost. We also had more profit, butwe have to stick that income somewhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating facts without expressing any conflicting views or contradicting statements.


Passage number 115.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My own interpretation of the priceforecasts, looking at the range of forecasts as well as my own, is2/12-13/85that I consider them basically unchanged. If you look at the deflatoron a fixed-weight basis, excluding food and energy, for the fourquarters ending in 1984 and the four quarters ending in 1985, it'sbasically 4 percent in both years. And when you look at 1985 asopposed to 1984, ending up with the same rate of inflation is betterin some sense because, if the economy behaves like the forecast, Ithink we're going to have at least some pressures from commodityprices over the next year. The dollar certainly isn't going tocontinue to go up; it probably will go down. But even if it stays thesame, people are not going to buy as much and we will get some furtherpressure on a year-over-year basis from unit labor costs. But Ipersonally don't interpret the forecast as saying that inflation isworse in 1985 than in 1984. It is either about the same or maybe alittle better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 116.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm going to have a heck of a timeexplaining to the Congress that a number that goes up is reallyessentially the same or a little lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention.


Passage number 117.
MR. PARTEE. Tell them that it usually goes up quite a bitmore in the third year of an expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Partee, without any opposing viewpoints or contradictory information.


Passage number 118.
MR. BLACK. In the third year of an expansion that's reallynot much of an increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a straightforward statement about the third year of an expansion that does not involve contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure as far as third years ofexpansions are concerned, but I don't see where we get any increase.I don't see why we don't have a decrease here, with what I see goingon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

The speaker expresses uncertainty and does not see an increase in something. They also state that they don't understand why there isn't a decrease. This indicates disagreement or contention as they question the lack of change or decrease.


Passage number 120.
MR. MARTIN. I support the decrease-to-constant hypothesis,Mr. Chairman. We increased capacity by over 3 percent last year;there has been a surprising rehiring of experienced labor; and thereis all of this talk that we heard earlier about the use of computersand telecommunications equipment and all that stuff that made up theinvestment boomlet. Surely, these organizations are going to dosomething with this equipment other than look at it and display it tovisitors--which are two of the functions of this sort of newequipment. It seems to me that they will still have the pressure fromforeign competition and that finally someday, somehow, sooner orlater, the slimming down of many organizations that occurred--as thecharm school middle managers were sent on their way and otheradjustments were made in management and staff ranks--is going to havesome effect on labor costs in a positive direction. My own personalprojection was for less inflation--someone has to be an outlier--in1985, and I would support your statement of a constant or declining[rate of inflation].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for the decrease-to-constant hypothesis and providing reasons to support their belief. They also mention their personal projection for less inflation in 1985.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to get the whole conversationgoing on this point. I think you might look at it again in the lightof an unchanged dollar assumption. Not as much as a lot of otherpeople, but we have been high on our inflation estimates before. Idon't know what prices are going to be, but there certainly will be arange of uncertainty. Maybe they will go up. The question is wherethe greater probability lies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that they don't want to start a conversation on a certain point, implying that there may be differing opinions on that specific topic. Additionally, they mention being high on inflation estimates before, indicating that there may have been disagreements in the past regarding inflation projections. The speaker also acknowledges uncertainty and raises the possibility of prices going up, suggesting potential disagreement or differing opinions about future price movements.


Passage number 122.
MR. WALLICH. Could I ask a question on that. The greaterprobability is the number on a skewed distribution. Presumably, the-10-2/12-13/85probability distribution of inflation is that it can't go much belowzero but it can go up quite far; it has a long right hand tail. Areyou thinking in terms of the mode--the most likely single value--orthe mean, including the tail.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and further information about the probability distribution of inflation.


Passage number 123.
MR. KICHLINE. We have alleged for years that we have a modalforecast. I would say that it's very difficult, but basically, if weuse the model and try to come out with confidence intervals, the modelcomes out with substantially lower rates of inflation. In fact, ifyou put a 70 percent confidence interval around our deflator estimate,a couple of times we drift out of that range on the high side. Sowith the same policy assumptions for 1985, the model forecast, forwhatever it's worth, is a rate of increase in the deflator onepercentage point less than in the staff forecast. I view thatinformation as saying that the risks tend to be skewed on the downside. We think 3-1/2 percent is the most likely outcome; but if we'rewrong, I'd say we're probably too high rather than too low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 124.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In the given passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement evident as the text ends abruptly with "Mr. Balles." Without any additional information or context to analyze, it is difficult to determine if there is any contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 125.
MR. BALLES. I have a couple of questions, Mr. Chairman. Twoof the most difficult things to forecast, as you know, are what willhappen with the Federal deficit and what will happen to the dollar. Iwas just wondering if you did any sensitivity analysis in terms ofalternate forecasts, supposing that there's no depreciation of thedollar and supposing that there's no action to reduce the Federaldeficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if any sensitivity analysis was conducted considering different scenarios regarding the Federal deficit and the dollar.


Passage number 126.
MR. KICHLINE. Ted, I don't know if we can run one with theexchange rate unchanged. You have some numbers on that there. We dorun one that has a fiscal assumption of no fiscal action at all, sothat would add $50 billion dollars, essentially, to outlays: $40billion in outlays and $10 billion of less taxes. In 1986, which isthe relevant year because we assume these fiscal actions take effectin 1986 and beyond, we get something like 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percenthigher real GNP--in the neighborhood of 4 percent or a little higher.The deflator in 1986 is only up a tenth or two but the momentum buildsas you get into 1987 and beyond. Short-term interest rates in thatscenario are about a percentage point higher in 1986 than those in thestaff forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting information and discussing potential outcomes.


Passage number 127.
MR. TRUMAN. On the dollar, taking not the fourth-quarterlevel but the estimate for the first quarter--which is a good deallower than we are now--as the jumping-off point, we don't get too muchdirect impact on either real GNP or prices from an unchanged dollar,since that [decline] is behind us. In the 3rd quarter, we get 0.2down in each and then next year we would get a larger impact of twicethat magnitude--an additional 0.4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Truman, is stating factual information about the impact of the dollar decline on real GNP and prices.


Passage number 128.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Mr. Forrestal" without providing any further information or context, so it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 129.
MR. FORRESTAL. I wanted to ask a question about the debt todisposable income ratio. Your chart shows that ratio moving up prettyrapidly; it's probably near or a bit above the 1979 high. Do we knowwhat accounts for this run-up in debt. Is it due to demographicforces or what really accounts for it. And if that debt ratio staysat about the same level or goes up, do you think it's going to put aconstraint on spending in 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification and opinion.


Passage number 130.
-11-2/12-13/85MR. PRELL. Well, we've been investing some special effortlately in trying to explain the behavior of debt. The majoringredient here is the consumer installment credit; its growthrelative to income has been so sharp over the past couple of years.There are a number of factors that seem to be at work. One, as Imentioned, is that durable goods spending has been exceptionallystrong, and that presumably is an area of spending that is relativelydebt intensive. Another factor is a rather mechanical one: For a yearor two after the period of credit controls, people seemed to be quitereluctant to use debt. [Credit] extensions during that period weredepressed and it takes a while for the higher level of extensionssubsequently to leave its full imprint on the repayment flows. Rightnow, and over the past couple of years, we've had a relatively lowrepayment flow from these past extensions, though we have a higherlevel of extensions currently. And as I indicated, in our projectionwe're expecting a catch-up as the more recent debt is what is mostlyreflected in the repayment flow. There may be some demographiccharacteristics involved here. Clearly, over the postwar period asthe population has aged, the younger generations have been moreinclined to use debt. There's some evidence of that over time andthere are a number of other minor factors. But this mechanical matterof extensions and repayments alone, according to some simulations wedid, seems to explain a great deal of that debt growth. We don't havedata anymore on extensions or repayments, but our inference would bethat a fairly normal pattern of debt usage relative to the spendingthat has occurred would have produced this acceleration and shouldalso produce a marked deceleration. As to whether it imposes aconstraint, the logic would suggest that those individuals who havedrawn upon their credit lines and so on and built up some debt mayhave some marginal constraint on their further spending. But this isa widely distributed debt. The evidence is that over the past severalyears it has been people in higher income brackets that have taken onmost of this additional debt. They presumably have more flexibilityand probably have more assets, so it should be only a limitedconstraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation for the behavior of debt and discussing various factors that contribute to the increase in consumer installment credit.


Passage number 131.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since there is no passage provided, I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I wanted to take exception to the[projections for] housing starts and residential construction volumefor 1985. As the chart showed, the mortgage commitment rate ishovering around 13 percent on a 30-year fixed-rate loan and theproportion of adjustable rate loans has dropped significantly. Idon't believe, given the satisfaction of the deferred housing demandthat has occurred to date, that we can reach 1.75 million [in housingstarts] or $166+ billion in residential investment in 1985. It couldhappen with a lower [mortgage] rate but the assumption of the staff isfor somewhat higher rates, particularly toward the end of the year.In the models I've seen, it would take a fixed-rate somewhere around12-1/2 percent. If you add the servicing on to that mortgagecommitment rate for 30-year fixed-rate loans you get about 13-1/4percent. So it seems to me that we're looking at 1.5 million ratherthan 1.75 million [on starts].There are a number of other institutional changes. We knowthat the investigation of the Bank of America mortgage-backed securityfraud situation is only beginning. There will be some investorreaction in the mortgage-backed security area. The thrift institution-12-2/12-13/85regulators are attempting to slow the growth [of such securities], andto the extent that there is some degree of success, that would affectavailability. And finally, there is the so-called willingness factorin home buying that is disappearing, in the sense that theappreciation motivation that has been so prominent over the lastseveral decades is waning in several regions of the country. Themotivation to buy is for shelter and not for appreciation. Thesyndicates have been pushed out of the market in the multifamily area;the multiple unit vacancy rate is terrifically high in some parts ofthe country. It isn't enough to do a macro job and get this very highvacancy shown on the chart. For the United States there isn't anational housing market; there is mosaic of sub-markets around thecountry; and many of those have very, very high vacancy rates. So Idon't see how we can get 600,000 or 650,000 in multifamily starts in1985. I suggest that the forecast is [.25 million] high. Thatdoesn't exactly throw the forecast out.I would couple that remark with a commendation for theanalysis in the rest of the structural forecast for the next year interms of real business fixed investment. I think it's a very goodanalysis, showing a very big cutback in structures in the realbusiness fixed investment area. I did a little work prior to themeeting and then found that I was caught in the sense that I was onlyverifying what the staff has done here. I think that's quiteaccurate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin disagrees with the projections for housing starts and residential construction volume for 1985. He argues that the assumptions made by the staff are too optimistic and believes that the numbers will be lower. He provides several reasons for his disagreement, including the high mortgage commitment rate, institutional changes in the mortgage-backed security market, and a decrease in motivation for home buying. He also disagrees with the forecast for multifamily starts and suggests that it is too high. However, he does commend the analysis in the rest of the structural forecast.


Passage number 133.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only states a name, "Mr. Keehn," without any conflicting or contrasting information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 134.
MR. KEEHN. On the business fixed investment chart I continueto be amazed by this very favorable red trend line that we've watchedthe last couple of years, which seems completely out of context withour experience. Mike, I think you did comment as you went through thecharts that most of that line, or a significant part of it, is in thecommunications/computer area. My question is: If you were to separateout what I would call for lack of a better term the "grunt stuff"--theheavy capital production type of equipment--from the computer area andthen, in turn, take a look at the part of that heavy equipment that isbeing supplied by the international market, wouldn't the line in factbe very, very different. And wouldn't that be a way of dramatizinghow terribly uneven all of this is, despite the fact that we have atrend line that looks very favorable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Keehn, is expressing his amazement and questioning the context of the favorable red trend line in business fixed investment. He suggests that if the "grunt stuff" (heavy capital production equipment) is separated from the computer area, the trend line would be very different. This implies that the current trend line is misleading and does not accurately represent the overall situation.


Passage number 135.
MR. PRELL. Well, I confess I have not done the calculationfor the residual component of producers' durable goods. It's a verylogical concept; I wish I had done it. This aggregate here includesoffice and store machinery, communication equipment, scientificengineering equipment, and photographic equipment. It is a prettygood piece--almost half--of producers' durable equipment. My sense isthat if you looked at the rest of the numbers, you would see a muchmore moderate advance. But as things progressed last year, we did seesome fairly substantial increases in the heavy machinery area and soon. There is the distinction between production and purchase of thisequipment. Clearly, the share of equipment sales that is going toforeign producers has increased very considerably. So the implicationfor domestic firms and the capital goods industry is one that is notquite as rosy as this picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply providing their perspective and analysis on the topic.


Passage number 136.
MR. KEEHN. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges gratitude towards someone.


Passage number 137.
-13-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Didn't those figures you had the other daysuggest something like 50 percent of the increase in equipment wasimported this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement presenting information without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 138.
MR. KEEHN. I think it is higher than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or belief without contradicting or challenging any other statement.


Passage number 139.
MR. TRUMAN. But the share this past year was about 25percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a straightforward fact without any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 140.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the share of the total.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statement or context that indicates disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about a share of a total without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 141.
MR. TRUMAN. Share of the total.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply attributed to Mr. Truman without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 142.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You had a chart that had absolute numberswhere one could see the increase in imports and the increase in thetotal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement presenting information about a chart showing the increase in imports and the increase in overall numbers.


Passage number 143.
MR. PRELL. Maybe I have those numbers. The figure we havefor 1984 was: total purchases of business capital goods excludingmotor vehicles rose $18 billion, of which $10 billion was foreign.And the overall penetration is about a quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting information about the figure they have for 1984 without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 144.
MR. PARTEE. Wouldn't help things too much around Chicago,Si.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states a person's opinion about the potential impact of something in Chicago.


Passage number 145.
MR. KEEHN. That's the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states "That's the problem" without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 146.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage, as no specific passage is mentioned.


Passage number 147.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Are you ready for more generalcomments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking if the reader is prepared for additional general comments.


Passage number 148.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without more context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 149.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me make a couple of more generalcomments. Our own view of the economy for 1985 is one that has realGNP growing about 4 percent, with the deflator a shade lower thanthat. And at this juncture, that has the characteristics of a goodforecast from my perspective. In the short run it could actually be abit stronger. The impression I get from talking to business peopleand others over the past month or so is that most of them have beenmarking up their projection of real growth and marking down theirinflation projection for the year. But I think there probably is aconsensus somewhere in the 3-1/2 to 4 percent range for both real GNPand prices.On the point that was just brought up, the feeling comes outvery, very forcefully in comments from directors and business leadersthat we have crossed the Rubicon on this external stuff and that itmay already be taking a bigger bite than even those numbers suggest.For example, who represents a very, very largemultinational firm heavy in capital goods, thinks that in recentquarters 100 percent of the increase in spending on equipment iscoming from abroad. Just within the past week he made some commentsto the effect that he had seen his order book affected in a verysizable way just in the past month because of the international tradesituation. So, that continues to be a wild card and it's gettingwilder by the minute. I have some of the same concerns that Pres had-14-2/12-13/85about the housing sector. It should be a good year, but there aresome things in there that I find troubling as well.Extracting from the traditional sectoral questions of whatthe risks are to a forecast, it seems to me that there are two orthree more generic risks that are particularly important in thecurrent setting. One of those is: What happens if interest rates goup in any appreciable way. Let me just define appreciable as morethan a percentage point in the short run. Obviously, that would be avery difficult situation. And then you ask yourself: What couldproduce that. If the budget deficit is not reduced, that couldproduce it; and if the dollar declines in any appreciable way, thatcould produce it even though the cushion for a dollar decline issomewhat larger now than it was before. That result could also comefrom the economy growing too fast because, from my perspective atleast, the balance in our credit markets is so precarious, asindicated in one of Mike's charts, that it doesn't take much to pushus into a situation in which the economy is growing too fast. Eventhough that might not reflect itself in price pressures, it couldeasily be reflected in interest rate pressures. Then, of course,there is always the possibility--perhaps remote at the moment--thatthe market could conclude that money growth in some broad sense isgetting away from us. So, there is a whole collection of things, anyone of which I think could produce pressures on interest rates. And Ithink it goes without saying that any appreciable pressures in thatdirection would throw any forecast to the wind.Another thing that I am somewhat concerned about in terms ofrisks is the burden of all this debt we're accumulating. I'm not assanguine as I thought you seemed to be, Mike, in terms of thecumulative effect of that debt burden--particularly in the context ofwhat I think is still some fragility in the financial system. And Idon't think all of these crazy new markets and instruments that arecoming along almost daily are helping that situation. Just to putthat debt situation in one perspective: Since 1982, the ratio ofnonfinancial debt to nominal GNP has risen by 17 [hundredths]. It'salmost a vertical line, and the level of that debt right now is so farout of line with anything we've ever experienced. That's just anotherway of looking at it that is troubling.The last thing I would mention on the risk side is the oilprice; that has been talked about a little. I was surprised the otherday when a point was made to me in a conversation with someone Iregard as a fairly credible source. The nature of the comment wasthat among a group of people thought to be experts, a third of themnow thought there was at least some possibility that the oil pricecould fall, say, to the $16 range. No one was predicting that as ahard prediction, but there was at least the recognition of that as apossibility by a fairly knowledgeable and sizable group of so-calledexperts. I must say when I stop and try to think about theimplications of that, I'm not sure what they are. They probably, ormost certainly, are not good. So, in general, I come out with [theview that] everybody is feeling good about the situation right now butgetting a little more worried about what the situation implies downthe road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the economy growing too fast, accumulating debt, and the possibility of interest rates going up. They also mention differing predictions about the oil price. This indicates that there is not total agreement or consensus about the current state of the economy and potential risks.


Passage number 150.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --more worried as you talked. GovernorGramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It mentions someone getting increasingly worried while listening to a conversation.


Passage number 151.
-15-2/12-13/85MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think the forecast in many respects isa remarkably good one for the third year of a recovery--when growth inthe first two years was well above the average for the first two yearsof recovery and in the third year the expansion is sustained at a ratewell above potential growth and unemployment is reduced while keepinga low inflation rate and relatively stable interest rates. As Irecall--and I didn't look this up--this forecast for '85 is notdramatically different than what the staff presented for '85 a yearago and I swore then that it couldn't happen. But we're here now and,if you look at outside forecasts, a very large number of them arecentering on performance very much like this one. Indeed, when I putin my forecast, I found myself putting in numbers very much like whatthe staff has here.In thinking about uncertainties, what worries me the most iswhat's going to happen to the dollar. Lots of people worry aboutthat, too. Oddly enough, some people say if the dollar goes up, thatwill be bad for the economy and when you ask them what will happen ifthe dollar goes down, they say that will be bad for the economy, too.There are some bad things and some good things, but we need to keepstraight exactly what is going to happen if either of those twooutcomes occurs. I worry more--a lot more--about what's going tohappen when and if the dollar begins to fall than if it rises further.If it rises further, it will put some additional restraint on thegrowth of domestic production but it will have beneficial effects onthe inflation rate and beneficial effects on interest rates. And Ithink it is not too difficult to handle the negative aspects ondomestic growth by adjustments of monetary policy, even though I amworried about the kind of protectionist measures that develop [inthose circumstances]. If the dollar begins to go down and go downrapidly, particularly [unintelligible] as we're approaching thenatural rate of unemployment, it's going to stimulate the economystrongly. It's going to put strong upward pressures on prices and,through both of those things, strong upward pressures on interestrates. And that we're going to have a lot of problems with. So, Ihope the staff is right and we begin to get a modest gradual declineof the dollar beginning fairly soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their thoughts on the forecast for the economy and expressing their worries about the potential impact of a fluctuating dollar.


Passage number 152.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sounds like one of the least likelyforecasts--not that anybody has any better one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting the opinion that the forecast mentioned is unlikely, and that there is not a better alternative forecast available.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 153.
MR. KEEHN. Just to comment generally on the outlook, thestaff forecast is really quite consistent with ours. Our GNP is alittle lower and our inflation is a little higher but not materiallyenough to comment on. But, as you can gather by my earlier comments,I am still just staggered by the continuing unevenness of it all.Many of the industries on the capital goods side are very weak and Ithink a lot of them have come to the conclusion that they are going tobe left out and that this recovery is going to completely pass themby. I was talking with a man who runs a very large diversifiedcompany, including an extensive foundry operation, and they haveconcluded that they had better get ready for the next recession andnow are in the process of closing permanently about half of theirfoundries. They just feel that that business is never going to comeback.A risk I would point out--and I would say it's a local risk,certainly not a macro or a broad risk--is this agricultural situation.-16-2/12-13/85I almost don't dare mention it because I'm sure I can't say anythingnew or surprising and you've heard a lot about it. But it is veryserious and is continuing to deteriorate. And it is one that I findvery hard to get a handle on; I find it difficult to measure just howdifficult and serious the problem is other than I have a hunch thatthe statistics we look at really don't adequately describe theproblem. The land surveys that we look at suggest that land valuesare down 30 to 40 percent from the peak. But there isn't much landselling; and when land does sell, it's selling at 50 to 60 percentunder the peak. People purposely are trying to hold land off themarket [because] the real values are substantially lower.As the land value goes down, the debt [unintelligible] willget very, very high at the agricultural banks. Cash flow just isn'tgoing to be adequate to service the debt. The concern among the agbanks is getting very high. I went to the Iowa bankers meeting inSioux City last weekend and I was pleased to get out of town in onepiece. They are pretty close-mouthed about the problem but they allcan see that the losses are going to be very substantial when theytotal the direct loans to the farmers and the indirect loans tosuppliers and merchants and the like. Also in the Midwest there hasbeen a lot of this trading of banks around that is supported by loanson bank stock, and I have a hunch that that will be a problem that'sgoing to grow in magnitude. When you add those together, I think thelosses on the portfolios are going to be very substantial. Anotherway of saying that the numbers hide the nature of the problem a littleis this: Of the 530 state banks in Iowa only 15 have capital of 7percent or less; and of those 15, 12 are between 6 and 7 percent,which would suggest that there isn't a problem from a capital point ofview. But when asset quality problems arise, a bank can go throughcapital awfully darn fast and all of a sudden there is an escalatingproblem. The Superintendent of Banks in Iowa suggests that about 140of their 530 banks are what he would call problem banks and by that hemeans that 60 percent of capital is classified. But he thinks thatnumber is going to go up and that by the end of the year about half oftheir banks will be in the problem category. These are all, I think,small banks and this is somewhat of a regional problem as opposed toone with broad national implications. But I do suggest to you thatthis agricultural problem--and, again, it can't be news to you--isserious and is escalating and that the number of bank failures isgoing to be significantly higher in the Midwest this year than was thecase last year. It is not at a level nor of the type of institutionthat could be destabilizing, but I think it is a risk that meritsnotice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Keehn expresses concern about the unevenness of the economic recovery and the weak state of certain industries. He also highlights the serious agricultural problem and the potential for significant bank failures in the Midwest. However, he clarifies that this is a regional problem and not one with broad national implications.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 155.
MR. BOEHNE. I've been in maybe a dozen meetings over thepast month and I think this is the gloomiest couple of hours I'vespent. Actually, the forecast looks like a pretty good forecast forthe third year of a recovery and it seems to me that it's a reasonableforecast. I think you can argue with it in pieces but, at least in mypart of the country, I find the mood more upbeat than I sense aroundthe table. There is a long list of things that could go wrong; eachone of them, certainly, could go wrong and 1985 could end up being adisastrous year. But it seems to me, if you're a betting person, thatthe outlook is really pretty good; and I don't see anything wrong withaccepting a pretty good outlook when it comes our way. Clearly, there-17-2/12-13/85are risks with the dollar and there are problems with agriculture andthere are other areas of risk. But on the whole I think maybe theFederal Reserve ought to surprise the country and not feel too badabout the outlook in 1985. So, I would be inclined to take theforecast more or less as it is, acknowledge that things could gowrong, but still present an upbeat kind of outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker does not express disagreement or contention in this passage. They acknowledge the potential risks and problems but overall have a positive outlook.


Passage number 156.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Miss Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without a specific passage provided, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the text.


Passage number 157.
MS. SEGER. First, in terms of the inflation outlook, I cameup with 3-1/2 percent without taking into account the value of thedollar; then Ted Truman convinced me that the dollar is going todepreciate so eventually I rounded my number up to 4 percent. If Ihad assumed it was going in the other direction, I would have roundedit down to 3 percent because I just do these in whole numbers; I don'thave the confidence that I can do it any more finely than that. Interms of productivity--and this is something that I'm very interestedin--one factor I think we're soft peddling, if not ignoring, in thiswhole productivity discussion is simply the commitment of businessmanagers to be more productive. I deal with some of the same kinds ofpeople that Si Keehn does out in the Rust Belt and they are viewingthis as a very high priority item. It's shape up or you're going tobe dead; it's as simple as that. Therefore, this has given them astrong incentive to be more productive. I understand that,unfortunately, that doesn't fit very well into the econometric models,but that doesn't mean it isn't a factor and that doesn't mean it isn'ta very important factor. Furthermore, I think this notion ties inwith what we're seeing in plant and equipment spending: that in orderto get the kinds of productivity gains they feel they have to have tocompete with the imports, they have to bring in state-of-the-artequipment. I just saw a plant on Friday that had robots all over theplace at $90,000 per unit. It's not a small investment but they haveto do this to improve their productivity. I think we're going to seemore and more of this even in offices; maybe not in Washington, but inother parts of the country they are having to be more productive.They are having to use word processors; they are having to stretchclerical help by giving them better tools. I think we have to paymore attention to this because, as Jim said, it is important withrespect to inflation possibilities and also to our growth potential.Finally, [I am concerned about] the continuing strong dollar,the agricultural problem that Si has already referred to, the thirdworld debt situation--I went to a meeting last week at the StateDepartment about the latter and that doesn't seem to me to be aproblem that has gone away--and the thrifts, which are still hangingon the edge of the cliff. Looking at all four of those factors, Ifind it very difficult to think in terms of interest rates going anyhigher at all, because I think that would push all of those problemsinto a still more serious mode. And heaven knows they are bad enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing her own opinions and observations about inflation, productivity, and various economic factors.


Passage number 158.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as there is no passage provided to analyze. Please provide the passage for a proper evaluation.


Passage number 159.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I agree with Ed Boehne only more so. Ithink the staff is projecting a smaller real growth for 1985 thanwe're going to realize. I put in a 4 percent number and I thinkthat's a minimum; I really think we'll probably do better than that onreal growth. It's hard for me to document my position very well onthe basis of the numbers that have come in since our last meeting-18-2/12-13/85because they are a fairly mixed bag. But one thing that has impressedme in the past few weeks has been the extraordinary strength in thestock market. Since the 9th of January the stock market has put on adisplay of business confidence of a sort that is quite rare in ourhistory. I think that we're going to be revising up these real growthprojections and by midyear, say, I think that is going to put us in avery difficult position with respect to the effects of our actions oninterest rates. So, it seems to me that our problems in 1985 aregoing to be the problems of a very strong economy and they are goingto be just as difficult to deal with, and perhaps more so, than theproblems we would face if the economy came in weaker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. It is primarily expressing the speaker's opinion and perspective on the projected growth of the economy and its potential implications.


Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage because it only consists of a name, "Mr. Guffey." More context or information is needed to make a determination.


Passage number 161.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, we're in fairly close agreementwith the staff forecast for 1985 but with a couple of differentassumptions. One is that we [keyed] off the midpoint of the M1[objective] and projected 5-1/2 percent M1 growth rather than the6-1/2 percent that the staff has, and still came up with essentiallythe same numbers with the exception of the deflator; we would besomewhere in the range of about 1/2 percent higher on the deflator.The higher deflator number fell out of the unit labor cost componentof the forecast, suggesting that unit labor costs would go up morethan the staff has forecast. But in all respects, it would seem to methat we're going to get somewhat greater growth than the staff isforecasting in the first half of the year and somewhat less in thesecond half, largely because of the interest rate pressures that willbe brought to bear because of that greater growth [in the first half]and maybe some action by the Federal Reserve to move against that.I would also want to note for the Committee, as a follow-upon a comment of Si Keehn, that the condition of the agriculturalsector in the high plains of the Midwest is a very serious problem.It may not have the national impact, much as he has suggested, butthat does not mean that there will not be great social and otherdisruptions in that area. And indeed, it could get out of hand. Iwould also want to note quickly, having talked to the Farm Creditpeople, bankers, large input suppliers to the agricultural sector, aswell as to some Congressmen, that I fairly well concluded that thereis not a great deal that monetary policy can do to alleviate thatproblem, at least in the very near term--I'm talking about 1985 andquite likely 1986. I'm not sure that there is a role for thisCommittee with respect to taking action to try to alleviate theproblem that rests in the agricultural sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, mentions a couple of different assumptions he has made in his forecast, but overall, he agrees with the staff forecast for 1985. He also acknowledges the serious problem in the agricultural sector but does not suggest any disagreement with the Committee's role or actions in addressing the issue.


Passage number 162.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 163.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I'm inclined to join those who areprobably a little more optimistic than the Board staff, although Ithink the staff's forecast is very reasonable and I would be willingto accept it. As for concern about all of the problems, I feel muchas you did, Ed: I felt very good until I got here. Those problems areall there and they are all very real possibilities. I guess the worstof all worlds would be if every one of them really came to pass; maybejust one of them will. We will just have to wait and see what's goingto happen on the deficit problem. The dollar problem is pretty muchof an unknown, and depending on how that develops--or if some of thesethings happen--I think we would all be shifting our views entirely.-19-2/12-13/85On agriculture, I tend to agree with Roger: I really don't know whatwe, sitting around this table, can do there.In the discussion, someone mentioned the oil price going to$16 or $15 dollars a barrel. Several months ago, in discussing whatthe effect would be on our financial institutions if we got a prettygood drop in the price of oil, the feeling was that if the price gotto $25 a barrel, that was going to cause some very serious problems.Now that that is a very real situation, they are saying: "Well, whenit gets to $20 we're going to have some real problems." So, it's hardto judge just where that level is. I don't believe it's quite asdifficult at $25 now as they thought it was going to be--not that it'seasy; it isn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker acknowledges potential problems and uncertainty, but does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 164.
 And now they are thinking maybe $20 is where thedifficulty is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is the price $25 now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that there is a possibility that the price or difficulty may be $20, without mentioning whether the current price is $25.


Passage number 165.
MR. BOYKIN. No. But I think it's becoming more and more ofa reality that it's going to get there. Therefore, in theconversations, the assumption is that it's likely to get there so theyquestion where the next down point is. But no, it's not there yet.Overall, looking at the situation today, I would certainly go forwardwith a great big smile on my face and keep my fingers crossed as Ikept going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents the speaker's opinion that a certain situation is not yet a reality, but may become one in the future. The speaker seems optimistic and positive about the current situation.


Passage number 166.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without further context


Passage number 167.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I didn't comment on the generalsituation earlier so let me briefly do that now, if I may. First ofall, I agree with the staff forecast; we came out very, very close toit. The only minor difference I would note is that, like some others,the shape of 1985 looks a little different to us than to the staff: wethink there will be greater growth in the first half than in thesecond. But generally speaking, it is a reasonable forecast and it'sone that I would be prepared to accept and one that I would beprepared to base policy on.In talking to people around my District, I sense that theconfidence level is very high; there is a good deal of optimism aboutthe economy. The private forecasters seem to be coming out prettymuch the same way on growth and inflation. I, too, came to themeeting feeling pretty good; but unlike a few of my colleagues, I'mnot particularly disturbed at what I'm hearing because I think thatthese problems are real. They are potential problems that I think wehave to keep very clearly in mind--not that they're necessarily allgoing to happen, but I think we would [ignore] those problems at ourperil. I think they are very real. I am beginning to feel in talkingto some people that there is a sense of euphoria beginning to develop.And, at least in my small sample, people aren't even talking as muchabout the deficit anymore. They have had in 1984 a very, very goodyear of phenomenal growth; they are looking at good growth in 1985;and these the problems of the dollar, the deficit, oil prices, andagriculture seem to be diminishing in people's minds. So, I think wehave to be careful to keep those problems very much in mind.The only other comment I would make is that I'm not so surethis agricultural situation is really a parochial one and not a macroone. We have it in our District, so now we're talking about the-20-2/12-13/85Midwest and the Southeast and perhaps the Southwest. And while thebanks that might be affected are small, the aggregate of dislocationamong the agricultural banks could be substantial. Again, while I'moptimistic, I think there are some dangers that we have to keep oureye on; but generally I would agree with the staff forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the staff forecast and expresses optimism about the economy, but also acknowledges potential problems and the need to keep them in mind. There is no argument or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 168.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 169.
 Except in prices, where you're much higheraccording to the--MR. FORRESTAL. We were higher. I thought we had 4.2 percentfor the GNP deflator.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that the prices are higher but does not express any disagreement or contention about it.


Passage number 170.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 4.2 percent, that's it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a numerical value without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 171.
MR. FORRESTAL. We had 3.6 percent for '85 over '84.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states a percentage without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 172.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 3.6 percent in prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a percentage increase in prices without any conflicting or contrasting information.


Passage number 173.
MR. FORRESTAL. That's what I have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a statement made by Mr. Forrestal, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 174.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not what I have on this sheet, butI'll take it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the information is different from what they have, but they are willing to accept it.


Passage number 175.
MR. FORRESTAL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. FORRESTAL" simply provides information about a person, without any indication of dispute or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 176.
 Let me read my margin--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Don't read any further; 3.6 percent, yousaid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a statement of someone reading a margin and instructing the reader not to continue further, followed by the percentage.


Passage number 177.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, 4.2 percent is the deflator number Ihad [unintelligible]; I thought I had the 3.6 number in front of me.Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Instead, the speaker is clarifying and confirming the numbers they have in front of them.


Passage number 178.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll take it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "We'll take it" does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 179.
MR. FORRESTAL. 4.2 percent, and year-over-year 3.6 percent.I had it right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states statistics without expressing or indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 180.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 181.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff's projection iscertainly plausible and we can't quarrel much with it. I believe,like Frank Morris and Ed Boehne and Bob Boykin, that the risk is thatthe economy will come in somewhat stronger than that. Underlyingtheir forecast is the assumption that the income velocity of M1 isgoing to grow a little more than 1 percent. That may well be right,but to me that seems on the low side of what is likely to happen. Iwould think it is more likely that we'll have more growth in nominalGNP as a result of a faster rising velocity, and I think that would bedistributed partly between real output and prices. So, we come out at4.4 percent on those. So far as the unemployment rate is concerned, Iwouldn't be surprised to see that drop a bit lower than what weprojected originally or what the staff is projecting. I think thedemographics of the situation and improving real family incomes mightwell limit the increase in what the staff is projecting for laborforce participation rates and bring that down maybe a couple of tenthsof a percentage point below what they have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 182.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Partee, without providing any information that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 183.
-21-2/12-13/85MR. PARTEE. Well, I'm inclined to agree with the optimiststoo. I think the short-term outlook is pretty good and the staffforecast is probably on the low end of what might occur in the nextyear. It has been shown pretty clearly now that what we had in thefall was a temporary stoppage in the growth and that growth has nowresumed at a pretty good rate. I have this view that the outlook isgood but the underlying situation is terrible. And the question is:Do we live in the short run or do we live in the long run when theunderlying situation may reveal itself. I suppose the greatestproblem that might occur would be a substantial increase in interestrates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 184.
MR. MORRIS. I think what you really mean to say is that thereal world is fine but the financial world is terrible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 185.
MR. PARTEE. Well, maybe that's what I'm affected by. Iagree with Jerry that a sizable rise in interest rates would be quitedifficult for these burdened sectors to take on. I don't agree withhim that a 100 basis points is a sizable rise. After all, rates aredown several hundred points over the last several months, but I guessI would agree that a 200 basis point increase would be a verydifficult thing. From my vantage point right now, I'm beginning tothink our greatest problem may be an excessive increase in activityhere that in fact will bring a 200 basis point increase in interestrates looking out 6 months from now. Therefore, I'm more on the sideof those who are now becoming somewhat fearful of too much of a risein activity rather than on the side of those who think it's going tobe too small in the period to come. In the end all these problems andmore that have been listed by Jim and others are going to come out insome way or other, but I think probably not in 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, disagrees with Jerry's assessment that a 100 basis point rise in interest rates is sizable. Mr. Partee believes that a 200 basis point increase would be a very difficult thing. He also disagrees with those who think that the rise in activity will be too small in the future, as he believes it may actually lead to a 200 basis point increase in interest rates. Therefore, he is more fearful of too much of a rise in activity.


Passage number 186.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No information is provided in the passage about Governor Wallich, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 187.
MR. WALLICH. I think as one looks at the evolution of ourprojections, it has been very favorable. Growth projections have beenupgraded and inflation projections have been reduced. I'm a littleuneasy about the inflation projections but there are reasons for them.When you take the absolute levels, the rate of growth is very close towhat we might consider potential and the rate of inflation is stillway above what it ought to be. The staff has it coming down in apretty satisfactory way; I doubt that [will happen]. In any event, Ithink there is much more to be done on that score.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It presents the speaker's perspective on the evolution of projections and their concerns about inflation projections. The speaker acknowledges that the staff has projected a satisfactory decrease in inflation, but expresses doubts about its realization.


Passage number 188.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the interest of accuracy, the staff hasit about the same as it was last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states that the staff has remained relatively the same as it was last year for the sake of accuracy. There is no sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 189.
MR. WALLICH. Oh. Hasn't it been coming down in recentprojections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. It seems that there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or asking a question about recent projections.


Passage number 190.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Their projections probably have beenreduced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that their projections have likely been reduced.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 191.
MR. WALLICH. That's what I had in mind. Well, I have oneother comment. We're in the third year of an expansion and there isno reason why expansions should come to an end after 3 years. Butneither do I believe what the [Administration's] economic report says:that there is no relationship between the age of an expansion and thechances of it coming to an end. So I think the risks, as others have-22-2/12-13/85 -23-pointed out, are that something untoward may happen and may interferewith this reasonably good evolution. We have no serious imbalancesother than, of course, the terrible one--the budget deficit. But wehave a number of danger points, mainly financial. So, again, thereare potential sources of the evolution being disturbed. To me thissuggests that the risks are more on the side of excessive expansionthan of going down unexpectedly, and our policy ought to be[formulated] accordingly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, disagrees with the economic report that claims there is no relationship between the age of an expansion and the chances of it coming to an end. He believes that there are potential sources of disturbance to the current evolution of the economy, suggesting that the risks are more on the side of excessive expansion.


Passage number 192.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage simply states a woman's name and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 193.
MS. HORN. I think the staff forecast is a reasonable one. Iam impressed with the year-end business statistics, and for thatreason I agree with those around the table who are optimists and whofeel the odds favor a stronger recovery than the one that's built intothe forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Horn expresses agreement with the staff forecast and shares her optimism about the potential for a stronger recovery.


Passage number 194.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are those year-end figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply asks a question about year-end figures without taking a position or raising any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 195.
MS. HORN. Well, we could start with the 4th quarter GNPnumbers and the auto numbers coming in strong. One of the things Iwas worried about at year-end was the buildup in inventories; I thinkthat is not so severe, based on the variety of numbers that I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Ms. Horn discussing different economic indicators.


Passage number 196.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the other hand, I raised the questionbecause new orders are down and housing is going no place on thelatest numbers, and there are real questions about the commercialconstruction area. Who knows. The auto figure looked good, as didthe inventory reduction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply listing different observations and their potential implications without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 197.
MS. HORN. The whole personal consumption expenditures, orthe consumer side, [looked good] and I tend to I focus on that. Inany case, looking at some of the assumptions that underlie myforecast--and I think a lot of the others around the table--one couldbuild a case for consumer and business outlays becoming stronger. Ifyou assume an expansive fiscal policy, no sharp changes in theexchange rates, no abrupt rise in interest rates, low farm prices,even lower oil prices, and so forth, I think you can build a case fora stronger recovery than the one that the staff is forecasting, and Ithink that's pretty close to my forecast. If the recovery isstronger, then the question about inflation comes up. I would see itnot spilling into the '85 numbers but be a danger in '86. And that,of course, requires either fiscal or monetary policy, or both, to dealwith it.In the Fourth District, the pattern of business activity issluggish with no particularly clear direction. But I can even put anoptimistic light on the Fourth District outlook in that there isreally a distinct change in mood, though it's probably short of Bob'sterm "euphoria." The impressionistic evidence we're getting hasreally quite a different tone to it. Of course, a lot of what we hearcomes from the strong auto numbers in both December and January, butwe're getting a lot of other stories. We've had no disappointment inretail sales in January, for example. We've had unexpected strengthin chemical orders and, to a lesser degree, in both heavy trucks andsteel orders as well. This is all recent and impressionistic ratherthan in the numbers. To keep from having a wholly optimistic reportto the Committee, though, I will say that the talk about protectionism2/12-13/85 -24-has increased--if that's possible--in the Midwest. You can't get twobusiness people in the Midwest together without that being thesubject, and I think that's a terribly serious danger as we goforward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their opinion and observations about the current economic situation.


Passage number 198.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When do the retail sales figures come outfor January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking about the release date of retail sales figures for January.


Passage number 199.
MR. KICHLINE. 8:30 a.m. tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a time for a future event.


Passage number 200.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You could make a bold comment about them.Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 201.
MR. BALLES. Well, I want to make a comment on the generaloutlook. We're essentially in agreement with the staff forecast. Infact, our numbers are very close except that we're a little lower oninflation. We have 3.7 percent, mainly because we only expect a 4percent decline in the dollar rather than 8 percent, but we would onlybe half as wrong. I think the staff forecast is quite plausible and Ihave no quarrel with it. I do want to say, though, that I think ChuckPartee put his finger right on it: The aggregate statistics look greatbut an awful lot of the economy looks sour. I don't ever recall aperiod in which there was such imbalance in the economy as we'rewitnessing right now. We really have two economies going here; itdepends on what business you're in. None of our directors buys andsells GNP; they buy and sell other things. And if they are in thedefense business, or aerospace, or electronics, or in some capitalgoods industries, they are doing great. But if they are in mining,agriculture, forest products, and so forth, they're doing lousy. Toadd to what Bob Forrestal and somebody else mentioned--that theMidwest is not the only place where agriculture is in trouble--two ofour biggest banks are having problems right now and are undersurveillance, in large part because of bum agricultural loans. Justso you don't get the wrong idea on that, it's not only bum real estateloans. There are bum farm loans and big chunks of very bad realestate loans; even the agri-business [unintelligible]. At big banksin California agriculture is a problem. I agree with Bob that it isnot a local problem.It's time to be optimistic as we look at the aggregatestatistics and I feel optimistic in that sense. But only at ourperil, I think, should we ignore some of these other factors, whichsooner or later are going to come home to roost. Going back toHenry's remarks about there being no relation between the age and thehealth of an expansion, I would simply add that most expansions in myrecollection have come about because of a combination of inflationarypressures and rising interest rates. And those are the things thatright now certainly could trigger what looks to be a soundexpansionary trend and [turn out to] be unsustainable developmentsthat could quickly come to an end. I feel good about the generalprospects for 1985 and I'm beginning to wonder how much longer we'lllive with these big problems hanging over us. One or more of thoseproblems could push us over the cliff before 1985 is over, but I don'tthink that will happen. That's more likely to occur in 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is mostly in agreement with the staff forecast and only raises concerns about certain sectors of the economy and potential risks in the future.


Passage number 202.
MR. GAINOR. We've come down on the optimistic side of thestaff forecast: a little higher on GNP and a little lower on thedeflator. But those who have talked about the agricultural sector are2/12-13/85certainly reflecting our views. There are serious debt problems;collateral value is falling; and it has become a fairly hot politicalissue in our District and elsewhere, as you can imagine. There arebills in every one of our [state] legislatures to try to provide somerelief for the agricultural sector. Most deal with ways to moderatethe impact of debt service for the farmers. And, of course, one ofthe objectives is to provide some liquidity for spring planting--cashfor seed--which is a very serious issue. While we don't think it ismonetary policy's role to deal with this, monetary policy is not goingto be immune in that there is a great deal of sensitivity to interestrates. And if rates start to rise, I think perhaps some politicalpressure that currently is not on the Fed will gravitate toward us.So we are concerned about rates in that context.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is explaining the views and concerns of Mr. Gainor regarding the agricultural sector and its potential impact on monetary policy.


Passage number 203.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If nobody else has anything to say, maybewe ought to have Mr. Axilrod say something about these targets fornext year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 204.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod's statement is not challenged or contradicted.


Passage number 205.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We went over the question of whether torebase last month. You're aware that that is one of theAdministration's helpful proposals in its economic report andelsewhere. I detected very little or no--I don't remember [any]--sentiment for rebasing last time. You've had another month or more tothink about it. Maybe we can dispose of that issue quickly, if youhaven't changed your opinion. And if you have, let me know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a previous question and seeking clarification or an update on the person's opinion.


Passage number 206.
MR. MARTIN. I think the Chairman's memory serves him well.I don't believe there was any overt support for rebasing. To startfrom some theoretical level being captured by a range we set some timeback has very little to recommend it, it seems to me. I would opposeany rebasing now, with all due respect to Bill Poole and his goodlanguage in the CEA report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the Chairman's memory and expresses their own opinion against rebasing.


Passage number 207.
MR. MORRIS. Also, Mr. Chairman, with the revised numbersthat we soon will be putting out, the deviation from the midpoint isdown to three-tenths of 1 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is providing a factual update on the revised numbers.


Passage number 208.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not provided.


Passage number 209.
MR. BOEHNE. No, it's more than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 210.
MS. HORN. It's eight-tenths--5.2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a numerical percentage, without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER."


Passage number 212.
 No, this change in--MR. MORRIS(.). [The midpoint] was 5-1/2 percent, wasn't it.SPEAKER(.). 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply confirming the information provided by Mr. Morris.


Passage number 213.
MR. MORRIS(.). The range was 4 to 8 percent, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a range of percentages.


Passage number 214.
MR. BOEHNE. Aside from the numbers, I think Pres has madethe basic case and I would agree with him 100 percent on this issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, states that he agrees with the President 100 percent on the issue.


Passage number 215.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I always have had problems withtelling someone we're aiming for a percentage rate of growth from some-25-2/12-13/85point we haven't reached, but I always have had sympathy for thesemoving lines around the midpoint rather than the moving megaphone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and personal preferences, but there is no mention of any disagreement or differing opinions with anyone else.


Passage number 216.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" is simply a proper noun and does not convey any contention or disagreement on its own.


Passage number 217.
 Well, let me get to that as--MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is just an introduction or transition to another topic.


Passage number 218.
 Well, that's part of the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm going to get to that issue too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging a topic they plan to address in the future.


Passage number 219.
MR. BLACK. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple confirmation or agreement.


Passage number 220.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without further context.


Passage number 221.
 They're somewhat related, but let me seewhat--MR. PARTEE. I'd be opposed to rebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the two things being discussed are somewhat related and is then interrupted by another person expressing their opposition.


Passage number 222.
MR. BLACK. I am, too, as you currently define it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Black is simply confirming agreement or alignment with the current definition being discussed.


Passage number 223.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't hear any sentiment for rebasinghere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 224.
MS. SEGER. May I just ask a question. I haven't seen whatit would do to the numbers to have an average of the months for thepreceding year used as the base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Seger is simply asking a question.


Passage number 225.
 I think that was one of theproposals that--MR. AXILROD. No, I thought they based it on the fourth-quarter average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 226.
MS. SEGER. I think they have it two ways.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Ms. Seger.


Passage number 227.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they used the fourth-quarteraverage. But another question, which I have looked at myself at timesin the past, is why we put all this emphasis on the fourth quarterinstead of on a yearly average target. That's another way to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses two different approaches or perspectives (using the fourth-quarter average vs. a yearly average target) but does not express opposition or debate between them.


Passage number 228.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the growth for 1984 year-over-year was6.9 percent; fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter it was 5.2 percent,rounded. I could get you the level, but these things just tend tooffset each other; as you go back over the years they tend to averageout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the growth rates, without any indication of controversy or disagreement.


Passage number 229.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles, did you have some comment onthis point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The statement is a question asking for Mr. Balles' comment on a particular point.


Passage number 230.
MR. BALLES. Well, mine is the same as Bob Black's. I thinka good alternative to rebasing, which has its problems, is theflexibility [unintelligible] the parallel line idea that we've seen inthe Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of any disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker simply states their agreement with another person's perspective.


Passage number 231.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me get to that in a minute. Itake it there is no sentiment to rebase. In fact, I don't think thatthis is an intellectually stupid way to approach it. It's a perfectlyreasonable thing to do, but I don't think there's any more reason torebase than not to rebase. It depends upon whether, on the basis ofthe year's events, we're happier to start out one way rather than theother way, depending upon some kind of an analysis. And that's theway I would explain it. But the convention is not to rebase, so the-26-2/12-13/85burden of proof is on changing it. In this particular year, if werebased M1 up I don't know what we'd do about M3. We'd have to rebaseit way down and have a peculiar explanation. The same is true forcredit, I suppose, if we took that seriously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the topic of rebasing and stating that it is a reasonable thing to do, but there is no clear preference for rebasing or not rebasing. There is also mention of potential complications if M1 or credit were to be rebased, but this is not presented as a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 232.
MR. BALLES. I did have one comment, Mr. Chairman. You saidyou'd get around to the idea of the parallel lines rather than thecone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a comment or clarification about the chairman's statement.


Passage number 233.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm getting around to it right now. If Iview the consensus accurately on the cones [it is not to] rebase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are about to do something and then mentioning the consensus on a certain topic, without expressing any disagreement with it.


Passage number 234.
MR. BALLES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual content of the passage.


Passage number 235.
 But my point is that if we don't rebase, weshould do something else or I think we'll have a big problem with M1appearing to be over its range for a good part of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, on this issue of how we draw thepicture I will declare my position: I have never liked cones. I wenton a little campaign a couple of years ago when the staff had palsy inthat they couldn't write these things without making a cone. But, onepart of the substance, anyway--in fairness, I don't think it's allthat the Council [of Economic Advisers] had in mind--is whether we aredisturbed that we are above the cone now. Now, this gets into theshort-run policy decision a little as well as the longer-run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions on various subjects, but there is no direct disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 236.
 But Ithink--MR. PARTEE. Growth has been pretty fast, if that's whatyou're asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and Mr. Partee is affirming that growth has indeed been fast.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 237.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not quite asking that. I'masking: Are you so unhappy that it's not so slow, having started inDecember above that cone as part of the low base, that you thought itwas important to get it back in the cone in January or February. Now,I would just assert "no." But that's certainly an interpretation; Idon't know what the Committee thinks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own interpretation or assertion about a certain situation, but acknowledges that they are unsure of what the Committee thinks.


Passage number 238.
MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, I for one would agree withyou; I'm not worried. I would be worried, except for the expectationof the Board's staff--with which our staff agrees--that the velocityof M1 will probably be down in this current quarter and maybe for thefirst half of the year, and that it will be up in the neighborhood of1 percent for the year as a whole. That's an excellent reason to runabove path right now and maybe for a good part of the year. It isgoing to make us look a little silly every Friday in that chartshowing the level of M1 in relation to the cone for the year that TheWall Street Journal prints. The same thing is in the San FranciscoExaminer and heaven knows where else around the country. Those whodon't look at it carefully or don't remember all of your finetestimony, say: "Aha. The Fed is off the money [target] and isovershooting again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of agreement with the expectation of the Board's staff.


Passage number 239.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Technically, it is literally true that theway The Wall Street Journal depicts the picture, they can write thatfor the week of December 31st we were below the midpoint of the moneysupply target and that for the week of January 7th--without any changein the money supply--we were above target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is made without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 240.
 I don't think that makes alot of sense, but---27-2/12-13/85MR. PARTEE. Paul, when we use the parallel line, I think weought to be clear what the meaning is. If we are well above where thecone would be in the early part of it but below the top parallel line,I believe that means that the growth rate from there on until the endof the area covered by the parallel line has to be less than themidpoint of the cone. Isn't that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and confirmation from Paul about the meaning of using a parallel line.


Passage number 241.
MR. BOEHNE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement or response from Mr. Boehne, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 242.
MR. PARTEE. So, it's really just cosmetic. It means that wehave to get a lower growth rate if we're above that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing that if they are above a certain threshold, they need to reduce the growth rate.


Passage number 243.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is literally drawing pictures, butpictures affect things. I don't know how we want to draw this. Oneway that appeals to me, but it's a really special case because I thinkit's more substantive--. If we just draw parallel lines, we have toask ourselves the question: Would we be particularly happy--right nowstarting off in the upper part of the parallel lines--to go down tothe bottom part, which is way below the cone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing different ways to draw something and expressing their personal preference for one method. There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement presented.


Passage number 244.
MR. PARTEE. That's a precipitous drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's a precipitous drop" is simply a factual observation without any sign of conflict or contradiction.


Passage number 245.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be quite a precipitous drop. AndI would argue--I think as a matter of substance, recognizing that allpictures aren't perfect--that we could just draw parallel lines andsay this is the way it looks with parallel lines. We could drawparallel lines and a cone. That's one way of handling this; we'vedone that once. We also drew a skewed one once. I think it has somemeaning to say that we have the points in the fourth quarter of thisyear, which are established by the basic target, whatever that is. Westarted out above the cone because it was coming up, largely inJanuary but in December too. We probably don't contemplate--orwouldn't be really happy based upon anything we know now--going belowthat lower line in the cone. And we could draw a line up from thatpoint in the fourth quarter back to the upper part of the range in thefourth quarter of this year. The result would be a truncated cone; Ithink that would be the mathematical expression. And it would be, Ithink, a substantive portrayal of the area in which we might like tobe. But it's just one way of drawing the picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting different ways of visually representing data and expressing their belief that one particular representation would be a substantive portrayal.


Passage number 246.
MR. GUFFEY. Would you describe that again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a simple request to describe something again.


Passage number 247.
MR. PARTEE. Just fill in the top of those lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a straightforward request or instruction from Mr. Partee.


Passage number 248.
MR. GRAMLEY. It looks a bit like a whale, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a personal opinion of Mr. Gramley and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 249.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Draw a line from the fourth-quarter targetof this year to the fourth-quarter target of next year. That's aline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply providing instructions or a suggestion to draw a line from one point to another without any element of contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 250.
MR. PARTEE. Oh, I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply shows Mr. Partee expressing his understanding or realization of something.


Passage number 251.
MR. GUFFEY. And then draw a cone off of the fourth-quarteraverage. Would that be the point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Guffey's suggestion or question about drawing a cone off of the fourth-quarter average.


Passage number 252.
MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] look at it in these terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker's words, "[Unintelligible] look at it in these terms," suggest that they are expressing their own perspective or asking for clarification, rather than contradicting or challenging someone else.


Passage number 253.
-28-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you do it that way, the bottom linesare the same as the cone. Well, look at M2 here. It does not lookvery different from that; that top dotted line there would be a littlehigher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply describes the mathematical calculation and compares the visual representation of the numbers.


Passage number 254.
MR. PARTEE. It would be a little higher at the beginning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact or opinion and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At the beginning, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The word "yes" implies that there is contention or disagreement in the passage, but without the actual passage or context, it is not possible to determine the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 256.
MR. GUFFEY. Isn't that essentially rebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple conversation where someone asks a question.


Passage number 257.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're ending up in the fourth quarterjust where you would end up anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It states a fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 258.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no text provided for analysis. Please provide the necessary passage or context for me to analyze.


Passage number 259.
MR. BOEHNE. You would start the top parallel line where the8 percent is. Is that how you would do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is simply asking for clarification on the location at which the top parallel line should start.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, not at the end of the year. I wouldstart it in November.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing their opinion on when to start something without conflicting with any opposing ideas or arguments.


Passage number 261.
MR. BOEHNE. All right, at the end of November. And you'regoing to call this a truncated cone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply provides a statement or fact without any disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 262.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not going to call it anything. Iwould describe it to the [Congressional] Committee as a reasonablepicture of the general zone in which we'd like to be as the yearprogresses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their intention not to label something and describing their desired situation.


Passage number 263.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, are you aware that there's a brandof golf balls that has truncated-cone dimples.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements, arguments, or opinions that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about the awareness of a certain type of golf balls.


Passage number 264.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, I think I drew a picture likethis once without consulting this Committee. I was probably using itin testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the speaker drew a picture without consulting the Committee, possibly for use in testimony.


Passage number 265.
MR. BOEHNE. So, this is sort of half rebasing and half not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Boehne without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 266.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since there is no passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 267.
 I don't think it's--MR. PARTEE. No, it's not really rebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement.


Passage number 268.
MR. MARTIN. It's not rebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 269.
MR. PARTEE. It makes a lot of sense, actually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Partee, is stating that something makes sense, indicating agreement or support rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 270.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it recognizes that we wouldn'tdraw it that way unless we wanted to convey a notion that we wererelaxed about being above this cone for a few months, or for the firsthalf of the year or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and interpretation rather than engaging in a debate or disagreement with someone else.


Passage number 271.
MR. MARTIN. Under other circumstances one might draw thegeometry the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating that under different circumstances, the geometry may be drawn differently.


Passage number 272.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 273.
 I think it depends uponthe substantive decision as to what kind of policy we want to---29-2/12-13/85MR. MARTIN. It conveys it a lot better than a geometricallyneutral form, if you would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of opinion.


Passage number 274.
MR. PARTEE. Are you talking about that for all the Ms oronly for M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question and does not express any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 275.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For M2 we might just draw the parallellines, I suppose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The speaker is expressing their thought or suggestion to draw parallel lines for M2. There is no conflicting opinion or contradiction mentioned.


Passage number 276.
MR. PARTEE. They're definitely pretty close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee states that the subject in question is definitely pretty close, without any conflicting opinions or differing viewpoints presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 277.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's so close it makes practically nodifference. For M3, I don't know what you want to do. We can drawparallel lines, I guess, and a cone. Mr. Sternlight, I have a noteindicating that you wanted to talk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing possible options and seeking clarification from Mr. Sternlight.


Passage number 278.
MR. STERNLIGHT. No sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "No sir" indicates agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 279.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we have to decide just atthe moment, but we have to talk about it and decide when we come tothe decision on what the targets should be precisely and what to sayin the directive. We can just do it. One way of finessing this,which we did once, is to draw the parallel lines and the cone--whichis what the staff has there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the need to talk and make a decision about targets and directives.


Passage number 280.
MR. GUFFEY. Have both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any contentious or disagreeable statement or conversation. It appears to be a simple statement acknowledging that both individuals (presumably mentioned earlier) are present.


Passage number 281.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, we could just draw theparallel lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it simply suggests a solution or course of action.


Passage number 282.
MR. GUFFEY. Have both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: no

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments. It simply mentions the presence of a person named Mr. Guffey and asks if both parties have him.


Passage number 283.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm pretty [easy-going] about all this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The phrase "I'm pretty easy-going about all this" implies a lack of disagreement or contention and suggests a laid-back or flexible attitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 284.
It doesn't--MR. GRAMLEY. If we have both, you can do the kind of shadingyou want with words; and you'll tell a lot more about what our thrustin policy is than in any kind of picture we can draw. If we draw thisstrange looking picture, you're going to spend about 6 pages of yourtestimony trying to explain to Congress what that crazy thing is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "If we draw this strange looking picture, you're going to spend about 6 pages of your testimony trying to explain to Congress what that crazy thing is" suggests that the speaker disagrees with the idea of using a picture to convey the policy thrust, instead preferring to rely on words.


Passage number 285.
 Ifwe draw both the dotted lines and the cones and then you say "Look, westarted off rapidly--"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Wall Street Journal won't know what toput in their article. They'll have to reprogram it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage is a conditional statement, suggesting a hypothetical situation. It does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 286.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'm not sure I could figure out whatmathematical equation would describe that animal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is unsure about finding a mathematical equation to describe the animal.


Passage number 287.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not a mathematical equation; it's apragmatic line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply contrasts a mathematical equation with a pragmatic line, suggesting that they are different concepts.


Passage number 288.
MR. PARTEE. Joined at the top of last year's range is thetop position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 289.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" simply refers to a person's title or position, without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 290.
 Besides, it's probably not just atruncated cone but---30-2/12-13/85MR. PARTEE. The end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about the shape of an object, given some numerical values.


Passage number 291.
MS. HORN. The top of the midpoint of the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact without opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 292.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A skewed truncated cone, with differentslopes on both sides.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply describes the shape of a skewed truncated cone and does not present any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 293.
MR. MARTIN. The Volckergram.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the mentioned passage as no further information is provided.


Passage number 294.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's also the question of what weightto put on M1. But it's getting late. I don't know whether there issome spontaneous consensus on the range itself. We can decide ittomorrow morning unless a spontaneous consensus emerges. If I recall[our discussion at the December meeting] correctly--though nobody isbound, obviously, by what he or she said last time--in a vague way thepredominant support was for alternative II but there was some supportfor something that would look at least partly like alternative I. Idon't think anybody was arguing for alternative III, although somebodymay have said that the ranges should be tightened. I don't know; Idon't remember that closely. Nobody is bound by that anyway. We'llnarrow it down anyway. Is something less than alternative II in theballpark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is discussing different alternatives and opinions, but it does not indicate any active disagreement or conflict among the speakers.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 295.
MR. MARTIN. I join President Balles in the caveat that, tothe extent that alternative II is beginning to emerge as a consensus,I think we may have pragmatic difficulties with the upper bound of M1.Given the staff forecast of income and interest rates, their warningthat the projections on velocity have some confidence limits aroundthem, and given the lagged effect of the interest rate drop that we'vehad, V1 could even be a little negative next year. If we're going foralternative II--as I hear you, John--it seems that we ought to dosomething about the upper boundary for M1; 7 percent may be too low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin expresses concern about the upper bound of M1 for alternative II, suggesting that the current limit of 7 percent may be too low. This contradicts President Balles' statement that alternative II is beginning to emerge as a consensus.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER", providing information about the chairman without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 297.
 I wouldn't--MR. WALLICH. Well, I don't see the setting of these targetsas a means of accommodating the economy. We're setting the targets soas to shape the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there are two individuals expressing their thoughts, there is no explicit disagreement or contention in the passage. The first individual is stating that they wouldn't do something, while the second individual simply states their perspective on the matter without addressing the first individual's statement.


Passage number 298.
MR. MARTIN. I'd like to see us shape the economy with a 4percent real growth rate, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin expresses his desire to achieve a 4 percent real growth rate for the economy, but there is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint presented in the passage.


Passage number 299.
MR. WALLICH. Well, that's not my objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Well, that's not my objective" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests that the speaker's objective is different from what was previously discussed.


Passage number 300.
MR. GRAMLEY. If you look at where our projections were lastJuly when we first set these targets versus where they are now, themedian forecast for real GNP looks like it might be half a percent orso higher than it was then. For the GNP deflator it looks like themedian forecast is going to be about 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent lower.So, we have more real money balances assumed and a larger real GNPgrowth and it seems to me that we would have a heck of a timeexplaining to anybody why we raised the targets for money growth. Ithink we could sit with these.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the projections and observations regarding the real GNP and GNP deflator.


Passage number 301.
MR. MARTIN. Lyle, we're not raising the targets; we'relowering them by 1/2 a point for M1. I would suggest 7-1/2 percent togo along with the 8-1/2 percent on M2. That would be taking the upperlimit 1/2 point [above the tentative target] and a 1/2 point [below-31-2/12-13/85the target] the year before. It gives us a little room. We'retalking about being around the upper limit of each of those ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is suggesting a specific plan for adjusting the targets, but there is no opposing view or conflicting opinion presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 302.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's room I don't think we need. And I thinkwe send the wrong kind of signal when, after having set these targetsinitially, we're forecasting more real growth and higher growth ofmoney balances with the lower GNP deflator. I don't see that we needthat additional freedom. And I would prefer to send a signal whichsays: "Look, we're still concerned with bringing down growth of moneyand credit over the long run to bring down inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage expresses disagreement or contention. Mr. Gramley disagrees with the idea of forecasting more real growth and higher growth of money balances with a lower GNP deflator. He also disagrees with the notion of needing additional freedom and instead suggests sending a signal of being concerned with bringing down growth of money and credit over the long run to bring down inflation.


Passage number 303.
"MR. MORRIS. I think there's a good argument for not changinganything in that we don't have the faintest idea what the velocitiesare going to be anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris simply states that there is a potential argument for not changing anything, based on the uncertainty regarding future velocities.


Passage number 304.
 Therefore, why not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we're going to shape the economyanyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It suggests taking action regardless of questioning why someone wouldn't do so.


Passage number 305.
MR. MORRIS. And I don't see any point in changing the debtrange because, historically, an 8 to 11 percent range for debt gives alot of room for 8 percent nominal GNP growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a historical fact and their opinion about the range for debt and GNP growth.


Passage number 306.
MR. PARTEE. It just hasn't in the last few years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee states a fact or observation about something that has not happened in the recent past. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 307.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this may be a little side issue. Itdidn't last year and maybe the year before; I don't remember. But Iwas a little struck too when somebody--Mr. Axilrod, I guess--saidthat, obviously, we can't lower that unless we're going to saysomething about all these mergers and so forth. Why is the analysisso certain that what we have for nominal GNP growth--7 or 8 percent orwhatever--is going to produce 11 or 12 percent debt growth when that'sout of keeping with 90 percent of history. It is not last year'shistory, I agree; but what is the analytic background. Is it thedeficit. Is it a high deficit that produces that. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification on the topic of GNP growth and debt growth.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 308.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, because if it were 8 percentnominal GNP growth, particularly in a more mature stage of thebusiness recovery, normally the deficit financing this percentage ofGNP would be down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement is suggesting that a deficit financing of 8 percent of GNP would be down in a more mature stage of the business recovery. This implies a disagreement with the current approach or expectation of deficit financing.


Passage number 309.
 I think that's why the predicament of this overallcredit market situation is so hard to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What you're saying may be true; I'm notsure what it is--that the dollar of government deficit produces moredebt than the dollar of private deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification.


Passage number 310.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides a job title, "Vice Chairman Corrigan," and does not present any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 311.
 No, I'm saying--MR. MORRIS. If there is a difference from the historical[experience], it's the fact that our total expenditures are runningsubstantially above the GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the total expenditures being substantially above the GNP, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 312.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's one reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a descriptive statement that does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 313.
MR. MORRIS. Therefore, you could argue that you need moredebt. But don't you also need more money. Why do you need more debtand not more money to finance a greater level of expenditures. It'snot immediately apparent to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for clarification or further explanation regarding the need for more debt instead of more money to finance greater expenditures.


Passage number 314.
-32-2/12-13/85MR. BALLES. Velocity is down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the decrease in velocity.


Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're throwing out two questions tothe staff now. We'll get a response and go home.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their plan to ask two questions to the staff, receive a response, and then go home.


Passage number 316.
 Maybe it's--MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement or thought that is being expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 317.
 Well, maybe part of it--MR. AXILROD. The staff was tempted to suggest throwing awaythe debt variable as not being useful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "The staff was tempted to suggest throwing away the debt variable as not being useful" suggests that there is a difference of opinion or disagreement within the staff regarding the usefulness of the debt variable.


Passage number 318.
MR. BALLES. I second that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I second that" indicates agreement with the previous speaker's statement or proposal.


Passage number 319.
MR. AXILROD. President Morris mentioned one thing. In someresearch we've done, the debt does seem to run a little betterrelative to total spending than it does to GNP. So that gives you apercentage point. Last year we thought the mergers and acquisitionsadded about a point. I threw in a quarter of a point for theacceleration of state and local government borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents different points or factors that contribute to the debt. There is no contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 320.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's 2-1/4 points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement "That's 2-1/4 points" does not express any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement of a numerical value.


Passage number 321.
MR. AXILROD. I think you can throw in another tenth or twofor those HUD notes that came at the end of the year. I didn't throwthat in there. I personally believe that the government deficit doesget you greater credit growth relative to GNP, though it's a littlehard to find it in the data. Of course, we haven't had so many yearswith these big deficits. You can base it partly on the grounds thatthe government does [not] really have the option to finance itself by(a) issuing equity or (b) drawing down assets. Now, the private[sector] can't draw down assets forever, but they have that [option]as well. So, we really have reduced the credit growth by roughly thesame amount as we reduced nominal GNP. When we worked through thewhole flow of funds, we had a hard time getting any less credit growththan that, going through it sector-by-sector and taking all thesethings I've mentioned into account. I think we have about 1/2 pointor so in there for mergers and acquisitions. That would be myresponse. I don't know whether Mike or Jim has anything to add tothat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their personal beliefs and providing their analysis on the relationship between government deficit and credit growth relative to GNP.


Passage number 322.
MR. PRELL. We had some discomfort about the overall debtgrowth relative to GNP. But we also know, as President Corriganpointed out, that we have had this very strong trend over the past twoyears. In arithmetic terms it seems to have been related to thisunusual Federal borrowing, and that will continue. We just couldn'treally find the basis--in terms of a set of credit flows consistentwith our sectoral picture and the GNP forecast--for squeezing out muchmore debt in the household sector and the business sector. I mustunderscore that the assumption we made about mergers and acquisitionsand so on is rather arbitrary. We don't see the pattern clearly yet,and it's not inconceivable that we could get a larger amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is discussing the discomfort regarding the overall debt growth relative to GNP and the uncertainty about the pattern of mergers and acquisitions. There is no disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 323.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to clarify it in my mind: What wouldyour straightforward projection of debt be consistent with your wholemodel and whatever mergers and acquisitions you allowed for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is asking for clarification and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 324.
MR. AXILROD. 11.7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage appears to be a statement or statistic, rather than a statement that could be argued or disagreed upon.


Passage number 325.
-33-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 11.7 percent, which includes 1/2 point formergers and acquisitions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing numerical values and information, without any conflicting or contradictory elements.


Passage number 326.
MR. AXILROD. Roughly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It simply states a word followed by "roughly."


Passage number 327.
MR. PRELL. There's no model; this is purely judgmental.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person, Mr. Prell, is stating that there is no model and that the decision being discussed is based solely on judgment.


Passage number 328.
MR. KICHLINE. And that's 2 percentage points less than ayear ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 329.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But with a lower GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about the GNP without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 330.
MR. KICHLINE. It was 13.6 percent in 1984.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement presents a fact about the percentage in 1984 without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 331.
MR. PARTEE. And 2 points less in the GNP growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about a specific data point without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 332.
MR. PRELL. It's a comparable excess over GNP growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement made by Mr. Prell without any conflicting viewpoints or conflicting ideas being presented.


Passage number 333.
MR. KICHLINE. Let me make one comment on the Federal side.I was looking at the numbers back in the 1975 through 1978 period; in1978 Federal debt was growing at under 10 percent--more like 9percent. This time, in 1985, we are still facing 15 percent rates ofincrease. We have come down from 19 percent to 17-1/2 percent to 15percent. Those are very large numbers to deal with and see the totaldecline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting numbers and making a comment based on those numbers.


Passage number 334.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes. And even in 1975, on thatchart we had earlier, the big spike in government borrowing wasaccompanied by a corresponding downward spike in private borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a factual observation that the spike in government borrowing was accompanied by a decrease in private borrowing.


Passage number 335.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what you'd think might happennormally. Well, let's stop for the evening unless somebody hassomething further they want to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to stop for the evening unless someone has something else to add.


Passage number 336.
MS. HORN. Have you heard anything about transportation tothe Embassy tonight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply asks if the person has heard anything about transportation to the Embassy tonight.


Passage number 337.
MR. BERNARD. There will be cars at the hotel at 7:15 p.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is not showing any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there will be cars at the hotel at 7:15 p.m.


Passage number 338.
[Meeting recessed]-34-2/12-13/85February 13, 1985--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were in the midst of discussing theselong-range targets, but maybe we can interrupt that for Mr. Kichline'sreport on the only new economic news we got overnight. Why don't youinsert that at this stage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The text simply discusses interrupting a discussion to insert a report on new economic news.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 339.
MR. KICHLINE. We have the advance retail sales number forJanuary, which is that total sales are up 3/4 of a percent. But therewere downward revisions for both November and December. The group,the so-called retail control--excluding autos and gasoline stationsand nonconsumer sorts of things--was down 0.4 percent in January.More importantly, December was revised down to minus 0.2 percent; ithad been plus 0.6 percent. And there was also a downward revision inNovember. Basically, the staff had assumed monthly increases ofaround 0.5 percent in the first quarter. That would have put theJanuary level of this so-called retail control about 1.5 percent abovethe fourth-quarter average. Taking these numbers as they now stand,January is 0.1 of a percent below the fourth-quarter average. So,these numbers are appreciably weaker. Who knows what they will be 3or 4 months from now when they're revised. But this is certainly nota bullish report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents the advance retail sales number for January, which shows an increase of 3/4 of a percent. However, there were downward revisions for both November and December. The speaker also mentions that the staff had assumed monthly increases of around 0. 5 percent in the first quarter, but the actual numbers are weaker. Therefore, the passage presents conflicting information and suggests a disagreement between the expected and actual retail sales numbers.


Passage number 340.
MR. PARTEE. Was the November revision significant too, Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking if the November revision was significant.


Passage number 341.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes. For total sales they had been showing a2.0 percent increase; it's now 1.5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no indication of contention or disagreement. Mr. Kichline is simply stating a change in the total sales increase from 2.0 percent to 1.5 percent.


Passage number 342.
MR. PARTEE. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they see something.


Passage number 343.
MR. KICHLINE. For this retail control, it was up 1.6 percentand it's now up 1.3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply provides information about the retail control being up 1.6 percent initially and now up 1.3 percent.


Passage number 344.
MR. PARTEE. So, it really has drifted quite a lot lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 345.
MR. KICHLINE. Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The word "correct" indicates agreement or agreement with a statement or answer.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 346.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were discussing what the long-rangetargets should be. I think the conclusion has been reached not torebase, though some imagination in drawing lines may be desirable. Wewere on the subject of what the targets should be. There was someexpression that they ought to be the way they are in alternative IIand some expression that at least M1 ought to be a 1/2 percentagepoint higher on the upper end. There was one expression of that view.Does anybody else have anything to say. Mr. Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. This can be seen when it mentions that there were expressions of different views on what the long-range targets should be, specifically in regards to alternative II and the desired percentage for M1.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 347.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, given the forecasts that we've made--noting that nobody expects real growth less than 3 percent or inexcess of 4-1/2 percent--I think alternative II looks very good. Itseems to me that the ranges proposed for M1 and M2 would accommodategrowth within the range of 3 to 4-1/2 percent. I'm quite comfortablewith a range for M1 of 4 to 7 percent and for M2 of 6 to 8-1/2percent. I could live with the proposed ranges for M3 and totalcredit, but I would prefer to see M3 raised 1/2 of a percentage pointto 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent and credit at 9 to 12 percent. We expect M1to come in near the upper reaches of the range. And while we hopethat M3 will also be in the upper part of the range established, wehave this experience of M3 running very high. And I don't see why we-35-2/12-13/85should not set the ranges so that M3 will be at least closer, if notwithin, the range. The main objection to that seems to be that thiswould transmit a signal to the public that we are not beingsufficiently vigilant or, in the case of total credit, that we'retrying to accommodate the deficit. I myself am not impressed withthat argument. It seems to me that the public cares most of all aboutM1 and, to some extent, M2. But I don't believe the public would bealarmed if we recognize that M3 is tending to run very high relativeto its range as it has in recent months and that we allowed for thatby increasing the band to 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent. I would favor alsoa range for total credit of 9 to 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, expresses his preference for increasing the range for M3 and total credit, while acknowledging that there is objection to this idea. This indicates that there is contention or disagreement on this issue.


Passage number 348.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Refresh my memory, Mr. Axilrod. Do yourtechnical gnomes think that M3 is [more] likely to run high relativeto its range than M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or confirmation of what the technical gnomes think about the possibility of M3 running high relative to its range compared to M2.


Passage number 349.
MR. AXILROD. I think the difference in our point estimatesis trivial. Our point estimate for M2 is around 8 percent and ourpoint estimate for M3 is close to 8-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that the difference in their point estimates is trivial, indicating that they are in agreement about the estimates for M2 and M3.


Passage number 350.
 I would say that thebest way to think of it is that M3 looks a shade closer to the upperend than M2, but I would have some doubts that M2 will run quite thatlow--MR. RICE. But, Steve, doesn't that depend in part on theassumption of higher interest rates as the year goes on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and doubts about a certain topic, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 351.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 352.
 We have a slight drift up ininterest rates, which was--MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 353.
 But your assumption that M3 will stay within therange is based on your expectations that interest rates will--MR. AXILROD. Yes. I would say that's equally important toM2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker acknowledges the assumption made by the other person but disagrees with it by stating that interest rates are equally important in determining if M3 will stay within the range.


Passage number 354.
MR. RICE. It may not happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 355.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not clear from the given passage whether there is contention or disagreement. Additional context or information is needed to determine this.


Passage number 356.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I would prefer the rangesactually adopted in mid-1984, although I'm a little agnostic on someshading of those targets insofar as they pertain to M3 and totalcredit. But, in particular, I would not want to see the M1 range for1985 different from the 4 to 7 percent. If M1 were at the top of thatrange, at 7 percent, that would permit an 8 percent rise in nominalGNP with only a 1 percent increase in velocity. And that's notunusual, even for the third year of economic expansion. On the otherhand, if inflation could actually be lower than 4 percent or so--assome people suggest--then that kind of a result could occur with evenless than a 1 percent increase in velocity. More importantly, if itworked out during the year that velocity wasn't growing at all but wasdeclining, I think it would be a heck of a lot easier to adjust inthat direction--even if it meant being above the range, which I thinkis unlikely--than to have to adjust the other way. [By other way, Imean] having money growth at 7-1/2 or 8 percent, which would still bein the target range but in a context in which it turns out thatvelocity is increasing and nominal GNP is growing too fast. So, Ifeel somewhat strongly about that one in particular. In general, I-36-2/12-13/85prefer something like alternative II or the ranges we adoptedtentatively in July--again with some agnosticism on credit and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their preferred ranges and discussing the potential outcomes based on different scenarios.


Passage number 357.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. It only mentions Governor Martin without providing any information or opinions that could lead to contention.


Passage number 358.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I would echo Governor Rice'scomments with regard to the understandable shift in our views towardthe probability of a bit stronger growth. It seems to me that in ourdiscussion yesterday, something like half of us were talking aboutgrowth of 4 percent, or at least higher growth than the staffforecast. It's obvious also in the tabulation done for the July[Humphrey-Hawkins] Report to the Congress vis-a-vis our most recenttabulation that there has been a shift of 1/2 or 1/4 percentage point,or something of that magnitude. That says to me that there is astronger possibility than existed before that M1 growth for 1985 willnot only run above the 6-1/2 percent but that it could easily run 7 or7-1/2 percent. We still don't know what the lagged effect will be ofthe drop in short-term rates which, after all, was a very substantialdrop. It hasn't worked its way through and we don't know what thatwill do to velocity. And we can't escape the din of news with regardto the strength of the dollar and the [unintelligible] that's in thatnews from time-to-time of almost a scramble for dollars in this orthat market. It seems to me that we easily could have a 7-1/2 percentrate of growth in M1, which would be consonant with a favorableinflation outlook and export performance. Regardless of the geometrythat we're presenting on this and that The Wall Street Journal ispicking up, the implication at least is that M1 will be running abovethe 7-1/2 percent level and that there will be implicit or explicitpressure on us to adjust.I favor [an upper limit of] 7-1/2 percent with some commentswith regard to some of these matters that have developed since July.Goodness knows, there have been enough developments of substance sincewe reported to the Congress in July to risk breaking a precedent. Myunderstanding is that we don't change these outer boundaries of rangesof monetary aggregates once they are set; I don't see why we should beconfined to that kind of a pattern. I suggest that we use 7-1/2percent [as the upper limit] for M1. I think some of the samecomments could extend to M2. It may run at or above the upper limitthat we set in July. The 8-1/2 percent doesn't seem to be asimportant in the way the market looks at the monetary aggregates. Wehave to think of how they--the traders, the market makers--think. Iwould extend that even more so to M3 and to total credit. I'm notready to jettison total credit as was suggested yesterday. Obviously,we don't seem to be gigged in the market and in the market commentswhen we exceed the latter two broader measures. So, I would opt foran upper limit of 7-1/2 percent for M1 and leave the other threeranges where they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is expressing his own thoughts and opinions on the possibility of stronger growth and the upper limits for monetary aggregates.


Passage number 359.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what historians we have here.How much have we changed these ranges. Do we never change them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It is a simple set of questions asking about the presence and extent of changes in historical ranges.


Passage number 360.
 We[unintelligible]--MR. AXILROD. We have changed the tentative ranges. We haveto check back; we can do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have made changes to the tentative ranges and need to verify the information. There is no conflict or opposition being expressed.


Passage number 361.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have, but not very frequently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 362.
-37-2/12-13/85MR. AXILROD. We'll check back on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a numerical equation or expression and does not involve any contradictory statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 363.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of Governor Partee in the passage.


Passage number 364.
MR. PARTEE. I think there's a lot to be said for the 4 to 8percent range on M1. My particular point estimate is 8 percent onnominal GNP, and if we have the 1 percent increase in velocity thatthe staff is predicting, that will result in a 7 percent [Ml] growthrate, which would be consistent with that. That's at the very upperend of our 4 to 7 percent range and a 4 to 8 percent range gives us alittle room. And it seems to me that it's more likely to fit suitablyin a year which--if it comes out as we are projecting it--producessuitable results of 4 percent or thereabouts on real growth and 4percent or maybe a little less than that on inflation. I don't seewhy in advance we should show some inclination to try to screw down onthe economy with this kind of a prospect. I also think it would lookgood from the standpoint of the public because we're saying: "Look,inflation has developed quite a bit better than we expected."Although it's not zero, as Henry keeps pointing out, it looks likeit's going to be a quiet period and we don't want to stop the economyfrom having reasonable growth. Therefore, since the problems haven'tmaterialized that we were beginning to anticipate when we cut thatrange back in July, I think there's a lot to be said for putting itback where it was before, at 4 to 8 percent. It could be played verywell. Therefore, I think that's what we ought to do.I don't think we ought to get into some kind of a box onthese other Ms because we're trying to be tight about everything. So,taking 4 to 8 percent for an M1 range, I also would take the rest ofalternative I for M2 and M3. Maybe total credit ought to be 9 to 12percent rather than 9-1/2 to 12-1/2 percent, but I see nothing wrongwith that in the context we're talking about. Now, if our forecastturns out to be seriously in error, that upper limit will give us aconstraint. If more inflation begins to develop, we'll start to popover the upper limit and that will be the basis for snugging up in themarket. On the other hand, if the staff is wrong on velocity and itgoes up 2 percent or 3 percent rather than 1 percent, there's noreason we can't fall below the 7 percent normative number that I havenow in my forecast and take 6 or 5-1/2 percent. That's within therange we're talking about. So, I think the 4 to 8 percent range fitsvery nicely with the economic circumstances that we're talking aboutfor this particular year, and I would support that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his own opinion and providing reasons to support his position.


Passage number 365.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Velocity went up 4 percent last year. Mr.Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Velocity went up 4 percent last year" is a simple factual statement without any conflicting information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 366.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I come out in a different placethan most of the others. I think we've done remarkably well withmonetary policy the last year and a half, so far as M1 is concerned inparticular. We've about hit our targets right on the button; we werea little off last year, but not a great deal. Accordingly, I thinkit's important that we continue this progress that we've made and Iwould go with alternative II. I accept the staff's suggestion that weincrease the monitoring range [for total credit]. But I wouldstrongly prefer that we omit any reference to coming in at the toppart of that [M1] range. If we hit the 5-1/2 percent midpoint, that'sa little pickup from what we had this past year: and with the economystill apparently strong, I just don't think any useful purpose would-38-2/12-13/85be accomplished by suggesting that we were aiming for the top portionof the range. I think it might undermine some of the progress we havemade in increasing our credibility in the last year and a half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and preferences, but there is no strong opposition or disagreement with other viewpoints.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: My apologies, but I'm unable to provide an answer as there is no passage provided. Please provide the passage so that I can assist you.


Passage number 368.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I too would prefer to see M1remain in the 4 to 7 percent range for the reasons that have alreadybeen expressed. And I would add just two. First, I think thatinflation expectations are better than they have been in the lastcouple of months and, therefore, we'll have more rapid growth in realbalances that will give us a little more leeway at the top end of therange. Also, to raise the M1 range to 4 to 8 percent at this timewould express more concern about the economy than our projectionswould seem to indicate. I just have a feeling that moving it to 4 to8 percent at this point could very well send the wrong signal to themarket. For that reason I would prefer to keep the range where it iswith the expectation that we probably would come in at the top of therange in any event. I think M2 also should follow the specificationsof alternative II. With respect to M3, I have a slight preference formoving the range up to reflect the reality of the situation that we'vehad over the past several months, and I would suggest a range of 6 to10 percent or perhaps 5-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M3. I think totalcredit perhaps should be widened also, say, to 8 to 12 percent,although the 8 percent is probably not a very significant number. ButI think we need to move the top end, again to reflect what actuallyhas been going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their preference for certain ranges for monetary aggregates such as M1, M2, and M3, but there is no disagreement or contention mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 369.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else have any comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply inviting others to share their thoughts or comments on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 370.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I also support alternative II andthe 4 to 7 percent range for M1. There may be reasons--Chuck and Preshave talked about some of them--why M1 indeed probably would come intoward the top part of the range. Nonetheless, with the uncertaintiesthat we face--[the age of] the recovery, velocity, exchange rates, andso forth--I'd like to see discussion in the presentation of theseranges that is a little more symmetrical. While it certainly wouldrefer to the top half of the range, I'd favor some discussion aboutthe uncertainties and what kinds of things might have us choose tocome in at the midpoint or even lower as the year progresses. Theother reason that I favor the 4 to 7 percent range is that I think thestatements about our long-term disinflationary goal sometimes getburied as we talk about some of the more immediate kinds of problemswe have. And I think it would be a good place and a good way torestate the long-term goal that we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Horn expresses her support for alternative II and the 4 to 7 percent range for M1, and states that she would like to see a more symmetrical discussion of the uncertainties and potential outcomes within that range. She also mentions her belief that the long-term disinflationary goal should be restated. There is no conflict or disagreement apparent in her statements.


Passage number 371.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 372.
MR. BOEHNE. As far as M1 is concerned, I'd be inclined tosplit the difference between alternative I and alternative II. Ithink we do have a reasonably favorable outlook for 1985 in terms ofreal growth and inflation. And I think we ought to take favorablethings as they come along and not clamp down. Alternative II is justtoo snug a fit as far as accommodating what seems to me a pretty goodoutlook; we need a little breathing room at the top. Also, I wouldremind the Committee that 7-1/2 percent is not an increase; it's adecrease over what the range was for 1984. I agree there is somethingto the long-run goal of ratcheting these numbers down. But our goal-39-2/12-13/85was 4 to 8 percent last year; it was not something less than that.So, it seems to me that splitting the difference gives us theadvantage of paying some allegiance to our longer-run goal ofratcheting these numbers down while at the same time providing somebreathing room to accommodate what I think is a fairly favorableoutlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, is offering his opinion and suggesting a middle ground between alternative I and alternative II. He acknowledges the favorable outlook for 1985 and advocates for not being too restrictive in monetary policy. He also reminds the Committee that the target range for 1984 was higher than the proposed range for 1985. There is no mention of disagreement or opposing viewpoints in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 373.
MR. AXILROD. As it turns out, Mr. Chairman, it's more usualto change the tentative ranges than to adopt them. Of the fourrelevant years--1981 through 1984--only in 1982 were the tentativeranges agreed on [in July] adopted [the following February]. In 1981,1983, and 1984 they were changed in varying ways. In 1983 there was asubstantial change in M1: that's when it was reduced to a monitoringrange and was raised to 4 to 8 percent as compared to the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent tentative range. In other [years] the changes were in M2or other broad aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents contention or disagreement regarding the adoption of tentative ranges in the given years. It states that in 1982, the tentative ranges were agreed on and adopted, but in 1981, 1983, and 1984, the tentative ranges were changed in various ways. This suggests a disagreement or lack of consensus on the appropriate ranges for those years.


Passage number 374.
MR. MARTIN. Good report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Martin has received a good report. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 375.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We changed M1 only once.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact without presenting any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 376.
MR. AXILROD. As far as I can tell, I think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and stating that, based on their understanding, they believe something to be correct.


Passage number 377.
MR. RICE. The change [unintelligible] circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply referring to a change in circumstances, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 378.
MR. BOEHNE. Even central bankers change their minds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Even central bankers change their minds" is a factual observation without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 379.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 380.
MR. KEEHN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would be with those whoendorse alternative II. It seems to me that the reasons are verycompelling to utilize that alternative, and I'm not sure I'm impressedby any compelling reasons to make a change at this point. Theeconomic outlook as we discussed it around the table seems prettysolid. The inflation outlook is not unreasonable, although itcertainly continues to be an area that we need to focus on. And thevelocity patterns seem to be more predictable than has been the case.So, I would be in favor of alternative II. I certainly would thinkthat raising the M3 and credit aggregate ranges would be appropriate.And I think we should begin to place much greater emphasis on M1 andthat that should be clear in the message that you will be giving. Iwould think that the longer-run objective for the year ought to betoward the middle part and I would prefer that we not necessarilyspecify that we would be in the upper or lower part of the range. Iwould be bilateral on that, depending on how the velocity outlookdevelops during the year. Our objective should be toward the middle;by so doing, we continue to give emphasis and credibility to theobjective of returning to reasonable price stability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Keen, expresses his support for alternative II and provides reasons for his endorsement. He also suggests specific actions and objectives related to monetary policy. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting views in the passage.


Passage number 381.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine as there is no passage provided in the question.


Passage number 382.
MR. WALLICH. I continue to think we ought to have ourmonetary targets and try to make the economy, and mostly inflation,conform to them. I think we are in some danger of adapting thetargets to what we think is ahead in the economy. The only reason fordoing the latter, it seems to me, is a concern about high interestrate problems for farmers, developing countries, or the dollar. Thoseare important. But somehow it seems to me that if we now raise our-40-2/12-13/85targets, we're in effect saying that we're going to maximize as bestwe can the expansion of the economy and maintain interest rates as lowas is consistent with continued rapid growth rather than focus on theobjective of inflation. I think inflation is the least achieved ofall of our objectives even though it has been better than we expected.But the same is true of unemployment and growth; we have done betteron each front than we expected. But in absolute terms we are fartherfrom a good condition on inflation than we are, say, on unemploymentand the use of the economy's potential. So, I would stay withalternative II, and where there seems to be a misfit such as on M3 andtotal credit, I would nevertheless stay with these ranges. I thinkthey are telling us something; they are not just something that needsto be made to fit what the economy does. If they don't fit, they'retelling us that credit is expanding at a rapid rate which at some timein the future will cause us trouble. And we should recognize that.Neither, therefore, would I aim at the upper [end of the] range. Iwould say that 7 percent plus 1 or 2 percent velocity gives us plentyof room. I would, therefore, accept alternative II exactly as it is.Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is expressing his opinion and stating his reasons for wanting to stick with alternative II.


Passage number 383.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It's not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or the actual content of the passage provided.


Passage number 384.
MR. GUFFEY. I also would choose alternative II for a coupleof reasons. One, if we raise the range even to 7-1/2 percent--which Irecognize is a move down from the 4 to 8 percent--or if we move to an8 percent limit on the high side, as has been suggested, I believewe're really saying that we've done our job on inflation and we'rewilling to accept inflation at roughly a 4 percent level or perhaps alittle above. And that's a view that I would not want the Committeeto give to the public; I would not want to permit that kind ofinterpretation. Secondly, as to the ranges themselves, it seemsfairly clear from the discussion yesterday and from the projectionsthat 4 to 7 percent will accommodate the growth in nominal GNP thatwe're looking for with the level of inflation we're expecting. And ifit doesn't, as we have done in the past, we can talk about the upperpart of the range. I would emphasize looking for growth near themidpoint, but I'd be willing to go to the upper part of the rangeproviding velocity doesn't perform as we are projecting. As a result,it seems to me that these ranges accommodate what we're looking for.I would like to have the top at 7 percent, therefore providing somerestraint in the event that the projections don't come through.Lastly, I'm not very concerned about M3 or credit; so the ranges,whatever they may be, are perfectly all right with me. For M1 and M2I would prefer those in alternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is simply expressing his preference for alternative II and explaining his reasoning.


Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any specific information or statements to indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 386.
MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, as we all know, these rangesserve many masters. One of the masters is the general impression ofthe public as to our long-run game plan--which has been expressed sowell by you over the years--to reduce gradually over time the rate ofmonetary growth and get it down to noninflationary levels. For thatreason I think it is important, if only symbolic, to lower the upperend of that range a touch. Going down to 4 to 7 percent, however,brings up the problems that I talked about yesterday and thatGovernors Martin and Partee ran off very well today, so I won't repeatwhat those problems are. As I mentioned yesterday, our staff forecastshows money running considerably over the upper end of the 4 to 7-41-2/12-13/85percent range for a good part of the first half of this year based onthe present level of interest rates. To keep that from happening, ourstaff thinks we would have to get a very considerable increase ininterest rates. That is on the assumption that the velocity of moneyis going to be declining during the first half of the year. Puttingall that together, I would come out in favor of a 4 to 7-1/2 percentrange. Although a case could certainly be made for 4 to 8 percent, Iwould prefer the 4 to 7-1/2 percent simply because of the publicperception that we are gradually making some progress in reducing theupper end of that M1 range. And it is my understanding that thefinancial community certainly pays a lot more attention to M1 thanthey do any of the other Ms. I share President Guffey's views on M3and total credit: it probably doesn't make much difference. But Iwould adopt the M2, M3, and total credit ranges of alternative I,simply to get back to reality a little. That would be the totalpicture I would recommend, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own preferences and explaining their reasoning, but there is no disagreement with any other individuals mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 387.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Garbarini.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 388.
MR. GARBARINI. Mr. Chairman, the heart of the Midwestcontinues to dance to a rhythm that I believe the Chairman has playedover the years, which leads us down a road called "reduced inflation."We would support alternative II and hope that we would not signal thatwe will be in the higher end of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's support for alternative II and expresses hope regarding the range of inflation.


Passage number 389.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Miss Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual content. Please provide the passage so I can give a proper answer.


Passage number 390.
MS. SEGER. I support alternative I. I'll just say "ditto"to Governor Partee's comments plus add another observation about M1.And that is: In 1984, using the revised numbers, M1 growth was 5.2percent, which was 0.8 below the midpoint of last year's goal, if Idid the arithmetic correctly. I know we decided not rebase. Still,if the targets for last year were appropriate and if that's the wayM1's actual performance came in, then I don't think we should ignorethat when we set the targets for this year. Therefore, I would liketo add that to all the other reasons for having the M1 range at 4 to 8percent. Also, as I listen to comments--and I also went back and re-read materials for the last two years--I'm not convinced that wereally have identified in any exact way the relationship between moneygrowth and the economy. I don't think we always know what's going tohappen to velocity; we may think we do, or would like to, but I don'tthink it works out that way. So, maybe it's more honest to send asignal that we don't have these precise measures and, therefore, wewill go with broader bands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Seger simply expresses her support for alternative I and adds additional observations and concerns about M1 growth and the relationship between money growth and the economy.


Passage number 391.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot answer the question as there is no passage provided. Please provide the necessary passage so that I can determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 392.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would join those who arearguing for alternative II, and I would be willing to take it the wayit's specified in the Bluebook. I really have no additionaljustification for that other than I think it allows for adequate moneygrowth. I do think that the perception is always important and it iscertainly important right now. I think that would convey theperception that I'd like to see us convey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 393.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence "Governor Gramley" does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states the name of the governor without offering any conflicting opinions or differing viewpoints.


Passage number 394.
-42-2/12-13/85MR. GRAMLEY. I tend to think of these longer-run ranges theway Karen Horn does. They tend to send a message about what ourstrategy for monetary policy is over a longer period. And I reallythink there's a complacency developing in our country about thisinflation problem. I just don't think we can afford to decide, evenimplicitly if not explicitly, that we don't need to be concerned aboutthis inflation problem anymore. I'm a bit puzzled when people say 7percent growth in M1 is a constraining influence on the economy. Ifour forecast for prices is half-way honest, we're talking about a 4percent increase or less, and a 7 percent increase in nominal M1provides for a 3 percent increase in real money balances. If you lookover the trend of the past 20 to 25 years, you'll find that the growthrate of real M1 has a trend of less than 1 percent a year. So, Iwould like to stay with these targets. If the economy turns outnowhere near the lines of the staff forecast and it's much weaker, Iwould be prepared later on to see growth of M1 exceed that upperlimit; but I don't want to send that kind of message now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and perspective on the topic of monetary policy and inflation. They are not directly responding to any opposing viewpoints or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 395.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 396.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I agree with Governor Gramley. From thestandpoint of the effect on expectations, I think it is wise normallynot to change the guidelines unless there is a compelling reason, andI don't see a compelling reason to change the guidelines. If we gettrend velocity we can finance an 8 percent nominal GNP rise verycomfortably within the alternative II guidelines. I don't knowwhether we're going to get trend velocity or not. If we don't--if weget an aberrant velocity behavior--we may have to change theguidelines within the year. But I don't think we ought to assumeanything other than trend velocity at this point in time. And I thinkalternative II would meet our economic objectives very easily giventhat assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris agrees with Governor Gramley and states his opinion on the guidelines and economic objectives.


Passage number 397.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gainor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is incomplete and does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 398.
MR. GAINOR. We would line up with those who favoralternative II. Our forecast shows very favorable growth, even withthat range, and we think it's appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the opinion and forecast of Mr. Gainor, without any conflicting perspectives or arguments.


Passage number 399.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a tremendous unanimity amongnonmembers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is unanimity among nonmembers, indicating consensus and agreement.


Passage number 400.
MR. BLACK. That augurs well for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a positive outlook for the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 401.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we get into this problem partlybecause I suspect the inflation forecast is too high--not to beat adead horse anymore. There's room for real growth under any of thealternatives in here [if we had] more modest inflation assumptions.The choice boils down to this. I'm not going to make everybody happy;we have four targets here and 12 members and the permutations andcombinations of that grouping are enormous. The only proposal I canmake is to stick with something like alternative II; I don't know howmany people that would make directly happy. Most people have beenfocusing on M1, so we can talk about modifying some of those otherranges if that's important. But I would also say that we ought togive the message--we do that in the short-term targets, I suppose--that we don't mind being above that cone for the time being. I wouldbe inclined, in the interest of reconciliation if nothing else, and it-43-2/12-13/85may be meaningful, to put a sentence in the directive indicating thatwe wouldn't necessarily be unhappy if growth were in the upper part ofthe range. I don't like the sentence that's there now; and I don'tknow why we should single out M1 given all the comments either. I'dhave a sentence to the effect that: "The Committee agreed that growthin the monetary aggregates more generally in the upper parts of theirranges for 1985 may be appropriate, depending upon" something. Oneapproach would be to use "provided inflationary tendencies remainsubdued." But I might say something about business too. I don't knowquite what we should say. I don't think we want to say "would beappropriate provided business is weak." That sounds a little odd.It's the fact of the matter, but it might suggest we're anticipatingsomething in that connection.Let me just try this. We have a majority that wantssomething like alternative II; it's not a very large majority but someof those said they didn't want to put in anything about being in theupper part of the range. The obvious accommodation is something likealternative II but some acknowledgment that growth in the upper partof the range might be possible. I wouldn't put it as an aim; I'd sayit might be appropriate under certain conditions. An alternative, ashas been expressed, is to go to something like 4 to 7-1/2 percent andnot say anything about being in the upper part. Let me try broadlythose two alternatives. We'll return to fine tuning M3 and creditlater. Looking at M1: Who would have a preference for leaving it at 4to 7 percent but with some acknowledgment--the precise language to bedetermined--first of all, that running above the range now isn'thorribly prejudging the short-term decision; and secondly, that wewouldn't be amazed and may well find it desirable to be in the upperpart of the range, depending on how things develop. To have aspecific acknowledgement of that is one alternative. The otheralternative would be just to go to 4 to 7-1/2 percent and leave it atthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is proposing different alternatives and expressing disagreement with the current approach. They are discussing different options and trying to find a compromise.


Passage number 402.
MR. GUFFEY. With respect to the first alternative, are youcontemplating putting it in writing or doing it in your testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 403.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right now I'm contemplating putting itinto writing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states the current thought of wanting to put something into writing.


Passage number 404.
MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 405.
 Well, you're going to testify within--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It could be done in the testimony, butwhat I'm proposing at the moment is that some sense of that be writteninto the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that some information be included in the directive.


Passage number 406.
MR. GUFFEY. I'd prefer not to go that way. I'd rather go tothe 7-1/2 percent, if those are the only alternatives you aresuggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is expressing a preference for one option over another, but there is no argument or disagreement present.


Passage number 407.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I want to concentrate on themembers at the moment. Who would prefer what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their desire to focus on the members at the moment and is seeking input or preferences from them.


Passage number 408.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I have a strong preference for thefirst.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. It simply states a personal preference without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 409.
MR. PARTEE. I have a strong preference for the second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions a personal preference without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 410.
-44-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's raise hands. How many have apreference for the first. Five. How many have a preference for thesecond. Five.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for preferences and counting the number of people who prefer each option.


Passage number 411.
MR. WALLICH. I don't need to have a preference for either,do I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing that he doesn't have a preference for either option being discussed.


Passage number 412.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Two things were presented to you. I don'tknow what you like and [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents two things without any conflicting information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 413.
 If you have anotherpreference that commands more support, that's--MR. WALLICH. Without committing, if I had to choose betweenthe two, then I would take the first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their preference and expressing that they would choose the first option if they had to make a decision.


Passage number 414.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me go to the fine tuning. Whatdo people feel about M2 or M3 and total credit. I don't know that wereally want to raise the range for total credit; it's already awfullyhigh. It may be exceeded. I don't know what kind of messages wewould be sending by raising the total credit figures at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and questioning the idea of raising the total credit figures, without taking a definite stance against it.


Passage number 415.
MR. PARTEE. I think it's a recognition of the unexpectedsize of the inflow of capital from abroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Partee's opinion on the size of the inflow of capital from abroad.


Passage number 416.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Are people talking about 9 to 12percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention people talking about 9 to 12 percent.


Passage number 417.
MR. PARTEE. Pardon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a neutral statement.


Passage number 418.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Were you suggesting raising that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 419.
MR. PARTEE. To 9 to 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact or statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 420.
MR. RICE. I thought you were talking about 9-1/2 to 12-1/2percent, as in alternative I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or remark made by Mr. Rice without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 421.
MR. PARTEE. I said that seemed a little steep. But I wasnot speaking of the numbers; I was speaking of the reason why we wouldrecognize that they were high numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply expresses his opinion about the numbers being high, but there is no opposition or argument presented.


Passage number 422.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure of that reason, but he has meconfused on it. Does anybody want to raise that from 9 to 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about a reason that someone else has confused them about. The second sentence is a question asking if anyone wants to raise something from 9 to 12 percent, which does not indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 423.
MR. RICE. Does anyone want to raise it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone wants to bring up a particular point or topic.


Passage number 424.
MR. PARTEE. Above 9 to 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as Mr. Partee simply states a range of numbers without expressing any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 425.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Above 9 to 12 percent. All right, that's9 to 12 percent. On M3 you expressed that opinion. Do other peoplewant to raise the M3 range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a numerical range and asks if others have a different opinion on it.


Passage number 426.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I wouldn't be bothered by 1/2 point[higher] on that just because I'm not sure what's going to happen toit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is expressing personal uncertainty or indifference about the potential outcome, rather than indicating a disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 427.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of any disagreement or contention in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 428.
 Everybody knows we studiously ignore M3 anyway,so whether we have 6 to 9 percent or 6 to 33 percent or whatever--MR. RICE. Since it doesn't matter, why not raise it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement in the passage. One person is stating that "we studiously ignore M3 anyway," suggesting that there is no significance to the percentage range. However, another person responds by questioning why not raise it, indicating a difference in opinion or contention regarding the importance of raising M3.


Passage number 429.
-45-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then, nobody is bothered by raising it to9-1/2 percent.SEVERAL. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 430.
MS. SEGER. Did you say 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question being asked.


Passage number 431.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent or 6 to9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It provides two different range options for percentages, but it does not imply any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 432.
MS. SEGER. That's what I want; I want the 9-1/2 percent highend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 433.
MR. BOEHNE. Why don't we make it 6 percent to whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is suggesting a specific percentage to be made, but there is no opposition or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 434.
MR. MARTIN. 6 percent or more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a percentage, without any contradictory statements or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 435.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 436.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we're going to have trouble withthat at 6 to 8-1/2 percent. I would prefer 6 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is stating his preference for an interest rate range of 6 to 9 percent, indicating a possible range of options rather than a disagreement with someone else's opinion.


Passage number 437.
MR. MARTIN. I would too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 438.
MR. BALLES. I would too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 439.
MS. SEGER. I would too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement expressing agreement, so there is no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 440.
MR. WALLICH. I definitely would not. I simply don'tunderstand why we have to raise all the ranges, or almost all of them,when we've had lower inflation than expected. It seems to me adevastating signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The phrase "I simply don't understand why we have to raise all the ranges, or almost all of them" indicates a disagreement or contention with the idea of raising all the ranges. The speaker finds it unnecessary given the lower inflation than expected. Therefore, there is disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 441.
MR. PARTEE. It provides for a little more room for realgrowth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the proposal provides for more room for real growth.


Passage number 442.
MR. WALLICH. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich's response is given without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 443.
MR. PARTEE. I don't see anything wrong with that myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses a personal opinion and does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 444.
MR. WALLICH. You want to maximize growth and take theinflation that that eventually would provide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states the perspective of Mr. Wallich, who believes in maximizing growth and accepting the inflation that would result from it.


Passage number 445.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The problem is that if you allow forreal growth of more than 4 percent, I think you have to forget aboutthe targets in one sense and ask yourself the question: What's likelyto be going on in the economy over some period of time. I'm nottalking about a quarter, but if over a period of time the economy isgrowing by more than 4 percent, it seems to me that in thecircumstances we're faced with right now--leaving aside the magic ofthese targets--the outcome may well be one that is going to put morepressure on financial markets and interest rates. And it's going tosubvert our effort to try and create a policy environment in which wecan keep the economy growing at 4 percent for a long time. That's oneof the things that worries me, Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a concern or worry about the potential consequences of allowing for real growth of more than 4 percent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 446.
MR. PARTEE. Well, to me 4 percent is desirable and 4-1/2percent is acceptable. We're starting off with an unemployment rate-46-2/12-13/85of 7.4 percent. There was talk about that being the full employmentlevel; I certainly don't agree with that. I think we have room to godown; I don't think we know; we have to probe and see. I think weprobably could have 4-1/2 percent growth for this year withoutdifficulty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, disagrees with the idea that a 7.4 percent unemployment rate represents full employment. He believes there is room for further decrease in the unemployment rate and suggests that 4-1/2 percent growth is achievable for the year.


Passage number 447.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Again, that's another possibility.The problem I have is that the higher we set the targets the moredifficult it will be to react in some coherent way if things break onthe up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It presents a concern and hesitation about setting higher targets, but there is no opposing viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 448.
MR. PARTEE. But if they break on the up side, we're going togo right through the upper ends of these ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 449.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we had 5.6 percent real growth lastyear and inflation at 3.5 percent with 5.2 percent M1 growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides statistical information about the growth rate, inflation rate, and M1 growth rate without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 450.
MR. PARTEE. A very unusual year. I don't think it will berepeated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement about the year being unusual, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 451.
MR. BALLES. That's because velocity went up 4 percent, Mr.Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents a fact without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 452.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know it did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or further information.


Passage number 453.
 That's why--MR. BALLES. If you believe it's only going up 1 percent thisyear, then you have to allow for more growth of money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement and then suggests considering additional growth of money.


Passage number 454.
 I think it's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who said it's going to go up 1 percentthis year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their own opinion without any conflicting views or debates being mentioned or implied.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 455.
MR. BALLES. I said if you think it might. That's what I'massuming ranges are for: to allow for realistic possibilities. We'renot committed to go to the upper end by setting it 1/2 percentagepoint higher, but it allows us to in case that develops, as our staffand the Board staff seem to think is likely. If it doesn't, so muchthe better. We're not committed to going to 7 or 7-1/2 percent.Governor Wallich raised the question: Why are we increasing ourranges. My answer to that, Henry, would be that it appears to us thatthe demand for money is increasing and one should allow for that inthe determination of the ranges. If we don't, I think we'll get thekind of results we did in the first half of 1982 when we tightened upat a time that, in my opinion, we should not have and we drove theeconomy into a deeper recession than might otherwise have been thecase. And it was because, in my case at least, of a belatedrecognition that the velocity of money was declining. I don't want tomake that mistake again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles and Governor Wallich have different opinions on whether or not to increase the ranges for determining the demand for money. Mr. Balles believes that increasing the ranges will account for the increasing demand for money and prevent a repeat of the recession in the first half of 1982. Governor Wallich is questioning why the ranges need to be increased.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 456.
MR. WALLICH. It wasn't declining last year; and 7 percent M1growth was associated during the '70s with rapidly acceleratinginflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents differing views on the relationship between M1 growth and inflation. While one view argues that 7 percent M1 growth was associated with rapidly accelerating inflation during the '70s, the other view suggests that it wasn't declining last year.


Passage number 457.
MR. BLACK. Well, the faster the rate of growth in money thelower the velocity is going to be, necessarily; it's just anarithmetic truth. If we hit the top part of the target we're going tohave lower velocity. If we hit the midpoint, we're going to havehigher velocity. I think either way we can finance it. But if we hitthe top part, then somewhere along the way velocity is going to return-47-2/12-13/85to a somewhat normal pace, I would assume. And that's where thetrouble comes in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a logical argument about the relationship between the rate of growth in money and velocity.


Passage number 458.
MR. MORRIS. I think we ought to have a lot of humilityaround this table in forecasting velocity. It seems to me that all wecan do is assume that we're going to get trend velocity; anything elseis pure speculation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is expressing the need for humility and caution in making predictions about velocity, suggesting that assuming trend velocity is the most reasonable approach. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflict stated.


Passage number 459.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble is we don't even know what thetrend is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is more of an acknowledgement of a lack of knowledge or uncertainty rather than an expression of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 460.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I would think the more the humility youhave the wider the range you would want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about humility and suggesting that someone with more humility would desire a wider range of something.


Passage number 461.
MR. GRAMLEY. Why should we be more humble now than we wereat midyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Gramley.


Passage number 462.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm going to defer this vote untilwe do the short run. Maybe that will put some light on what we shoulddo. Will you introduce the short run, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting taking a specific action (deferring the vote) in order to gain more information and make a better decision. They are addressing Mr. Axilrod to introduce the topic of the short run, but there is no indication of any disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 463.
MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, I will be referring, ofcourse, to the table on page 10 [of the Bluebook]. Most of thesealternatives, depending on what you perceive the Committee is willingto do for the rest of the year, would be consistent in the long runwith the range of alternatives that the Committee is now discussing.In a sense, I suppose alternative B would be viewed as most consistentsince that alternative assumes, if we're right about our estimates ofM1 relationships to reserve conditions, very little change inunderlying short-term interest rates and reserve conditions, typifiedby a level of borrowing in the neighborhood of $300 million over thenext several weeks. We expect that that would be doable with an 8percent growth in M1. I might add, although I don't know if thechicken's entrails are [of interest] to the Committee, that ourmonthly model would suggest somewhat higher growth of M1 over thebalance of this period--perhaps a couple of points higher. On theother hand, the quarterly model, left to its own devices, wouldsuggest that growth over the quarter would be a lot less than we'reestimating here. The growth implied here would give you a negativevelocity--on the order of [minus] 1-1/4 percent--assuming GNP is aboutas we have projected now for the first quarter. That would be, in asense, a partial offset to the positive velocity on the order of 3percent in the fourth quarter and would be, on average, obviouslyclose to 1 percent. We expect also a substantial slowdown in M2 andM3 growth in February and March largely for the reason given earlier:that the drop in offering rates on MMDAs and money market funds iscatching up with the drop in market rates. Indeed, market rates haverisen about 25 basis points recently so they are accelerating thatcatch-up. So, we would expect M2 and M3 growth to slow substantially.All this is assuming funds are trading around 8-1/4 percent and notthe average of about 8-1/2 percent of the last two weeks. But thoserelationships, as the Committee knows, are rather loose and dependvery much on how the market perceives money supply and businessconditions and how that might feed back and be affecting Fed policyover the very short run. Mr. Chairman, that very briefly sums up theessential points contained in [the Bluebook].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward explanation of the author's views and assumptions.


Passage number 464.
-48-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Apart from the numerology here, I think asusual the decision at the moment is: Do we want to tighten up, easeup, or leave policy unchanged in the immediate future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a decision about policy options in the immediate future.


Passage number 465.
MR. WALLICH. In terms of the level of borrowing, this issurely a policy that can hardly be eased any further. The borrowingfigure is very low. In terms of the funds rate to which thisborrowing relates, I think it's true that that's still a rather highnumber relative to the rate of inflation. I see no reason to want toraise the funds rate at this time, but neither would I want it to godown; nor would I want to do something with the discount rate. So,I'd come out with "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich simply presents his perspective on the borrowing figure and the funds rate, stating that he does not see a need to raise or lower the funds rate at this time and does not advocate for any action with the discount rate.


Passage number 466.
"MR. PARTEE. I would agree with "B" also; I would agree withwhat Henry said--that the current situation is adequate. It looks asif we're getting a pretty good recovery, somewhat shaded by thatretail sales report this morning. But the rate of growth still seemsadequate. I would point out that we've been bordering on the highside of monetary growth and, when I say "remain unchanged," I have inmind a moving down in the rates of monetary growth of the sort thatthe staff is projecting for the quarter. If that didn't occur, Ithink it would give us trouble.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement with the current situation and the speaker's thoughts on the current state of the economy.


Passage number 467.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 468.
MR. BOEHNE. I ditto what Chuck just said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Boehne is simply agreeing with what Chuck said, so there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 469.
MR. RICE. So do I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "So do I" indicates agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 470.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So do I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "So do I" simply indicates agreement with a previous statement, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 471.
MR. MARTIN. I go along with "B," Mr. Chairman. My onlyreservation with regard to "B" is what the band of confidence isaround the 8 percent December-to-March number for M1. It seems to methat the odds are that M1 will exceed 8 percent. My only discomfortis that 8-1/4 percent may not be the correct fed funds rate for theshort run; maybe it should be 8-1/2 percent. But I take it that thereis enough flexibility built into our procedures [to allow for] an8-1/2 percent rate if we need it to get 8 percent [M1 growth] orwhatever that is--less than the 10 percent and 12 percent that we'vebeen experiencing in recent months. Given that assumption, I would goalong with "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, expresses some reservations and discomfort with certain aspects, but ultimately agrees with option "B."


Passage number 472.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 473.
MR. BOYKIN. I would go with "B" also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker agrees with option B without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 474.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the provided passage.


Passage number 475.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think it is desirable for us totry to end the year at the midpoint of alternative II, so I tend tofavor the short-run M1 path of "C." By the same token, I have someleanings toward "B" too, because I don't believe it would be desirablenecessarily to move to the kind of borrowing target that "C"contemplates in the Bluebook. Edging on up toward the $400 millionborrowing level would be as much as I'd want to do. Perhaps moreimportant than that, I'd want those words on lines 93 and 99--where wehave the choice between "would" and "might"--to be "would" in both-49-2/12-13/85cases. I don't think we know which way it's going to be and I'd liketo see us be prepared to move in either direction, if the aggregatesare not staying on the target. I think the phrase at the beginningshould be "increase slightly;" that would be preferable to what isshown in "C." And I would go with the funds rate range of "B" becauseI'm not thinking about very much action at this point and that oughtto be fully adequate to encompass anything I have in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. Black discusses his preferences and thoughts on various options, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 476.
MR. PARTEE. "Increase slightly" for pressure on reservepositions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 477.
MR. BLACK. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No

The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only shows a response by Mr. Black, but without further context, it is impossible to determine if there is disagreement or agreement.


Passage number 478.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 479.
MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, the same factors thatinfluenced me on my views on the long-term ranges are coming intoplay, particularly in the short term here. My view, and I hope it iscorrect, is that we're experiencing an increase in the demand formoney as a direct reflection and delayed reaction to the drop ininterest rates in the latter part of last year. To slow money downfrom the rapid growth rates of December and January would require aconsiderable increase in interest rates, which I don't want to see,particularly in view of the precarious situation of agriculturalloans, international loans--the whole shooting match. Therefore, forthis period and this period alone, I would come out in favor ofalternative A for the short-term specifications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, expresses his disagreement with increasing interest rates in order to slow down the rapid growth of money. He argues against this action due to concerns about the precarious situation of agricultural loans and international loans. This contention is evident in the phrases "which I don't want to see" and "in favor of alternative A."


Passage number 480.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states the name "Mr. Forrestal" without providing any context or information that can indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 481.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, of the three alternatives thatyou presented--tightening, loosening, or staying the same--I think theproper course for policy at the moment is steady as we go. We haveanother meeting of this Committee within a relatively short time, atthe end of March. I think there is enough time to allow the situationto unfold and to wait and see what happens. If I have a bias, itwould be for eliminating the tilt toward accommodation. And if we got[money growth] at the upper end of the range, I would hope that wewould be prepared to move more promptly against that rather than theother way. But I think it is important that we stay steady for thetime being, and I guess that's associated with alternative B and itsspecifications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Forrestal is expressing his opinion on the proper course of action, which is to maintain the current policy. He mentions his bias towards eliminating accommodation and his preference for prompt action if money growth exceeds the upper range, but overall he suggests staying steady for the time being.


Passage number 482.
MR. GRAMLEY. Like Chuck, I'm worried about how fast money isgrowing now and I hope we're going to get that slowed down. I'm notat all certain that I know what level of the Federal funds rate isgoing to do that. I'm reluctant to see policy shift from onedirection to another abruptly, and I can go along with "B" with theunderstanding that if, in fact, we get money growth above thosenumbers, we begin to snug up a bit.I would like to call the Committee's attention to thelanguage of the operational paragraph with respect to what it saysabout economic activity. I think we need a change there. What wehave there talks about an easier policy in the context of sluggishgrowth in economic activity and greater restraint if indications ofsignificant strengthening of economic activity occurred. If we leavethat wording, it seems to be saying that we still think the economy is-50-2/12-13/85sluggish and I don't think that's what we ought to say; we ought tohave a more neutral set of phrases than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is expressing his concerns and suggesting some changes, but there is no disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 483.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else have anything to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a question asking if anyone else has something to say.


Passage number 484.
MS. HORN. I favor alternative B. I do share concerns withsome of the people around the table that we have had 3 months ofstrong M1 growth and that by the end of March it could be more like 5months. And at that point my concerns would be greater about thedirection of M1 growth. But for the time being I favor "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MS. HORN expresses concerns about M1 growth but ultimately states that she favors alternative B. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 485.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Garbarini.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 486.
MR. GARBARINI. I would also favor "B," and I would prettymuch echo Bob Black's comments: I also have a little more concernabout the accommodation and, therefore, lean a little more toward "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker states their agreement with Bob Black's comments and expresses their concern about the accommodation, leaning towards option "C."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 487.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Miss Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.


Passage number 488.
MS. SEGER. I can handle no change from the present [stance],if that's what alternative B is. I would be concerned, though, if nochange brought about a substantial rise in the fed funds rate becauseof how that is interpreted in the markets as a signal of what we'redoing and also because of the very severe problem with the superdollar and some of the other special factors that I've mentionedbefore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing concern about the potential consequences of no change in the present stance, but there is no clear disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 489.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Mr. Guffey without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 490.
MR. GUFFEY. I'd also choose alternative B. The onlyquestion that I would have with respect to alternative B is the $300million borrowing level that the staff associates with an 8-1/4percent funds rate. I would just point out the pattern of seasonalborrowing between now and the next meeting. If you just take 1984,for example, seasonal borrowing went to a very low level of roughly$150 million by the end of the period. If we're at or near africtional level of borrowing now and we get $150 million of seasonalborrowing, then that suggests to me that the funds rate might welldrop below the [8-1/4] percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is simply expressing his question or concern about the $300 million borrowing level associated with an 8-1/4 percent funds rate. He is presenting his observation about the pattern of seasonal borrowing and suggesting that the funds rate might drop below 8-1/4 percent based on this observation.


Passage number 491.
 We would have a hard time holding itthere without some additional--MR. PARTEE. What is seasonal borrowing now--$60 or $70million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there is a question being asked and some uncertainty, there is no clear disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 492.
MR. KOHN. The level of seasonal borrowing has been about $60million over the past 4 or 5 weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a factual statement about the level of seasonal borrowing.


Passage number 493.
MR. GUFFEY. Yes, in January; and then historically it beginsto move up. For example, at the end of March in 1984 it was $150million after starting the year at or about the same level [as thisyear]. So there's an increase of about $100 million in seasonalborrowing alone, which may complicate Desk operations if [adjustment]borrowings are at or near a frictional level now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the historical movement of borrowing levels and how it may complicate Desk operations.


Passage number 494.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement within it.


Passage number 495.
-51-2/12-13/85MR. KEEHN. Well, I was in favor of alternative II before andalternative B here seems to fit that pattern appropriately. So, forthe reasons I've stated, I'd be in favor of alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Keen states that he was in favor of alternative II before and alternative B seems to fit that pattern appropriately. He further explains that he would be in favor of alternative B, based on the reasons he has stated. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Keen expresses his agreement with alternative B.


Passage number 496.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else. Mr. Gainor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Anybody else" and the introduction of Mr. Gainor do not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 497.
MR. GAINOR. We too would favor alternative B. If we weregoing to fine tune it, however, we would move to the direction of "C,"probably to 7-3/4 percent or something like that [for M1].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their preference for alternative B but also suggests a slight adjustment towards alternative C. However, there is no conflicting opinion or argument presented.


Passage number 498.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris, we're left without a commentfrom you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they have not received a comment from Mr. Morris.


Passage number 499.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I would buy alternative B. I think Rogerhas made a very good point that the borrowing target ought to behigher than $300 million--more like $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, agrees with Roger's point and expresses his decision to buy alternative B.


Passage number 500.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we need to develop fairly promptlya view as to the kind of weight we give to seasonal borrowing. It'snot zero and it's not a hundred; it's something in between. Ofcourse, we could have an unusual increase in seasonal borrowing--maybe not between now and the next meeting but between now and midyear--and we need to know how to evaluate that if it occurs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing the need for a decision on the weight given to seasonal borrowing.


Passage number 501.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] we've really had adifferent program for seasonal borrowing, we'd have to take account ofit. It's going to develop in the next five weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that if there was a different program for seasonal borrowing, it would need to be considered and it will develop in the next five weeks.


Passage number 502.
MR. AXILROD. What we present, of course, always assumes anormal seasonal in a sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states that the presented information assumes a normal seasonal trend.


Passage number 503.
MR. PARTEE. Yes. Well, this just reminds me that it'ssomething we ought to be looking at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee that he is reminded of something that should be looked at.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 504.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in this case, we seem to have agreat degree of unanimity about alternative B, whatever that means.Let me interpret alternative B. Borrowing is roughly around $300million. It has been running a little above $300 million, actually,so I would think alternative B is consistent with something like $300to $400 million, depending upon the tone and feel of the markets,including the exchange market. If the evidence accumulated in thenext few weeks that we're distinctly above it, the tendency would beto tighten a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests disagreement or contention regarding the interpretation and implementation of alternative B, particularly in relation to borrowing amounts and potential tightening measures.


Passage number 505.
MR. PARTEE. Above on the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the provided passage, there is no evidence of contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement or introduction by Mr. Partee addressing the topic of discussion related to aggregates.


Passage number 506.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, above these numbers for theaggregates. But probably we would not move very aggressively at thispoint. It sounds fine in concept. If this happened coinciding withweak business news and a strong dollar, I would have some questionabout it. At least at this point I would interpret this as notabsolutely automatic if those two condition arose. But thepresumption would be in that direction. The prospects of easing, Ithink, are substantially less in the sense that we would have to haveslower growth in the aggregates than suggested in alternative B plusgreater concerns about the business picture than have been expressedaround this table. That's what I would interpret alternative B tomean. Does that differ widely from what anybody else thinks. I-52-2/12-13/85attempted to incorporate this into a somewhat rewritten directive butI don't have any copies of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their interpretation and perspective on the topic.


Passage number 507.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, we have that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple response indicating that they have the requested information.


Passage number 508.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You might take a look at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement shown in the statement "You might take a look at it." It simply suggests or recommends someone to examine something, without indicating any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 509.
MR. PARTEE. I think Lyle's point was good about thosemodifiers on the business situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee agrees with Lyle's point about the modifiers on the business situation.


Passage number 510.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "MR. GRAMLEY." This is because the passage only provides a name and does not present any information or statements that could indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 511.
 I have a suggestion for a way of dealing withthat that's fairly neutral, and that is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I rewrote the whole thing. I gaggeda little at saying "maintain" the degree of reserve pressure when it'ssomething of a euphemism to say we have any reserve pressure at themoment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply suggesting a neutral way of dealing with a certain issue.


Passage number 512.
MR. MORRIS. It should read: "the absence of reserve[pressures].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is just a suggestion to correct a phrase.


Passage number 513.
"MR. PARTEE. "The same reserve posture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any conflicting views or disagreement. It is simply a statement from Mr. Partee about a certain topic.


Passage number 514.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I made it "maintain reserveconditions." Presumably, this would be--what do we have there: 8percent and 10-1/2 percent and 9-3/4 percent. Those are awfullyprecise fractions. I doubt whether we generally put "3/4s" in there,do we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement and a doubt expressed by the speaker.


Passage number 515.
MR. AXILROD. Not really. We get hung up with maintainingdifferences among the alternatives consistent with what our modeltells us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is no disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 516.
MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] number of models you look at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the presence of [Unintelligible] indicating that there was some kind of interruption or interruption in communication between Mr. Partee and another person involved in the conversation.


Passage number 517.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would be sorely tempted to say 10percent for both of them, just to round them off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal temptation to round off both percentages to 10%.


Passage number 518.
MR. PARTEE. Wouldn't it require quite a substantial slowingof M2 growth to get 10 percent, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is asking a question about the requirement for a substantial slowing of M2 growth to achieve a certain percentage.


Passage number 519.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it slows to 9 percent and then to 7-3/4percent to get 10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a numerical progression without any mention or indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 520.
MR. PARTEE. January was pretty high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "January was pretty high" appears to be a neutral observation or opinion about a certain month without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 521.
MR. AXILROD. January was 14-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 522.
MR. PARTEE. 14-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "14-1/2 percent" is presented without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 523.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Technically, we could separate out the M1,M2, and M3 and say something like: "Growth of M1 would be at an annualrate of around 8 percent, and growth of M2 and M3" etc.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply discussing the possibility of separating M1, M2, and M3 and providing growth rates for each of them.


Passage number 524.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The only word I stumble over a bitis "limited.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this statement as it only expresses a minor difficulty with pronouncing a particular word.


Passage number 525.
" Could that be made "gradual" or "moderate" or---53-2/12-13/85MR. PARTEE. I do too. Maybe "some." And then for theeasing sentence [rather than] "might be acceptable," I think we oughtto say "would be acceptable" under those conditions you havespecified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers appear to be in agreement about the suggested changes and modifications.


Passage number 526.
MR. WALLICH. Well, this is [unintelligible] the fact that Ithink of it in a deliberately asymmetrical manner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is merely stating his personal thought process, which is not being challenged or contradicted by anyone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 527.
 Wouldn't "might"and also the word "substantially"--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The use of the word "substantially" can be interpreted differently by different individuals. Some may argue that it implies a significant difference or impact, while others may argue that it implies a minor or insignificant difference. Additionally, the use of the word "might" indicates uncertainty or possibility, which can also lead to disagreement or differing interpretations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 528.
 Yes, I thought "substantially"--MR. MARTIN. I think it should be symmetrical given theunknowns we're mulling over here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker ("MR. MARTIN") disagrees with the use of the word "substantially" and suggests using the word "symmetrical" instead.


Passage number 529.
MR. BLACK. I favor symmetry but if we must be asymmetrical,I think this is the right direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker states their preference for symmetry but acknowledges that if asymmetry is necessary, they believe the current direction is appropriate. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this statement, as the speaker expresses their opinion and offers a conditional perspective.


Passage number 530.
MR. WALLICH. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich affirms the statement made by the speaker.


Passage number 531.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I didn't mind the "substantially slowergrowth" but then might "be acceptable in the event of substantiallyslower growth in the monetary aggregates, sluggish growth in economicactivity, and continued strength of the dollar". I thought "might"was perhaps a little reserved. Lyle, I think that does take care ofyour problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 532.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes. Where the term "sluggish growth" fallsnow, since it's second, it doesn't seem to say that we've failed tonotice what has happened so far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply explains that the term "sluggish growth" is mentioned second and does not imply failure to notice previous events.


Passage number 533.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could put in a sentence on theaggregates and say something like this: "Should growth in M1 appear tobe exceeding an annual rate of around 8 percent and M2 and M3 a rateof around 10 to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a potential sentence to be included in a discussion about growth rates of the aggregates M1, M2, and M3.


Passage number 534.
"MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 535.
 12 percent down from 14--MR. PARTEE. 10 to 11 percent is okay. I think that isreasonably stated. We're going to get a slowing in M2 growth; there'sno doubt about that. But I think it will be hard to get it within thequarter when one month is 14-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It consists of statements made by Mr. Partee, discussing the projected decrease in M2 growth.


Passage number 536.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how we should describe thisincrease in reserve pressures. I was looking for a word that said weweren't going to be terribly aggressive about it in the next fiveweeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses uncertainty and the speaker's intention to not be aggressive in the next five weeks.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 537.
 Given the conditions, a "modest increase"--MR. PARTEE. "Some increase" is pretty indefinite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage because Mr. Partee disagrees with the term "modest increase" and suggests using the term "some increase" as a more definitive option.


Passage number 538.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Some" isn't necessarily "modest." Whatword do we typically use. It's probably "some," isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the word "some" and considering what other word is typically used.


Passage number 539.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it is "some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply expresses the opinion of the speaker.


Passage number 540.
"MR. BALLES. How about "some limited".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. It is a simple statement with no conflicting views.


Passage number 541.
-54-2/12-13/85MR. BOEHNE. I think "limited" captures the spirit of whatwe've been talking about. If we did anything terribly aggressive, Iwould think that we'd want a consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Boehne expressing his opinion about a topic.


Passage number 542.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Maybe it's a matter of semantics.["Limited" sounds as] if there is a predetermined point beyond whichwe would not go in any circumstance. It's partly the semantics of itthat I'm reacting to. I am not talking about being aggressive oranything like that, but I think a word like "gradual" or "some" isjust more in [tune] with the kind of approach we take to these things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion about the use of the word "limited" and suggesting alternative words that they feel better align with their approach.


Passage number 543.
MR. MARTIN. I think the message is that we're giving this alittle tap; we're not letting the 10 to 12 percent run but we're notreversing course. Isn't that what we're trying to get at. That'swhat "some" says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is restating his understanding of the message and confirming it with the phrase "That's what 'some' says."


Passage number 544.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in a sense. But I think "some" isprobably what we use all the time when we've made big changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker begins their statement by acknowledging that there is some level of agreement or similarity, but then offers their own thoughts and opinions without contradicting or opposing the initial statement.


Passage number 545.
MR. PARTEE. It says "pressures." We could change it to"conditions" as it has previously been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. PARTEE suggests changing the word "pressures" to "conditions," but there is no evidence of disagreement or opposition to his suggestion.


Passage number 546.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can't say "increases in conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is stating a general fact or opinion without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 547.
"MR. PARTEE. Well, I was going to add--you may not care forthis--that we could say "some snugging up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 548.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're right. I don't care for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the other person by acknowledging that they are right.


Passage number 549.
MR. GRAMLEY. It sounds a little obscene.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "obscene" may suggest a negative or offensive connotation, but it does not imply contention or disagreement.


Passage number 550.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it has been pointed out to me thatthe typical version uses "somewhat greater or somewhat lesser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 551.
"MR. GRAMLEY. Well, so long as we all understand what's goingto happen. This language is going to come out after the fact anyway.I think the point to be made is the one that Jerry made: that if wesay "limited," the public may say that we had a certain degreespecified and would go no further beyond that. We still want tomaintain the idea that we have the ability to respond to what ishappening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is simply expressing his belief that it is important for everyone to understand what will happen and the potential public perception of using the word "limited." The point made by Jerry is also mentioned as agreement.


Passage number 552.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 553.
 It's conveying that sense offluidity, even if we don't--MR. PARTEE. Actually, the suggestion "some limited" israther better with respect to that. "Some limited increase in reservepressures" doesn't have the precision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The response from Mr. PARTEE introduces disagreement with the original statement.


Passage number 554.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could go with "modest" or "somemodest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply suggesting the possible use or choice of the words "modest" or "somemodest".


Passage number 555.
"MR. MARTIN. We would have to say "some modest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is expressing a hypothetical statement and does not seem to be introducing any conflicting ideas.


Passage number 556.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's more than "modest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 557.
"MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 558.
 What about saying "reserve pressures would beincreased somewhat, particularly if business activity"---55-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that sounds like more to me. Iunderstand it won't be published until later, but that's what wealways say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the understanding that reserve pressures would be increased, based on past experiences and previous statements made.


Passage number 559.
MR. MARTIN. I think the word "modest"--. Say "modestincreases would be sought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is expressing his own opinion and suggesting using the word "modest" to describe the type of increases that would be sought.


Passage number 560.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if this is where we are, do we makethat sentence "Should growth in M1 appear to be exceeding an annualrate of around 8 percent and M2 and M3 a rate of around 10 to 11percent during the period from December to March, modest increases inreserve pressures will be sought, particularly" etc.. And then say"lesser restraint on reserve positions would be acceptable" and keepthe federal funds range at 6 to 10 percent. Is that where we are.This does imply, unless I'm wrong, that we will remain above thiscone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is questioning if the current situation aligns with the described conditions. They are seeking clarification rather than disagreeing with anyone's viewpoint.


Passage number 561.
MR. AXILROD. Oh yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is agreement or acknowledgment of something.


Passage number 562.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And in all cases, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. This is because the statement is based on the speaker's personal opinion or speculation, rather than presenting conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 563.
MR. AXILROD. If the cone is 4 to 7 percent, it comes out asa projection that by March the level is something like $3-1/2 billionabove it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a projection.


Passage number 564.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, would you consider adding somewords to the directive, such as you talked about a little earlier, toindicate that conditions might arise where we wish to be above thatlimit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 565.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think this implies that we would beabove the upper limit. But I will return to that in the longer-termdecision. I think this implies--and we might as well say it--that weexpect to be above the upper limit of the cone in the early part ofthe year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is presented as the speaker's thoughts and their intention to revisit the decision later on.


Passage number 566.
MR. BALLES. That would take away a lot of the uncertaintyand speculation and guesswork in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a potential outcome and its impact on the market.


Passage number 567.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we should say it, if we havethis kind of short-term directive. I think I'd probably say it intestimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their opinion on a hypothetical situation without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments mentioned.


Passage number 568.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's much better to say it in the testimonybecause that way the message gets to the public and you want it to.Otherwise, it's too late.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is just stating an opinion about the effectiveness of conveying a message through testimony.


Passage number 569.
MR. MARTIN. I think we should say it in both places.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin suggests a course of action, saying that they should say something in both places.


Passage number 570.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I worry about this in the testimony:I don't know how to word it. We haven't exactly tightened but in theprocess of stopping the ease we're a little snugger than we were. Idon't know quite what word to use to convey the nuance. It's hardly asnug.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement expressing uncertainty and difficulty in finding the right word to describe a certain situation.


Passage number 571.
MR. BLACK. If you want to get a chuckle, say it just thatway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a suggestion made by Mr. Black to elicit laughter.


Passage number 572.
-56-2/12-13/85MR. MARTIN. I thought the term of art this season was"tilt." We have removed the tilt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply mentions the term "tilt" being used in a certain season and the fact that it has been removed.


Passage number 573.
MR. KEEHN. If we're contemplating a shift to parallel lines,do you have to spend a lot of time talking about where we are inrelationship to the cone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a simple question.


Passage number 574.
MR. PARTEE. I think we have to leave the cone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion without directly contradicting or arguing against any other point of view.


Passage number 575.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's implied. I take it we're readyto vote on this. Then we'll have coffee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that a vote is about to take place and implies that after the vote, coffee will be served.


Passage number 576.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided is incomplete and does not mention Mr. Bernard or provide any content. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 577.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say just for the record, and I'msure it's apparent to all of you, that the exchange market has moreprominence in this directive than it has ever had. It has beenmentioned in recent [announcements of] discount rate changes, but--.Let's have coffee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The individuals mentioned are all agreeing or expressing their approval of something related to the exchange market. The last sentence about having coffee does not indicate any disagreement either.


Passage number 578.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somehow I didn't get a great message fromouter space as to how to resolve this long-range target while eatingdoughnuts. I continue to believe that what comes the closest tocapturing the central tendency is leaving the 4 to 7 percent. Wecould raise M2 and M3--at least the upper ends--by a 1/2 point, ifthat makes people feel happier. We would make some note that growthis going to be running above the cone. I don't think we have to saythat in the directive; I could say in the testimony that we're runningahead of the cone in the early part of the year and we expect that. Ithink that's normal and reasonable under all conditions. And we wouldhave some reference, probably, in the directive that it might beacceptable to be in the upper part of the range, but make it short ofsaying we're aiming for that. I don't think we have to say what we'reaiming for, conclusively, 9 months from now. We review it again atmidyear. If we really find that velocity is not right, then we mayhave to change the target in the middle of the year; we've had someexperience in doing that. But, meanwhile, we give a reasonablesignal. And it all comes against the background that I would like togive a little more confident view as to the inflation outlook, which Iwill for myself [in my testimony]. Therefore, it makes all thesenumbers fit better.So, I will try again: something like 4 to 7 percent, with amodifier in the directive, which we don't have precise language for-57-2/12-13/85yet; I'm fairly indifferent on M2 and M3 but if it really makes peoplefeel better to add another 1/2 point, I don't think that does us anygrave damage one way or the other; total credit looks awfully high tome, but I guess we could leave it where it is. Let's see whether wecan proceed on that basis. Let me ask a preliminary question. Anumber of people said they would rather have 4 to 7-1/2 percent or 4to 8 percent but they may or may not have wanted another 1/2 point onM2 and M3. Does it make any of those people happier to have another1/2 on M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and opinions on setting a target range for M2 and M3. They mention that they are indifferent but willing to add another 1/2 point if it makes others feel better.


Passage number 579.
MR. MARTIN. I'd much prefer it on M1, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is expressing his preference for something without any opposition or disagreement being mentioned.


Passage number 580.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not what I asked.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That's not what I asked" does not convey any contention or disagreement. It is merely a response indicating that the previous statement or question did not address the intended subject or request.


Passage number 581.
MR. BLACK. We could have it on M1 and drop it from M2 andM3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a potential solution or idea.


Passage number 582.
MR. MARTIN. I could go along with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement agrees with the previous information or proposal.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 583.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the trouble with that isthat it's probably contrary to where the probabilities lie. Theprobabilities are that M2 and M3 are more likely to exceed [the upperends of the ranges] than M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement suggests that there is a disagreement about the likelihood of M2 and M3 exceeding the upper ends of the ranges, compared to M1.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 584.
MR. PARTEE. But I would like to point out to you, Paul, thatthe staff's M1 projection under alternative B is for growth for thefirst quarter over the fourth quarter of 9.2 percent. If that's atall right, the 7 percent is a considerable constraint for theremainder of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is pointing out that the staff's projection for growth in the first quarter is 9.2 percent, which contradicts the constraint of 7 percent for the remainder of the year.


Passage number 585.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what it means for themiddle of the year mathematically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 586.
MR. PARTEE. Well, for three more quarters it means about 6percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of a fact or statistic.


Passage number 587.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question it means less than 7percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 588.
MR. AXILROD. About 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 589.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. About 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 590.
MR. AXILROD. About 6 percent or [just] below that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker simply provides a specific percentage of about 6 percent without any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 591.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement presented in the given passage. It only mentions the title "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any additional information or context that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 592.
 Sure, it takes all three--MR. PARTEE. Yes, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Both speakers agree that "it takes all three" without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 593.
MR. BALLES. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 594.
 Chairman, one thing that might help--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is more, I would point out, than wehad all of last year when the GNP was rising by 5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents additional information or a suggestion in a calm and straightforward manner.


Passage number 595.
MR. PARTEE. It could happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "It could happen" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests that the event in question is a possibility.


Passage number 596.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, one thing that might help allthose who are worried about the 7 percent ceiling would be what you-58-2/12-13/85propose on the matter of the so-called parallel lines or the bands.My concern, specifically--because we have a money market model whichgives results very similar to those of the Board staff's monthlymodel--is that the model shows money growth for some months ahead atdouble-digit rates. To keep from getting that, we estimate we have toput short-term rates up at least 200 basis points or thereabouts. Butif we were to adopt the bands, that would take care of the problemearly in the year--in the sense that we would be above the cone butnot above that parallel line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Balles expressing his concerns and suggesting a potential solution.


Passage number 597.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I certainly think we should be above thecone in these early months. Now, just how do we draw it. We can drawparallel lines; we can draw solid-line parallel lines and dotted-linecones; we can draw dotted-line or solid cones and dotted-line bands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different options for how to draw a cone.


Passage number 598.
MR. GRAMLEY. We could even use colors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests the idea of using colors for a certain purpose.


Passage number 599.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can draw the kind of thing that I drew,which is the way I tend to think of it. It doesn't make muchdifference in where the line actually falls. I'm open to any of thosevariants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the author's openness to different options without any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 600.
 I'd draw the parallel lines without the cone, if that's--MR. WALLICH. I think the discussion shows the danger of theband. The band allows you to go at any rate of speed during the earlymonths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 601.
MR. PARTEE. And they have to slow down later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 602.
MR. WALLICH. While I would ordinarily say it doesn't matterbecause you know what you're doing, here we're talking about it asthough it really made a difference. We give ourselves more leeway; weuse it right away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that ordinarily it doesn't matter, but in this particular situation, they are discussing it as if it does make a difference. They also mention giving themselves more leeway and using it right away, suggesting a consensus or agreement.


Passage number 603.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For a good reason, though, I would say.In this particular case, we ended up with a slowdown in M1 growth lastyear, so it's quite natural--it's a characteristic of the band--thatwe would also be happy with an extremely low growth in the firstquarter, if you took it literally. We're not going to get that, butwith just the band itself M1 growth would still be within the band ifwe had zero growth, I suppose--or close to it--for this quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is explaining a situation and expressing a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 604.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The reverse is also true, though.If, as John says, we had double-digit M1 growth for several moremonths running, you can draw your lines any way you want and you haveone heck of a problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or opposing viewpoints. It is a statement and explanation of a situation.


Passage number 605.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. None of this changes the fact that whatwe're fixing is where we'd like to be at the end of the year. Indeed,I don't think it makes an enormous difference whether it is 1/2percentage point higher at the top; it's visual. We're talking about$2-1/2 billion of money supply, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact and opinion.


Passage number 606.
MR. MARTIN. The band is a better way to communicate. Itessentially expresses what we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is simply stating his opinion that the band is a better way to communicate and that it expresses what they do effectively.


Passage number 607.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with a band. I assumethat at the least we would draw a band along with the cone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker states that they have no problem with a band and assume that they would also draw a band along with the cone.


Passage number 608.
-59-2/12-13/85MR. MARTIN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a dialogue between two individuals, Mr. Martin and another person. The given excerpt does not contain any contentions or disagreements.


Passage number 609.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Since there has been discussion about it,just for the purpose of elucidating how the two things look, at aminimum we would draw them both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that, since there has been discussion about it, they would draw both things to provide clarity on how they look.


Passage number 610.
MR. BALLES. And that would help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is expressing a statement or suggestion, but it does not imply any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 611.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, we had the same problem at this time lastyear: January had growth in the double-digit range and we were abovethe cone until the end of the first quarter as I recall. I don't knowhow you explained it then but it didn't seem to create great problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Guffey about a previous experience. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 612.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does anybody have some strikingsuggestion as to how to draw the picture that they urgently want tobring to our attention. Left to my own devices, I will draw some kindof a band--a lopsided band or something--along with the cone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone has a suggestion on how to draw a picture. They mention that if they were to draw it on their own, they would draw a band and a cone.


Passage number 613.
MR. GRAMLEY. It will become known as the Volckergram.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something will become known as the "Volckergram."


Passage number 614.
MR. BLACK. With a truncated band.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 615.
MR. WALLICH. If you connect the extreme points of lastyear's cone and this year's cone and make that the band, you'll findthat you have a very low rate of growth in that connecting line. Youwould be going from something that rose 8 percent to the next cone,which would be rising 7 percent. And the connecting line, if that'sthe top of the band, will be a lot flatter than the upper side ofeither cone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a mathematical observation about the connecting line between two cones.


Passage number 616.
MR. PARTEE. A little flatter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 617.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It will be a little flatter than aparallel line, but hardly enough to be discernable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a concise and straightforward observation.


Passage number 618.
MR. WALLICH. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement by Mr. Wallich, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 619.
MR. PARTEE. Probably 1 percent flatter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward statement without any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 620.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be 1 percent flatter; well, itwould be 3/4 of a percent flatter. And since we're not up there atthe beginning anyway, it wouldn't make much difference. The simplestthing to do is probably a compromise between them. I might draw atruncated line--draw the cone with just a top parallel line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 621.
MR. BALLES. I'd settle for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, expresses his willingness to settle for something without indicating any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 622.
MR. BLACK. Where are you thinking about beginning the line.You explained that yesterday and I thought I understood but I wasn'tquite certain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply seeking clarification and expressing a lack of certainty regarding a previously discussed topic.


Passage number 623.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not saying that now. We wouldjust make it 3/4 of a percent different. If you draw parallel lines,they would both rise at a 5-1/2 percent rate of speed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is clarifying their previous statement and providing a specific adjustment to the percentage.


Passage number 624.
MR. BLACK. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. The statement "MR. BLACK. Right" does not indicate any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 625.
-60-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The bottom part of that would be out ofsight; nobody wants to go there initially. The only modification Ihad was that instead of a parallel line, I'd draw it back to thefourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is simply describing a calculation and suggesting a modification to how it is visually represented, but there is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 626.
MR. PARTEE. Target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. It is merely a statement or remark made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 627.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [The fourth-quarter] target, which wouldbe 3/4 of a point higher because we ended up below the midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides information about a target for the fourth quarter but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 628.
MR. BLACK. Yes, that's what I understood you to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply confirming that he understood what was said.


Passage number 629.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that's all. The only rationale isthat I find it easy to explain. I say that that was last year'starget and we presumed we would have been satisfied to be there.Assuming we were satisfied to be there, we want to have somecontinuity to the next year. We know where we want to be at the endof this year, we decided where we wanted to be at the end of lastyear, and that's just a line that happens to connect those two targetsthat we happened to agree upon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their rationale and stating the goals that were agreed upon.


Passage number 630.
 It's no big deal, and maybe it does--MR. PARTEE. It creates lots of room, all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 631.
MR. WALLICH. It sure does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich simply agrees with the statement or viewpoint being discussed.


Passage number 632.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any context or information that suggests any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 633.
 You're looking at these early monthssince--MR. PARTEE. Yes, and we're well within it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about being in the early months of something.


Passage number 634.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're not all that much within it,are we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing that they are not greatly involved in the topic being discussed.


Passage number 635.
MR. PARTEE. Well, if I understand the way you're going todraw it, we're a good deal more within it than with parallel lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 636.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's more than with parallel lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement apparent in the passage.


Passage number 637.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER." This is simply a title or term referring to a certain individual.


Passage number 638.
 It would be 3/4 of a percentage point morewithin it than--MR. PARTEE. Well, that is just connecting the points here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a numerical comparison without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 639.
When I look at the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're unquestionably right in direction;I just don't know how far it will go. I'd have to look at it. Whereare these great pictures [in the Bluebook].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any direct disagreement or contention. The speaker acknowledges the other person's correctness but expresses uncertainty about the extent of it. They then ask a question about the location of the pictures in the Bluebook. The tone appears conversational and without apparent conflict.


Passage number 640.
MR. PARTEE. M1 is right after the full page of tables.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage merely states that M1 is right after the full page of tables without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 641.
MR. MARTIN. Two pages beyond page 10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement evident in the given passage. It simply states "Two pages beyond page 10," which does not indicate any opposition or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 642.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the way I drew it before; that'sright. In the fourth quarter we're going to be 3/4 of a percentagepoint above the parallel line and it would get progressively less. Idon't know what it would be in the first quarter; I suppose 5/8ths ofa percentage point or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 643.
-61-2/12-13/85MR. WALLICH. Well, it'll be more comfortable throughout theyear as far as how high up we can go. As far as the rate of growth wecan have, once we reach it, it'll be less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the comfort and growth rate of something.


Passage number 644.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It won't be more comfortable in the fourthquarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the fourth quarter will not be more comfortable.


Passage number 645.
MR. WALLICH. There is more room to go up. There isn't moreroom once you're at the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, first states that there is more room to go up, indicating that there is further potential for growth or progress. Then, he contradicts his previous statement by saying that there isn't more room once you're at the top, suggesting that there is a limit or ceiling to how much progress can be made. While these statements may seem contradictory, they are both made by the same person and there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 646.
MR. GRAMLEY. You can always turn the picture sideways,though, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is suggesting a solution to a problem, but there is no disagreement or opposing viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 647.
MR. BLACK. Or upside down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement that suggests disagreement or contention. It simply states, "Or upside down," without any conflicting opinions or contrasting ideas.


Passage number 648.
MR. MARTIN. But only if you have a semi-log scale.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Martin.


Passage number 649.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You come out the same place in the fourthquarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the outcome or result remains unchanged in the fourth quarter.


Passage number 650.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I think Governor Wallich issaying that if you reach the top of the parallel line you have to grow5-1/2 percent, no more than that; if you reach the top of the higherline you have to grow 4-1/4 percent or something. These are roughnumbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is summarizing Governor Wallich's statement and clarifying the numbers mentioned.


Passage number 651.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply confirming the correctness of a previous statement.


Passage number 652.
 It's 4-3/4 percent--MR. PARTEE. Say we've had a couple of quarters of 9 percentgrowth; the arithmetic implication is that it is going to have to dropto 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 653.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think all these implications are thesame. Wherever you are in the first quarter, to meet the target atthe end of the year growth has to slow down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing the author's opinion that in order to meet a target by the end of the year, growth needs to slow down regardless of where one is in the first quarter.


Passage number 654.
MR. MORRIS. Unless we rebase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Morris' viewpoint or proposal.


Passage number 655.
MR. PARTEE. Now, there might lie the basis for somecompromise. We can go with the 4 to 7 percent on the understandingthat we're going to increase it later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker suggests a possible compromise, indicating a willingness to consider increasing the percentage later.


Passage number 656.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think clearly [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 657.
MR. PARTEE. I don't recall that we ever have, but I may bewrong about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is stating that he does not remember a certain situation accurately, but he is not arguing or disagreeing with anyone.


Passage number 658.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, we did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a straightforward statement or agreement.


Passage number 659.
MR. MORRIS. We did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that "Mr. Morris" said something without any conflicting opinions or contrasting statements.


Passage number 660.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Given that the response is "Oh yes," it is not clear whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Oh yes" does not provide enough information to determine if there is disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 661.
MR. PARTEE. We rebased, but did we ever raise it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as Mr. Partee is asking a question, rather than making a statement.


Passage number 662.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, we did both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 663.
MR. MORRIS. We eliminated it for one year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 664.
-62-2/12-13/85MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it consists of a mathematical expression.


Passage number 665.
 In mid-1983 we--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We rebased and raised [the M1range].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not explicitly mention any assertion or disagreement. It simply states that "we" (presumably a group or organization) performed actions to rebase and raise the M1 range. It is a statement of a fact without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 666.
MR. GRAMLEY. We rebased and raised the target from 5 to 9percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley simply states that they have rebased and increased the target from 5 to 9 percent.


Passage number 667.
MR. BLACK. We rebased on the second quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they rebased on the second quarter.


Passage number 668.
MR. GRAMLEY. And accepted the overrun in the first half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "And accepted the overrun in the first half" does not indicate any dispute or argument. It simply states that someone accepted something in the first half.


Passage number 669.
MS. HORN. We rebased and we respecified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply mentions that "We" rebased and respecified something, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 670.
MR. GRAMLEY. We made a tremendous change in mid-1983.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that a significant change was made in mid-1983.


Passage number 671.
MR. BLACK. The base became the second quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage only states a fact about the base becoming the second quarter. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 672.
MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the provided passage, as only the name "MR. GUFFEY" is given. There is no accompanying context or dialogue provided to indicate any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 673.
 And then we used it as a monitoring--MR. PARTEE. That's right, we did; rebasing made a bigdifference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement and adds additional information to support it.


Passage number 674.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we always reserve this right andwe have done it. Suppose it ended up that business is sluggish,inflation is doing fine, and the dollar is very strong, but liquiditypreferences are high and money growth is running high. We said moneygrowth is expected to run high in the first quarter of the year; if atthe middle of the year we say we don't think it's reasonable for it togo down, we have to raise the target. What I would hope would happenis that inflation will be less, we will get nice orderly growth, thatthis trend appears in M1--which it may or may not--and that everythingworks out just copacetic. Who knows. How much do you think theconsumer price index is going to be affected by this orange andvegetable situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses the speaker's hopes and expectations regarding various economic factors, such as business, inflation, money growth, and the consumer price index.


Passage number 675.
MR. KICHLINE. I think we have 4-3/4 to 5 percent for foodprices in the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline is simply stating the estimated percentage increase in food prices for the first quarter.


Passage number 676.
 Our CPI projection, let's see--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. While the staff is looking that up,I would just note that one of the things that could really help theprice outlook is some relaxation in these Japanese automobiles quotasbecause one of the troubling things about prices even now is the waythe auto manufacturers are sneaking in all these price increases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that a relaxation in Japanese automobile quotas could help improve the price outlook. They also express concern about auto manufacturers increasing prices.


Passage number 677.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 678.
 Just as a matter of curiosity, the samething occurred to me--MR. KICHLINE. We are expecting a CPI of 3-1/2 to 4 percentin the first quarter. Offsetting the food price rise is an expectedprice decline in energy of 4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The first statement is a personal observation and the second statement provides information about an expected CPI and price fluctuation.


Passage number 679.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much of a bulge do you have in thefood prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The sentence is simply asking about the extent of the bulge in food prices, without suggesting any conflicting viewpoints or contradictory ideas.


Passage number 680.
MR. KICHLINE. How much of a rise in food. Food prices rose2-3/4 percent in the fourth quarter and we have them up to 4-3/4percent, so that's a 2 percentage point increase. Energy prices were-63-2/12-13/85about flat--up a percent--and we have them down 4 percent, so theyought to be offsetting factors in the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the rise in food and energy prices.


Passage number 681.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are Japanese cars in the consumer priceindex.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention anything about contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about Japanese cars in the consumer price index.


Passage number 682.
MR. KICHLINE. Conceptually, yes. They expanded the modelssome years ago and I used to know that and I don't remember. But yes,conceptually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Kichline is stating that there is conceptual agreement regarding the expansion of models in the past, but he is unsure of the specific details. There is no explicit indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 683.
MR. GRAMLEY. I wouldn't look for much price relief fromraising the quotas. The quota increase probably will be quite small.And the excess demand for Japanese cars is so great that I think atexisting prices they could just ship a few more and that's about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing his opinion that increasing quotas on Japanese cars will not result in much price relief and that the increase will likely be small. He also states that, due to the high demand for Japanese cars, simply shipping a few more cars at existing prices would likely be sufficient. This is a single viewpoint and does not involve any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 684.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's probably true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's probably true" suggests agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 685.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suspect that's right. But suppose theytake the quota off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 686.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, my sense is that the Japanese would be soreluctant to risk the possibility of a reimposition of quotas thatthey would increase their shipments to the United States in quitemodest amounts. I would doubt seriously, if we had a removal of thequotas, that we would see an increase in Japanese shipments of morethan, say, 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, believes that if quotas were removed, Japanese shipments to the United States would only increase by a modest amount, possibly around 10 percent. However, there may be others who hold a different opinion and argue that the increase could be higher than that.


Passage number 687.
MR. MARTIN. But don't forget that the South Koreans are nowcoming onto the market. [Unintelligible] and some of these othercompanies are coming on strong. And the [cars are priced] at $6,000and under.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that South Korean companies are entering the market and offering cars priced at $6,000 and under.


Passage number 688.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley simply states that he knows something.


Passage number 689.
 I was just--MR. PARTEE. Favorable prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions favorable prices.


Passage number 690.
MR. GRAMLEY. --making the comment solely with respect toJapanese quotas. The shipments from South Korea and so on are goingto increase anyway. But the shipments from Japan I don't think aregoing to increase very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the expected increase in shipments from Japan.


Passage number 691.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How big a car do they put in the consumerprice index.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about the consumer price index and the size of cars included in it.


Passage number 692.
MR. KICHLINE. I have somebody on the staff who could giveyou the [specifics] in all sorts of ways, but I'm not the person.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Kichline is simply stating that he is not the person who can provide specifics.


Passage number 693.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not the man. But they don't pricethe expensive ones, do they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "You're not the man" is a declarative sentence stating a fact. The following question "But they don't price the expensive ones, do they?" is not expressing disagreement but seeking confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 694.
MR. PARTEE. Not the really [expensive ones].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention regarding the expensive ones. It simply states that they are not being referred to.


Passage number 695.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what they call expensive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their lack of knowledge about what something is referred to as expensive.


Passage number 696.
MR. PARTEE. Cadillacs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Cadillacs" without any further context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 697.
-64-2/12-13/85VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think we could guarantee that whatthey would call expensive would be different from what you'd callexpensive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that different people may have different ideas of what is considered expensive.


Passage number 698.
MR. PARTEE. Actually, you'll find that any car is expensive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement about the cost of cars.


Passage number 699.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm afraid so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without a specific passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide a specific passage for a more accurate response.


Passage number 700.
MR. PARTEE. $10,000 or more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement simply states a dollar amount, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 701.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't hear any bright ideas abouthow to draw these parallel lines. If I don't hear any stronger ideasright now, I will reserve that prerogative unto myself with theunderstanding that there's going to be some kind of parallel linepicture. But I will go back and ask two questions. Are those whowant higher ranges at all consoled by making M2 and M3 higher. Andare those who don't want higher numbers distressed by making M2 and M3higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 702.
MR. MARTIN. It depends on whether we can agree with regardto language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage implies that there might be a disagreement or contention surrounding the use of language, as it states that agreement is necessary in this regard.


Passage number 703.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's look at the language. Stevehas given me a modified sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting to analyze the language and stating that Steve has provided them with a modified sentence.


Passage number 704.
 I don't know whether you'll likeit: "The Committee agreed that growth in"--MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing uncertainty or lack of knowledge about whether the person will like something.


Passage number 705.
 They ignore the separate--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It continues the first page. Change the"M1" to "monetary aggregates" and otherwise the first part remains thesame: "The Committee agreed that growth of the monetary aggregates inthe upper part of their ranges for 1985 may be appropriate, providedthat inflationary pressures remain subdued and depending on velocitytrends." If we use that kind of language, it just reads a little moresmoothly to me to say "may be appropriate depending on velocity trendsand provided that...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing a potential agreement among a committee regarding the growth of monetary aggregates.


Passage number 706.
"MR. MARTIN. It's important to make that comment with regardto velocity. That's been a good deal of the substance of ourdiscussion. And John Balles has been [suggesting] language withregard to the lagged effects of the interest rate drop in the lastyear. Whether that's appropriate--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or providing additional information.


Passage number 707.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's broadly encompassedin this term "velocity trends." It may not be a trend, but in thiscontext we're not really talking about it depending on long-termvelocity trends; what we mean is depending upon velocity this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing clarification and context, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 708.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We're talking about short-termvelocity rather than long-term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply clarifying that the discussion is focused on short-term velocity rather than long-term velocity. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 709.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One could say "depending on velocitydevelopments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contentious or disagreeable statement. It is stating a conditional statement, suggesting that the answer depends on velocity developments.


Passage number 710.
"VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "Developments" is a better word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is straightforward and does not present any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 711.
MR. PARTEE. And if we generalize it to say "monetaryaggregates" that may be appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a generalized statement made by Mr. Partee, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 712.
-65-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is a disagreement or contention regarding the mathematical operation in the passage. The expression -65-2/12-13/85 involves subtraction and division, and there might be differing opinions on how to correctly calculate or simplify the expression.


Passage number 713.
MR. GUFFEY. It picks up M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a fragment of a sentence, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement based on this information alone.


Passage number 714.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Depending on developments with respect tovelocity and provided that inflationary pressures remain subdued."How do you like that language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a condition and a possibility based on certain factors.


Passage number 715.
MR. GRAMLEY. Poetry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not present any form of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions Mr. Gramley and his connection to poetry.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 716.
MR. BALLES. Sorry, Mr. Chairman, but are there some words inthat--we don't have it in front of us--that say something about beingabove the cone or whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, expresses uncertainty and questions the presence of words regarding being above the cone or something similar.


Passage number 717.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I wouldn't say that in thedirective. But it would be said; it's implicit in the decision wehave just made. We're talking about a fourth-quarter target here andit sounds a little awkward--I don't object to it, but it seems to metotally unnecessary--to say here that consistent with that fourth-quarter target we intend to be above the cone in the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the wording of the directive, but there is no disagreement with anyone else involved in the conversation.


Passage number 718.
MR. BALLES. Oh, I see now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles seems to understand or comprehend something.


Passage number 719.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that point should be made; I justdon't see that it's necessary here. I have no objections to saying ithere, but it just seems rather complicated to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion about a point that could be made, stating that it is not necessary in the current context but acknowledging that it is not objectionable.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 720.
MR. PARTEE. You wouldn't be prepared to say monetaryaggregates in the upper part of their ranges or above. Well, thereare two great provisos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be disagreement or contention about whether monetary aggregates should be in the upper part of their ranges or above. This is indicated by the phrase "Well, there are two great provisos" which implies that there are differing opinions or conditions that need to be considered.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 721.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but I think I could say somethingabout that in the testimony. I don't think we should set a range andsay we might be above it. We might. We haven't been within theranges all that consistently, but it's rather peculiar to say that inthe directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a different opinion about setting a range and potentially being above it. They also mention that they haven't been consistently within the ranges mentioned in the directive.


Passage number 722.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 723.
 That's why 7-1/2--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with saying: "Obviously,we'll look at these at midyear; we expect to be above in the firsthalf of the year and if velocity were really slow we'd have to look atthis range again at midyear." I think we probably ought to say that.What about M2 and M3. Let me examine the proposition this way. I amassuming this language and--. Where are we on these three ranges. Ifound myself testifying the other day unable to remember what theranges were. At least psychologically that tells you something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a person discussing their own thoughts and considerations regarding certain ranges.


Passage number 724.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Page 5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide an accurate answer without the specific passage or information you are referring to.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 725.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's the preference for [upper limitsof]: (a) 7, 8-1/2, and 9 percent, which is exactly the same asalternative II, as opposed to (b) 7, 9, and 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 726.
MR. PARTEE. Opposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the word "opposed" indicates that there is disagreement or contention.


Passage number 727.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want the (b).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 728.
-66-2/12-13/85VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only states the position or title of Vice Chairman Corrigan without providing any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 729.
 Or whatever it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't get around to asking thequestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the passage presents an unfinished thought or statement, without any clear opposition or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 730.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explaination: The provided passage does not contain any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 731.
 Oh, I thought you said--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You got a little overanxious overthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying a misunderstanding or miscommunication.


Passage number 732.
MR. MARTIN. No, we're just quicker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that there is no contention; they are just quicker.


Passage number 733.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm going to ask both. Option (a) isalternative II as shown [in the Bluebook]; (b) is 1/2 percentage pointhigher for M2 and M3. How many prefer (a).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement presenting two options and asking for a preference.


Passage number 734.
MR. GRAMLEY. What are you talking about now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is simply asking for clarification or more information.


Passage number 735.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Option (a) is alternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any alternatives or arguments that could lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 736.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 737.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 738.
MR. MARTIN. As is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage consists of a quote from Mr. Martin without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 739.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All of this has the language in thedirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states a fact or observation without expressing any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 740.
MR. BALLES. There is only one hand up, Mr. Boykin's.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage reports that there is only one person with their hand raised, Mr. Boykin. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 741.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, (b) with a 1/2 percentage pointhigher on the upper end of M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a numerical increase in the upper end of M2 and M3 without presenting any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 742.
MR. RICE. Well, I'm not [for] M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: no

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. Mr. Rice is simply stating his own opinion or stance.


Passage number 743.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I could live with your (b).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only states a personal opinion or preference.


Passage number 744.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the in-between course is raising M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 745.
MR. PARTEE. I think M2 is likely to give us trouble and Iwould want that upper end up a little. I don't care what we do to M3because we don't pay any attention to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply expresses his opinion about M2 and M3 and suggests a desired adjustment for M2 without opposing anyone else's perspective.


Passage number 746.
MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 747.
 No; that's why it's harmless--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that's 100 percent true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No; that's why it's harmless-- I don't think that's 100 percent true.

Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "No; that's why it's harmless--" presents an opposing view to the previous statement. The following statement "I don't think that's 100 percent true" further strengthens the disagreement, indicating that the speaker does not agree with the previous statement being made.


Passage number 748.
MR. PARTEE. 99 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit statement of disagreement or contention in this passage. The statement "99 percent" appears to be a factual statement rather than a point of contention.


Passage number 749.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we use 7, 9, and 9-1/2 percent [asupper limits] and 9 to 12 percent [for credit], I guess. Does thathave the largest amount of support. It does raise a question in mymind: If we raise those M2 and M3 limits, maybe we should go back tojust talking about M1 in that sentence we just wrote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and considering different options regarding the use of interest rate limits. There is no conflicting view or argument presented.


Passage number 750.
MR. MARTIN. We might still have a problem with M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is simply stating that there might still be a problem with M2 without any indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 751.
-67-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage as it only mentions the Chairman Volcker without presenting any contrasting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 752.
 Yes, we could but it--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Why don't you see who could acceptyour (b) but not necessarily prefer it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a course of action (see who could accept it) without expressing any opposition or contradiction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 753.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, who can live with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the use of the word "who" in the statement "Yes, who can live with it." The use of "who" suggests that there are individuals who cannot live with "it," implying a disagreement or different perspectives on the matter being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 754.
MR. AXILROD. Our point estimate of M2, which may be a littlelow, would only be a half point above the midpoint of that 6 to 9percent. It could well be 8-1/4 percent or higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "which may be a little low" suggests that there is uncertainty regarding the accuracy of the point estimate of M2. Additionally, the statement "It could well be 8-1/4 percent or higher" implies a potential increase in the estimate, indicating a difference of opinion or disagreement on the actual value.


Passage number 755.
MR. GUFFEY. But it's still well within the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement by Mr. Guffey without any opposing viewpoint or conflicting information.


Passage number 756.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. As I say, it's only a half point abovethe midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 757.
MR. PARTEE. Well, your point estimate is already in theupper part of the range. That's another way of putting it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply restating a previous point in a different manner.


Passage number 758.
MR. AXILROD. Well, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The response "Well, yes" from Mr. Axilrod does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It seems to be a simple acknowledgment or agreement.


Passage number 759.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your point estimate is what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that "Your point estimate is what."


Passage number 760.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no statement or claim made in the passage that could be debated or disagreed upon, therefore there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 761.
MR. AXILROD. 8 percent at the moment. That requires quite aslowdown in the subsequent quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a fact about the current percentage, which requires a slowdown in the subsequent quarters.


Passage number 762.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Keep in mind that that moment is11:50 a.m. By 12:00 noon it may be something else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a fact about the passage of time.


Passage number 763.
MR. MARTIN. 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states "Mr. Martin. 10 percent," without any conflicting ideas or opposing views.


Passage number 764.
MR. PARTEE. We count [deposits at] nonbank banks in themonetary aggregates, don't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement in the form of a question.


Passage number 765.
MS. SEGER. Those that have checking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 766.
MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the complete passage.


Passage number 767.
]MR. BLACK. Chuck, only those that take demand deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Black.


Passage number 768.
MR. PARTEE. What.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: is your stance on the issue of climate change?
MR. SMITH. I believe that climate change is primarily caused by human activity and that we need to take immediate action to address it. However, some argue that natural factors play a larger role and that our actions may have minimal impact on the overall climate. Therefore, there is some disagreement on the issue. Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. In the passage, Mr. Smith expresses his belief that climate change is primarily caused by human activity and the need for immediate action, while he acknowledges that others argue for natural factors playing a larger role and minimizing the impact of human actions. This difference in opinions highlights contention or disagreement on the issue of climate change.


Passage number 769.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This answer is based on the fact that the given passage only contains a person's name (Mr. Black) and does not present any information or ideas that could be subject to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 770.
 Ones that aren't supposed to take deposits--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This actually makes M2 and M3 higher thanwe had them last year. What were [the ranges for] last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is providing information about the increase in M2 and M3, without any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 771.
 I don'tguess there's any--MR. STERNLIGHT. Both were 6 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any opposing views or conflicts.


Passage number 772.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6 to 9 percent for both of them. So wecan make M2 the same and M3 a little higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply stating that both M2 and M3 can be set at a certain percentage, without any disagreement or opposing views being expressed.


Passage number 773.
MR. GRAMLEY. If we change it once more, I'm going to wear ahole in this paper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, expresses frustration and annoyance by stating that he will wear a hole in the paper if the change is made again. This disagreement suggests a difference of opinion or preference.


Passage number 774.
-68-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's try that (b): 7, 9, and 9-1/2percent; and 9 to 12 percent. How many go along with that. Well, Ithink that's as close as we're going to come. Let's vote on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests a specific range of percentages and asks for agreement from the others present.


Passage number 775.
MS. SEGER. Just to educate me, if we go with the 4 to 7percent for M1, can you tell me why we can't tie it to the midpoint ofthe fourth quarter--that is, the range for last year that we shot for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or information.


Passage number 776.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can, but we decided not to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a decision that has been made, without any opposing opinions being expressed.


Passage number 777.
MR. PARTEE. It's just that it produces so much rigidity tohave that as a precedent for doing it in the future. It's like havinga monetary rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In the given passage, there is no explicit contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is expressing his concern about the rigidity that comes with having a precedent for certain actions. This is simply a statement of his opinion without any opposing viewpoints or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 778.
MS. SEGER. Making that up was one of the reasons why Iwanted to have a wider band. So, I can go with the narrower band ifit's calculated from a higher level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing a desire for a wider band and explaining that they would still be open to a narrower band if it is calculated from a higher level.


Passage number 779.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is the reason in my mind forindicating that we might be happy in the upper part of the range,based upon what we know now. All right. Do you know what you'revoting on.SPEAKER(.). Not now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question.


Passage number 780.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I think so" shows the speaker's own opinion or agreement rather than contradicting or arguing against any other perspective.


Passage number 781.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7, 9, and 9-1/2 percent upper limits [forM1, M2, and M3, respectively], 9 to 12 percent [for credit], and thesentence as we talked about it in the directive. There's nothing elsein the language that raises a question is there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing different percentage limits without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 782.
MR. BALLES. And with a Volckergram.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions a "Volckergram," which suggests that there is a disagreement or controversy surrounding this topic.


Passage number 783.
MR. GRAMLEY. He's liable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in the given passage. The statement is a simple declaration or observation about someone being liable, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 784.
 We have already given him theauthority to make his pictures anyway he wants to including colors,dots--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the understanding that there will besomething like a parallel line on the [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no mention of any disagreement or contention in the passage. It simply states that someone has been given authority to make pictures in their own preferred way, including colors and dots. The mention of a "parallel line" does not indicate disagreement or contention either.


Passage number 785.
MR. BERNARD. Your reference is to all the aggregates and notjust M1 in this sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The statement made by Mr. Bernard is clarifying that the reference being discussed includes all the aggregates, rather than just one particular aggregate (M1).


Passage number 786.
MR. PARTEE. I think it ought to say aggregates; it ought tobe generalized. If they don't happen to be there--well, they won't bethere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 787.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "okay" is not a statement that implies any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral expression often used to indicate agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 788.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Bernard's opinions, statements, or actions that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 789.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles YesPresident Boehne NoPresident Boykin YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn Yes-69-2/12-13/85Governor Martin NoGovernor Partee Reluctantly, yesMR. PARTEE. Could you put in that "reluctantly".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. All of the individuals mentioned are expressing their agreement or affirmative response.


Passage number 790.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Somewhat reluctantly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The term "somewhat reluctantly" indicates a mild or hesitant level of reluctance, but it does not indicate any specific disagreement or contention.


Passage number 791.
MR. WALLICH. Limitedly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by "Mr. Wallich" is presented simply as a fact or an observation without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 792.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 793.
Governor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich NoCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. I guess we have nothing elseto do. The Secretary points out to me that we had better modify thatsentence about retail sales registering a large increase in Novemberand remaining at a higher level in December since it's no longer true.The language he suggests is: "Total retail sales rose moderately inJanuary following a decline in December." With all that[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The governors seem to agree on the need to modify a sentence about retail sales based on new information. The phrase "With all that [unintelligible]" at the end does not provide enough context to determine if there is any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 794.
MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 795.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a chance to go back and redo your[Humphrey-Hawkins] projections if you do that within a day or two. Iwon't register my concern about the price numbers, except that I'mreminding you that I registered it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 796.
MS. SEGER. Are we supposed to make a certain assumptionabout the value of the dollar to be consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is asking for clarification or guidance on a particular assumption, rather than expressing disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 797.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think the assumption would bestated as: the value of the dollar will not be substantially changed.I think what we said last time was that its value would not be outsidethe range-of trading in recent months or something like that. Wecould have an 8 percent decline and not be outside that range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is clarifying their previous statement and suggesting that a potential 8 percent decline in the value of the dollar would still fall within the range of recent trading.


Passage number 798.
MR. GUFFEY. The assumption for the money growth is at themidpoint or--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or contradictory statements. It simply mentions that the assumption for the money growth is at the midpoint, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 799.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I really don't know. The assumption formoney at wherever you want to make it within that range, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The sentence expresses uncertainty and lack of knowledge about a topic, but it does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 800.
MR. GUFFEY. It makes quite a difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 801.
MS. SEGER. The staff have [M1] at 6-1/2 percent in theirassumptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about the staff's assumptions.


Passage number 802.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, that's the point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Guffey's response to a question.


