Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJanuary 30-31, 1984A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Monday, January 30, 1984, at 2:00 p.m., andcontinuing on Tuesday, January 31, 1984, at 9:00 a.m.Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. KeehnMr. MartinMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RobertsMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Balles, Black, and Forrestal, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, and Atlanta,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele,1/ Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman,1/ Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach,1/ T. Davis,1/ Eisenmenger,1/ Prell,1/Siegman,1/ Scheld,1/ and Zeisel,1/ Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Attended Monday session and Tuesday session after action to establishlong-run ranges.PRESENT:1/30-31/84Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn,1/ Deputy Staff Director, Office of StaffDirector for Monetary and Financial Policy,Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill,1/ Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey,1/ Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Freund 2/ and Madigan,2/ Economists, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Fousek,1/ Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. Burns,1/ J. Davis,1/ Keran,1/ Koch,1/ Mullineaux,1/Parthemos,1/ and Stern,1/ Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Dallas, Cleveland, San Francisco, AtlantaPhiladelphia, Richmond, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Meek,1/ Vice President and Monetary Adviser,Federal Reserve Bank of New York-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJanuary 30-31, 1984January 30, 1984--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The meeting can come to order with theapproval of the minutes, if somebody would like to move that.MR. MARTIN. So moved.MR. PARTEE. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will do that. Iwant to change the agenda order here a bit and have Mr. Cross and Mr.Sternlight report first, after we discuss this confidentiality item onthe agenda. Then we'll go to the long-term ranges with the staffreport and the discussion. I would not anticipate that that will cometo a conclusion this afternoon, but I would hope that we will beprepared to reach a conclusion, as nearly as one can forecast, when weassemble tomorrow. Given this confidentiality problem--and maybe outof an excess of caution--I think perhaps we could have an executivesession first thing tomorrow morning while we complete that discussionand then resume with the short-term targets.Meanwhile, let me discuss this confidentiality issue.Everybody has received a copy of the GAO report, which in general cameto no conclusion with regard to who did the leaking. I think the GAOalso came to the conclusion that procedures were somewhat more casualon the Hill than in the Federal Reserve. And the unspoken conclusionfrom that I will leave unspoken. Maybe one should speak in terms ofprobabilities. But obviously, they did call attention to weaknessesin our own procedures, too. I don't think the key to this lies inprocedures but rather in personal integrity and morale. Those arereally the key. But I think it is incumbent upon us to review ourprocedures and satisfy ourselves that they are reasonable andreasonably tight and also that people know what they are. The latterwas particularly the criticism that GAO pointed out. [Our rulesregarding confidentiality] have been lying around for a long timewithout review and there was, to say the least, some confusion aboutthem.The way I would like to proceed is to do nothing further atthis meeting but to appoint a committee that I would hope--maybeoverly optimistically but not necessarily--could report by the nextmeeting and if not then, by the following meeting. But let's see ifthey can review the procedures and present some recommendations andproposals to us at the next meeting. In thinking about who might beappropriately on that committee, and taking some account of geographyand distribution among the presidents and the Board, it seems to mereasonable, if they all agree and if the Committee doesn't point outany great objections, that Mr. Solomon might chair the committee--andthe New York Reserve Bank, of course, has a particular problem--andMr. Partee might represent the Board and Mr. Black, in effect, theother presidents. I would have the committee work with a staff group.I left the names of staff I had in mind on my desk; I hope I canrecall them. I thought Mr. Axilrod might serve as Chairman of the[staff] committee; Mr. Oltman could provide some legal perspective andsome practical perspective from New York; Mr. Coyne with his1/30-31/84particular responsibilities could also serve on the staff group; andMr. Bernard could act as Secretary to it. That doesn't mean thatanybody else who has an idea--either on the staff or the Committee--should not participate. I would hope that the staff would consultwith other staff and that the committee might be [open] to suggestionsor comments from any member of the Committee or from other Presidentsand that we could proceed on that basis.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We'll be deeply honored.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If anything goes wrong, we'll point to theSolomon guidelines in the future. Let me turn to Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I have a feeling that the exchangemarket for the dollar is exhibiting all the characteristics of the topof a bull market and that when the turn does come it could beprecipitous; the market could very well overshoot on the down side. Iunderstand the constraints placed on us by Treasury policy positions,but it seems to me that this would be a good time for us to beginstockpiling currencies to use if and when we get the kind of declinein the dollar that I feel is on the way.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Instead of stockpiling, the Treasuryis de-stockpiling. It was a very unusual thing that they did, payinghalf of the United States' quota--the gold tranche of the quota--inyen and deutschmarks. But they wanted to reduce their war chest.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your point has been made on a number ofoccasions. I think we're getting into a very difficult situation herewhere we're getting totally locked into a big capital inflow fromabroad which so far has come very easily--too easily--with the dollarup. But when that mood changes, we will have problems because thereis no way we can get out of dependence on our capital inflow from abalance of payments standpoint or from a budgetary deficit standpoint.The capital inflow this year will run to more than 2 percent of theGNP, I guess. So, the total net savings runs to something like 7 or 8percent in the United States and about 25 percent of that is beingsupplemented by foreign capital inflows.MR. MORRIS. But for precisely that reason it may take a verysharp decline in the dollar to maintain the inflows.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't disagree with you.MR. PARTEE. It's hard to say where equilibrium might be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a wonderful specter of the dollarplunging and interest rates rising at the same time! In some sensethe crowding out is now crowding in--or rather, drawing in--foreigncapital. If it [stops] drawing in, we will have a problem. I thinkthat is at the heart of our budgetary deficit policy problem.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Until the dollar reaches extremelyweak levels, we're not likely to get any really meaningful centralbank cooperation on major intervention. So, Frank, the onlyreservation I have to increasing the war chest of foreign currencies,1/30-31/84which as you know I have always been in favor of--and we did follow[that approach] until this Administration came in--is that even thatwar chest is going to be of very limited value unless we get verystrong cooperation by other central banks. And we would not get thatin the first stages of a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure we would want it in the firststages, but all that remains to be seen. But even then, I wouldn'thave too much faith in intervention when we're relying on $80 billionof capital inflows. Intervention of $5 billion or even $10 billion isa small fraction of the total.MR. WALLICH. Well, there is the fact that interest rateswould be going up. That is, foreigners would be [buying] bonds, sothere is a sustaining element. Inflation--MR. MORRIS. Yes, but if the market perceives a 20 percentdrop in the dollar, a small movement in interest rates is not going tostop it.MR. WALLICH. Inflation is low and it's not going to risevery much as a result of this movement; it will rise some. So, Idon't think one can take this as a foregone conclusion. It's a risk.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would have had somewhat similar feelingsa year ago, though less strongly, and it hasn't happened yet. It maynot happen in 1984. But I think it is not a sustainable long-runposition to have the United States borrowing a larger and largerfraction of its GNP from abroad. It's not sustainable onprotectionist grounds either, or on industrial grounds. But I find itdifficult to predict when the turning point may come.MR. PARTEE. We've been predicting it for a year and a half.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. But the fact is that westarted--and we're inclined to forget this--from a very strong,relatively balanced, payments position and we had a current accountsurplus, or a roughly balanced current account, two years ago. Well,two years ago [the deficit] was $14 billion or so and last year it was$30 billion and three years ago [the current account] was in surplusor in balance. [The deficit] wasn't all that big for the whole oflast year by today's standards, but as it gets bigger we have to getmore and more capital every quarter.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But everything will work the wrongway when it starts, because as interest rates rise foreigners will getout of the bond market and the stock market, even more so given theirexpectations on the dollar. We'll get a combined reversal of theinflows. I agree with Frank that [the exchange value of the dollar]has been so high for such a long period of time that when it turns theprobability is that there will be a very substantial move downward.MR. CORRIGAN. The mere fact that that is now being widelytalked about, not just in financial circles but in business circles ingeneral, tends to reinforce the view that when it goes, it couldreally go.1/30-31/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been talked about a lot and ithasn't happened, which suggests that maybe the market is fairlyresistant for the moment, but--MR. WALLICH. The market sees all this as much as we do andfor some curious reason doesn't respond. I think they anticipate twopossibilities. One is that we will put our [fiscal] house in order.Then the budget deficit would go down and the United States wouldbecome a more dependable place to keep one's money. The otherpossibility is that we won't put our house in order. Then theopposite of these things would happen. Nevertheless, interest rateswould be high, so the dollar might not come down very much. I can'tbelieve we are going to continue on with $100 billion in capitalimports for very long; that I understand.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And I take it that may very well bewhy it's going to be a long period of time yet--maybe half a year, ayear, or even longer--before this turn comes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have this in your presentation, Mr.Truman? We'll get off this depressing subject for the moment.MR. PARTEE. Would you explain the Jamaican--?MR. CROSS. That was an arrangement the ESF made with theJamaican authorities. It has not been announced and I was justinforming the Committee of it. It ties in with a move by which theJamaicans would have an IMF program and it's a kind of bridgefinancing looking toward that.SPEAKER(?). Didn't you call it a swap?MR. CROSS. Yes.MR. RICE. It's not a Federal Reserve [swap]?MR. CROSS. No. What I said is that we have done this forthe Treasury. It's totally an ESF arrangement. I only noted it foryour information.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other comments, we need toratify the transactions.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So moved.MR. MARTIN. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. BOEHNE. Peter, I noticed that the net change in outrightholdings for all of 1983 was about twice as big as in the two previousyears. Is there a reason for that?MR. STERNLIGHT. Currency. The outright change was anincrease of about $16 billion, and a big rise in currency incirculation was the main factor. Currency was up something like $141/30-31/84billion when I last looked. There was some decline in our foreigncurrency holdings over the course of the year, which would have beenanother reason for the outright increase. But that currency increaseis the chief thing that comes to mind.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No other comments? If not, we have toratify the transactions.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So moved.MS. TEETERS. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will turn to Mr.Kichline.MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, TRUMAN, and PRELL. [Statements--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can someone explain to me the chart in theupper left hand corner on households?MR. PRELL. That indexes the dollar volume of borrowingrelative to personal income at 100 in any trough and plots themovements from there. The shaded area shows the range of experiencein the earlier--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How does that differ from the chartimmediately below it, except that it is indexed?MR. PRELL. That is the outstanding debt relative to personalincome. This is the level of indebtedness. The other is the flow ofborrowing scaled by disposable income; one is the flow and one is thestock.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if the top one is changing, thebottom one ought to be changing too, right?MR. PRELL. No. If debt is growing at the same pace asincome, which is what the bottom panel shows, you would have an upwardmovement as shown in the top panel.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure why, but I won't pursue itanymore.MR. PRELL. Well, let me restate it: The volume of borrowinghas grown relative to GNP, but the [percent] increase in debt has beenthe same as the [percent] increase in income.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else need any enlightenment?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. I have a question. I don't know whether it'sappropriate now or later, but one of the problems that I have with theforecast is that it doesn't seem to be compatible with the M2assumption. Would you prefer to defer that question until later on?1/30-31/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod says yes. We will defer it,meaning that he will effectively answer it in his presentation. Butwe can have his presentation now if it's more desirable.MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm not sure my presentation dealsdirectly with it, since I go even in the opposite direction toPresident Morris' question. But it will certainly come up, either asa question now or as a question after my presentation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what people prefer. Ithink we ought to discuss the economic outlook. Do we want to do thatagainst the background of your presentation? Go ahead and give yourpresentation.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Before you do that, let me ask asimple question. I see that mortgage loan delinquencies did notreally come down in 1983 and are running at very high rates. Whyhasn't this big wave of prosperity since 1982 reduced mortgage loandelinquencies?MR. PRELL. Well, as you can see, that line has edged offvery slightly. If one looks back at 1975, one can see also that itwas a while before that rate dropped very substantially. Clearly,there has been, and even now still is, a great deal of unemployment,and that could be a factor holding the rate up. And there may havebeen some problems among people who had short-term loans that they gotearlier at low rates which they have had to renew at higher rates thanperhaps they could handle. We don't have any information suggestingthat that has been a major problem, but that's a special feature inthe current period.MR. MARTIN. May I speak to your question?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, go ahead.MR. MARTIN. To take the analysis of the housing financialsituation out to the margin, I note that data on the losses fromforeclosures in residential property last year, including the fourthquarter of last year, indeed [support] Mr. Prell's premise. Forexample, the mortgage insurance industry, which could be accused ofinsuring some of the submarginal and certainly a lot of the marginalresidential credit, is now experiencing losses from foreclosure atabout 3-1/2 times their historical level. That industry historicallyhas had a ratio of losses to premium of about 20 percent and now has aloss ratio to premium of 90 percent. So, at the margin, there isconsiderable difficulty in the mortgage market.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Is this mostly in the industrialstates--the heavy smokestack industry?MR. MARTIN. No. I don't have a map of the United States inmy mind, Tony, but it's very widespread. It includes California, withthe so-called creative financing, and it includes overcommitting inthe Southwest as well as the smokestack states.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Baldwin United got in just at the righttime!1/30-31/84MR. PARTEE. Let me ask the staff who look at the domesticside of the economy whether they were aware that the implication ofthe international projection is for the residual rate of priceincrease to go down as 1984 and 1985 transpire. It seems ratherinconsistent with what you have for unit labor costs, which don't godown, and GDBP prices, which don't go down. Yet the working throughof this I take it by Ted's people on the international side is thatonce you take the international effect out, you must have a decline inthe rate of inflation. Do you want to comment on that, Jim?MR. KICHLINE. We're talking about the CPI, not the deflator,in our forecast.MR. PARTEE. Is that the CPI?MR. KICHLINE. Yes. The CPI in our forecast runs a good dealabove the deflator. So, in part, what we're looking at is thedifference between the measures of GNP prices versus the measures ofconsumer prices. I think that's the bulk of it. Our CPI forecast for1984, for example, is around 5-1/4 percent, which is .6 to .7 morethan the deflator. But you're right: A good deal of the impact ofthe dollar does show through; it's not a minor feature. We are of themind that, indeed, 1984 unemployment rates are still high enough to beexerting some degree of downward pressure on wages and compensationdomestically. Aside from the dollar problem, we think there isdownward pressure, but it erodes over time. And by the end of 1985the downward pressure on the wage side is virtually nonexistent in thesense that we think an unemployment rate of 7 percent is near the topend of what is "full employment."MR. TRUMAN. Part of the point here is that the dollar'searlier rise brings forward some of the price pressures in thewage/price dynamics that we would get later. So, therefore, just thefact that you have those price pressures tends arithmetically to holddown some of the prices in the short run and removal of that gives yousomewhat of an uptick. That's why, at least measured off the consumerprice index, you get that tilting up.MR. PARTEE. The other thought I had as I looked at thisparticular chart is that I don't see much delay in the price effect ofthe alternative projection--that is, the one where you have the dollarfalling to a hundred by the fourth quarter of 1984. It seems as ifthe maximum first difference price effect appears almost at the sametime. I thought there was supposed to be a lag of 6 months or so.MR. TRUMAN. There is a lag before you get the total impact.Well over half of the impact is seen as an instantaneous adjustment orin the first four quarters. The total impact would go out further;more than three quarters to 80 percent of it would occur by the end oftwo years.MR. PARTEE. So we're looking at the increment, and theincrement is at its maximum in the early quarters; then the incrementfalls off but the total effect continues to accumulate.MR. TRUMAN. That's right. That's partly shown in this lowerpanel. You can barely see it, but there is a little pushing togetherand the dollar stays up as the impact wears off.1/30-31/84MS. TEETERS. Ted, I'm a little surprised in your foreignprojection that the continued very moderate growth of the industrialcountries doesn't do anything for them on prices. Is there somereason that they get very little impact on prices?MR. TRUMAN. There are two factors. First of all we'reaveraging. For the low inflation countries we have basically the samekind of phenomenon that we have for the United States--that as theeconomy picks up, you get some upward pressure on prices moderated bythe fact that on our full projection their exchange rates areappreciating. So, for the forecast period you get about a 1/2 percentrise in the year-over-year inflation rate for Germany and Japan andSwitzerland and countries like that. That is combined with somefurther downward pressure for Italy and France and Belgium whereinflation has been above average and they still are following moreaustere policies in general.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How much of the assumed fall in theexchange value of the dollar over the projection period is correlatedwith that 1/2 point rise?MR. TRUMAN. The difference is between the level and the rateof change. The 1/2 percent "bonus" that I referred to in the middlepanel of that chart corresponds to a 1-1/2 percent change in thelevel, given the 10 percent decline in the dollar over a period oftime. The reason you get a fairly constant contribution is that thedifference between those two lines in the upper chart is about thesame. There is a rather constant process; every year in this three-year period we got about a 10 to 15 percent appreciation of thedollar. So, the first-year effect, the second-year effect, and thethird-year effect are all coming in together; once one faded outanother one came together. So you get about 1/2 percent a year of thethree-year effect.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're crediting me with a moresubtle question than I asked.MR. BALLES. It probably was a good answer. What was thequestion?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Given the fact that we're moving intoa period of much more utilization of capacity, the falling exchangevalue of the dollar in time will have much more of an inflationaryimpact than it otherwise would. Now, if I understood you--maybe Ididn't catch it earlier--you are projecting that over the 1984-85period there will be a 1/2 point higher rise in inflation due to thefall in the dollar, ceteris paribus. Is that right?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, about that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And how much of a fall in the trade-weighted value is that?MR. TRUMAN. The depreciation is 17 percent over eightquarters--two years.prices?MR. WALLICH. The 1/2 percent is inflation or level of1/30-31/84MR. TRUMAN. Inflation. The answer to the question, GovernorWallich--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somehow this chart of yours on inflationabroad seems somewhat improbable to me too. If we have that kind ofdecline in the dollar, all these countries are benefitting from a 25percent [decline] in the price of oil--and you still show noimprovement in their consumer price indexes.MR. WALLICH. The dollar price of oil may rise.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, he didn't assume that.MR. TRUMAN. That's right. It is true that when we've donethese kinds of experiments, for the foreign countries there is alarger impact per unit exchange rate change than in the United Stateslargely because of the dollar oil price effect. That suggests, atleast in the forecast, that the pickup in demand is correspondinglyhigher to hold the prices down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you have unemployment rising, Ithought you said.MR. TRUMAN. Well, rather stable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Stable. All right.MR. TRUMAN. On an historical basis unemployment would berising because if you believe, as most people still do, that potentialis rising at something like 3 percent abroad and they don't get thereit should be rising. On the other hand, they had been growing at lessthan that rate in 1983 and in some of the faster-growing countries theunemployment rate has come down. That may reflect different changesin work sharing and that kind of thing going on in the labor market.That's why I hedged my projection about what will be happening onunemployment.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. For our labor force in 1985, as Iremember the chart, you are projecting an increase only a shade morethan 1 percent.MR. ZEISEL. That's about right, if I remember correctly.No, it's about 2 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You have about a 1 percent increasein the participation rate as I read it.MR. ZEISEL. I'm sorry, that's right. We have a 1 percentincrease in participation--about a 1 percent increase in population.MR. PARTEE. That's 2 percent!MR. KEEHN. I have a question on capital expenditures. Maybeit's a question of the scale, but capacity utilization in the perioddoesn't go back to the '79 level yet the capital expenditure lineappears to be going up fairly steeply. Are you pretty confident aboutthat real business fixed investment [projection]?1/30-31/84MR. ZEISEL. Well, we've had a very, very substantialincrease in business fixed investment recently. In fact, it has beenin the phenomenal range and we don't expect that to continue. Wethink that some of the increases that have occurred over the last fewmonths are a surge in one-time activity. But there is a verywidespread, and we think very fundamental, increase in expenditures.And what we have projected is a fairly strong recovery by historicalstandards. The assumption is that a number of factors have operatedto reduce the relative cost of capital--the stock market rise, tax lawchanges for accelerated depreciation, and so on--and apparently havelaid the basis for a considerable recovery in capital outlays. Wehave it moderating through 1985.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I was going to ask a question on the samesubject, as a matter of fact, but with a little different slant,Jerry. The anecdotal evidence from some of our directors, which ofcourse isn't definitive, has been pretty constant in recent months.When I quiz them about the capital spending outlook they say thatthere still are great inhibitions--the high cost of money, inparticular--to spending on long-lived assets. I was wondering whetheryou have any breakdown in the fixed investment data between theequipment side and the plant side. The impression I'm getting, whichmay or may not be accurate, is that a good deal of this surge inspending has been on computer and business equipment and so forthrather than on basic new capacity, which requires additional buildingsand plants. Do you have any breakdown on that series?MR. ZEISEL. Well, we certainly have data on the compositionin broad terms. Over the last couple of quarters, the third andfourth quarters of this past year, producers durable equipment rose byannual rates of 22 percent and 28 percent respectively. During thesame periods the outlays for structures were [up] about 10 percent,which is fairly strong. The outlays were rather concentrated inpublic utilities; commercial activities have not been so strong. Interms of further detail, we have some shipments and orders figuresthat show fairly strong growth in heavy non-electrical machinery,communications equipment and--of all strange things--farmingequipment; but the growth is fairly widely distributed.MR. PRELL. Plant construction is not a whole lot of dollarsin the investment total. We think our forecast is consistent with arate of increase in that kind of spending of maybe 4 to 5 percent overthe forecast horizon, which is not very substantial.MR. BALLES. That's very interesting. The bulk of theincrease is going to be on the so-called equipment side, then?MR. ZEISEL. For producers durable equipment we haveprojected increases in the 12 to 15 percent range for 1984 and in the6 to 8 percent range for 1985.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask you a general question. Iassume that there is no change in the projection of revenues andexpenditures--that there is no new action on the deficit. Is thatcorrect?-10-1/30-31/84MR. KICHLINE. We have some small changes but nothing ofmajor size.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Now, maybe I should be smarter andunderstand this, but what conclusions do you come to about the so-called "crowding out"? What is the impact later in '84 and in '85 onmedium- and long-term interest rates? Would you just take that as agiven coming out of monetary policy?MR. KICHLINE. No. We think it's there now in a variety ofways, one of which is that interest rates tend to be higher than onemight otherwise--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I know that, but that couldchange from the present situation.MR. KICHLINE. Well, as we go on we do not have in thisforecast any growth in housing; it begins to taper off in 1985.Second, we have a slowing in the rate of increase of durable consumerpurchases, which we think are credit sensitive. So, that is slowingand business fixed investment itself is slowing over time, and arelated factor is the massive current account deficit that we have.So in a variety of ways it's sprinkled throughout the projection.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if I remember correctly you haveonly a very modest rise in mortgage rates over the remainder of theprojection period.MR. KICHLINE. That's right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How do you get an assumption that therise will be that modest? Is that a conclusion arrived atindependently or is that taken from Steve [Axilrod] or something?MR. KICHLINE. We think that all of this is integrated; wetry to focus on what interest rates are consistent with a givenmonetary policy. But I must say that I've been humbled over the yearsin forecasting interest rates--other things as well, but interestrates in particular. So, we think it is consistent but I would not beprepared to live or die by this mortgage rate forecast. One of theissues, of course, is whether the pressures build up sufficiently sothat we get far away from the kind of picture we have forecast, whichis one of moderating growth, inflation picking up, and interest ratestending to rise, but we don't hit a point where things really take offor the economy collapses because of pressures. That is one of theissues, it seems to me. It's not so much a near-term issue, but asone looks ahead in this forecast there are things that are out ofwhack--one is the deficit and another is the international side. Andone could easily think of an alternative view in which those pressuresbuild much more substantially and are reflected in events, perhaps notin 1984 but in 1985.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I detected a bit of a struggle in Mr.Prell's explaining how the government is going to be financed and inMr. Truman's explaining how the balance of payments is going to befinanced. But he has the great advantage of a statisticaldiscrepancy.-11-1/30-31/84MR. TRUMAN. Well, Mr. Prell has that too, as a matter offact. To answer Mr. Solomon's question: These forecasts are moreconsistent than they ever have been in the past.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even in 1985 when unemployment getsdown to 7 percent, housing is still relatively stable, businessinvestment is strong, the deficit isn't reduced, and you have anextremely modest rise in interest rates.MR. PRELL. Well, I think Mr. Axilrod in all likelihood willbe saying something, at least implicitly, about velocity behavior interms of our short-term rates. We think the short-term interest ratepicture that we have is consistent with the monetary assumptions andthe GNP pattern we have [forecast]. And the long-term rate picturethat goes with that we also think is consistent. We believe thepieces fit together in a plausible, rational way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think Mr. Forrestal is going to explainit to us.MR. FORRESTAL. I have no statistical variance. I'm justgoing to stay with interest rates for a minute and try to relate thatto the depreciation of the dollar. If I understood you correctly,you're projecting a roughly 17 percent decline in the value of thedollar from mid-1984 on but at the same time you're projecting abudget deficit of about $184 or $185 billion. If you assume thatinterest rates are going to stay in relatively the same position as aresult of the deficit, do I understand correctly that you'reattributing the decline of the dollar almost solely to the tradebalance and current account deficit? Is that analysis correct?MR. TRUMAN. Interest rates do go up a bit, as I mentionedand as Jim mentioned in his assumptions. In some sense, in thegeneral equilibrium nature of this whole forecast, that is associatedwith the decline of the dollar, which helps to push up nominal demandin this period.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, if you assume that the dollar is strongprincipally because of high interest rates and that interest rates aregoing to remain at a high level because of the deficit, then I'm notsure why you're projecting the decline of the dollar except because ofthe current account deficit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's a very good question.MR. GUFFEY. Wishful thinking.MR. TRUMAN. That is one of the reasons I presented the twoalternatives in the bottom part of that chart. One has the dollarcontinuing to go up; the other one is a scenario in which it isfalling out of bed. Our view is that eventually $100 billion currentaccount deficits are going to be generating more in the way of netclaims on the United States and [the question is whether] the rest ofthe world, with safe haven factors and so forth and so on, wouldwillingly want to hold [such claims] at unchanged to say nothing ofrising exchange rates; and that would produce an adjustment [in dollarexchange rates]. In fact, a number of foreign countries--I point toGermany as an example--have too long and to their dismay, I think,-12-1/30-31/84assumed that their currency was always going to rise and, therefore,built into the price projections a kind of inflation bonus.Eventually some portion of that inflation bonus has to be repaid, andI think that's the essence of the story. Whether it will be of thismagnitude--a 17 percent decline--and over this forecast period [isuncertain]. Although we continue to forecast it, I obviously ammodest about its probability, given the [experience of] the last 18months.MR. WALLICH. Well, the current account implications of thatdecline in the dollar come mostly in 1985 and after, so the interestrate implications of that--at least as far as the financing of capitalneeds is concerned--also come at that time, although movements in thesecurity markets of course might make them come at any time.MR. TRUMAN. Everybody has his own technique, but the way Itend to think about it is more to have interest rates coming out ofthe rise in nominal GNP--higher prices and at least for a while higherGNP coming from more exports and lower imports in real terms. Andthat pushes up the interest rates rather than the actual foreign salesof securities, which would tend to bring that pressure forward in timemore than what you're talking about.MR. WALLICH. If throughout 1984 the crowding out goes abouthalf against the balance of payments and the other half againstdomestic investment, that's one reason why interest rates don't seemto have to rise.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Is that Wallich's rule--the ratio isone to one?MR. WALLICH. Well, if you have a current account deficit of$100 billion and a budget deficit of $200 billion--which produces,let's say, $200 billion worth of crowding out--half of it goes againstthe foreign sector, hurting exports and import-competing industries.The other half goes against investment, hurting housing and so forth.MR. PARTEE. That's assuming that the current account wouldbe zero in the absence of the federal deficit. I'm not so sure.MR. TRUMAN. If you look at the structural deficit, GovernorWallich, the change shown on the first chart is about the same size--at least for the calendar year [or the] fiscal year--as the change inthe current account deficit. And in that sense in fact all of it isgoing into the foreign sector.MR. GRAMLEY. Are we supposed to be having our regular goaround now or is that going to be later? If we don't talk now, do weforever hold our peace?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The ground rule is that you can talk aboutthe economy now. If people don't want to talk anymore about theeconomy now, we will have a break.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I have a couple of comments I want tomake on the price forecast. I think there is very considerable dangerthat prices are going to go up more than the staff is forecasting overthe next couple of years, and I think so for several reasons. One is-13-1/30-31/84that I am more optimistic on growth--or pessimistic, as the case maybe. I don't want to chop that one up, but I noted Ted's comment--and[I did so] with approval or otherwise I wouldn't be mentioning it--that when net exports go down as they have recently, one shouldn'tregard that as a sign of weakness in the economy but as a sign ofstrength. It's a consequence of the fact that the domestic economy isgrowing very rapidly. We have a lot of fiscal stimulus and highinterest rates. If you apply that to the fourth quarter and take intoaccount the fact that the rise in inventory investment in the fourthquarter was very small, that more than explains why we had a slowdownin [economic] growth. Indeed, if you take the private domestic finalpurchases--they went up more in the fourth quarter than they did inthe third--my hunch is that we're going to have a stronger economy inthe first half than the staff is forecasting. I think the underlyingdynamics are stronger than the 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent growth rateprojected for the first half. And I think that is going to bebuilding up pressures on prices as time goes on. Second, I think wehave to reckon with the possibility that the turn-up in the laborforce participation rate that the staff is forecasting may or may nothappen. And if it doesn't happen and we have somewhat stronger growthto boot, we're going to have a much bigger drop in the unemploymentrate in the course of 1984. Third, to go back to what Governor Parteewas saying, I don't understand the consistency of the staff forecastin regard to prices. The staff is kind enough to give me all kinds ofdetails when I ask for them and I--MR. CORRIGAN. They are used to it!MR. GRAMLEY. Well, they are very good about that. The fixedweight deflators for private domestic final purchases, excluding foodand energy--and that's about the most trouble-free index you can lookat--goes up 4.4 percent over the four quarters of '83, 5 percent in'84, and 5.6 percent in '85. But if you take out the half point bonusthat Ted has been talking about for the appreciation of the dollar in'83 and take out two-tenths for the depreciation in '84 and eight-tenths in '85--and I think that's the right calculation--you get adeflator that's just flat. It goes nowhere. And it goes nowheredespite the fact that we have both higher food prices and highercompensation per hour. Now, if there have been a few miscalculationson that side that have favored lower prices and if we get more growthand if we get this flat participation rate, the potential is there--I'm not sure it's going to happen, but the potential is there--for aworse inflation outlook. [It could mean] 1-1/2 percentage points ormaybe 2 percentage points by 1985 on the inflation rate, and that'ssomething I think we ought to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask you a question on the businessoutlook. You say final private domestic demands are high and rising.MR. GRAMLEY. Not rising. Well, they rose from the thirdquarter to the fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's say they remain high, orhowever you want to qualify it, and the GNP doesn't rise all that muchbecause imports are going up so rapidly. How long can that last?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, not forever, that's for sure. Somethingis going to happen. But the fact is that a $9 billion drop in net-14-1/30-31/84exports in 1972 dollars at an annual rate is most unlikely to continuein the first half of this year. This would be a lot greaterdeterioration in the trade balance than what the staff is forecasting.And if what happens is that we get a somewhat smaller decline in netexports and a somewhat larger increase in inventories and continuationof fairly strong private domestic financial purchases, we're going toget a growth rate, I think, in the 5 to 6 percent range during thefirst half of this year. And that is going to be trouble for us,particularly if we continue to get slow growth in the labor force.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How big an increase do you have in thisconcept Mr. Gramley is using for the first half of the year?MR. KICHLINE. 5 percent in the first quarter and 4-1/2percent in the second quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was it in the third and fourthquarters of last year?MR. KICHLINE. 5-1/2 percent in the third and 8 percent inthe fourth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The rates are 5-1/2, 8, 5, and 4-1/2percent. You still have a big increase in imports in the first halfof the year; it's magically going to level out in the second half.MR. PARTEE. Well, it could be even larger, it seems to me.As I've said, in addition to consumer demand, which is fueling importsnow, we have the probability of a speed-up in inventory accumulation.It may well be stronger, as Lyle thinks, and that's going to feeddisproportionately into imports. I must say that I sense a certainfragility in the forecast, the same as Lyle does. I'm not so sure Iwould say the first half will be that much stronger, but I think theodds would favor a gradually accelerating price rise, particularly in1985. And with a sharp drop in the value of the dollar--say, perhaps25 percent in the latter part of '84 or early '85--why, we would havemore of a price rise. Because of that, we also would have problemsfinancing the deficit, higher interest rates, and reduced domesticdemand. So, as I see it, the odds are that 1985 will have moreinflation, less real growth, and higher interest rates than the staffis forecasting.MR. BOEHNE. One question we haven't talked about is how muchinflation we're likely to get before this cycle is over. If we'reever going to get back to price stability, we have to keep ratchetingdown the peaks of inflation from cycle to cycle. As I look at this,all expansions come to an end because of some excesses somewhere.We've pointed out a couple--the [budget] deficit and the tradebalance--and there may be others. But it seems to me that the twoexcesses that we have our telescopes on are the kind that are likelyto push up interest rates fairly sharply once they go. And we have arecovery, it seems to me, that is operating near a margin of interestrates that could turn the whole recovery soft fairly easily. We seethat in the mortgage market. I think we see it in automobiles and inthe consumer sector generally and in business equipment. By the endof 1985 this recovery will be three years old and as we get into 1986it will be four years old. The question is: Will the excesses triggera recession before inflation jumps up above the previous peak? And it-15-1/30-31/84seems to me that that's not likely to happen--in other words, thatinflation in this cycle is not likely to accelerate beyond [its peakin] the previous cycle.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because you have the happy prospect ofanother recession!MR. BOEHNE. That's right. Speaking realistically, it seemsthat we have the kind of cycle that will likely run itself out withinthe context of inflation continuing to ratchet down. You can viewthat as good or bad. But if you look at inflation in a cyclicalcontext, inflation is not likely to get away from us in thisparticular cycle.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other general points peoplewant to make now? Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. I think the predicament we have has actuallygotten worse even though the business statistics at the end of 1983 insome sense look a little better. In the near term, and by that I meanthe first half of this year, my forecast is almost identical to thestaff's. The problem is that I'm not sure I believe either one ofthem. The risks continue to be on the side of a stronger economy andmore inflation--not by a lot, but I think that's the direction. Theirony is that an economy that is better in the short run is likely tobe worse in the long run. And what we have been talking about on theinternational side brings that home very forcefully. On the inflationfront, for example--even aside from Governor Partee's point--thestaff's forecast basically assumes that profit margins are exactlyflat. As I detect things out there, I still see a lot of pressure onthe part of businessmen trying to widen those margins in any way theycan. And that's one of the reasons why I just wonder whether the kindof assumptions that historically are reasonable about the implicationsof a declining dollar for the inflation rate are really in theballpark. It seems to me that we may have a situation right now wherethe indirect effects of the exchange rate and the import issue ondomestic inflation are greater than the direct effects. In otherwords, it's not just the question of the price level of an importedgood coming into this country as much as it is the way in which thoseimported goods are affecting the behavior of domestic manufacturers,wholesalers, and retailers in terms of what kinds of pricing theythink they can get away with. So, I'm inclined to think that if thedollar did in fact come off--whether by 17 or 25 percent or whatever--the impact on the domestic price level could be larger than thatcontemplated by Mr. Truman's exercise, even though it's a quitereasonable expectation from an historical perspective.On the whole credit flow question, I see the complication atthis point growing out of the international side and the deficit incombination. That seems to me problematic and then some. I find itdifficult to conceive that we can easily get $45 billion in capitalinflows in 1984. I don't know what we would ever do if we had anegative statistical discrepancy. That's another story. Moregenerally, even if we could get those capital inflows, I have a verydifficult time squaring the circle as it were in terms of the overallcredit flow analysis that Mr. Prell went through in the context of thekind of interest rate outlook that's associated with the staffforecast, absent a reduction in the deficit in 1984. Personally, I-16-1/30-31/84don't think the so-called crowding out issue in the context of thecurrent international situation is an '85 problem; I think it's an '84problem and then some. So, again, while one can feel a little betterlooking at the very recent statistics--as I do and I think we all do--the overall situation that we face has become a little moreproblematic, if anything, from my perspective.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I would like to join those whohave been warning that the interest rate projections may be on the lowside, even with regard to 1984. Upward pressures on rates may findtheir way out even by mid-1984--not in the clash between private andpublic financing, which I think obviously has occurred and will occur,but between financing the international trade deficit and financingthe enormous [budget] deficits. Deficits in 1984 of $189 billion or$195 billion--take a number--will give us an interest rate situation,given these other assumptions in the forecast, that may catch ussooner rather than later.I look at the curves depicted in the charts here on the levelof housing starts and the line in the diagram depicting business fixedinvestment. I can't reconcile that to my expectation of interestrates rising sooner than projected here. The housing curve, Ibelieve, is unrealistic. Housing doesn't reach equilibrium; housingis either rising or falling. With increased interest rates, I don'tthink the level of housing in this projection can be achieved. I'mnot even sure it can be sustained with today's interest rates becausemuch of the first-time home buyer segment has been used up and now wedo not have the strength in trade-up purchases that has been typical.We have mortgage payers unable to handle their financing in partbecause the builder points that kept their interest payments down arerunning out. And, with an increase in interest rates in mid-1984, theadjustable rate mortgages will be adjusting upward. That willincrease the foreclosure rate--a depressing element on the housingmarket.As far as business fixed investment is concerned, I think wesee here that the easy kinds of investments have been made. Businessfirms that did have some cash and could finance themselves to easilymodernize the plant or the office building have done that. In arather remote way it's [comparable] to the first-time home buyer, asthese people attempt to match the hurdle rates that their boards ofdirectors are going to require of them with what they have to pay inthe stock market. I would suggest to you that the broad [stock price]measures have decreased since midyear. We aren't talking aboutfinancing 30 firms whose stocks go into the DOW. We're talking aboutfinancing a thousand firms whose stocks are represented by the broadmeasures of the New York and American [Stock Exchanges] and theNASDAQ; and those broad measures have declined, not increased. Add tothat higher interest rates on raising credit and I think you get aflatter curve than the business fixed investment curve here. So, itseems to me that those are two factors that mitigate against what someof our colleagues have indicated here might be a much strongerrecovery in 1984. I join those who feel that we certainly will have acumulative impact of the various imbalances by 1985. It seems to methat we have a considerable downside risk right now in 1984, and it-17-1/30-31/84arises from the difficulty of financing the enormous mega deficit andthe mega trade balance deficiency.MR. BOEHNE. I would like to piggyback on something that Pressaid. I've been talking to thrift people in the Philadelphia area andthey have been trying to figure out the best way to market thesevariable rate mortgages. I don't know how widespread it is, but afellow was telling me the other day--and I've heard it several times--that the variable rate mortgages will sell with more points up frontand a lower variable rate. I have forgotten the numbers precisely butthis fellow was telling me that they had something like a 10.9 percentrate with 3 points and that wasn't going, so he changed it to 4 pointsand dropped the initial rate to 9.9 percent and they're going likehotcakes. Everybody knows that after a year, with no change ininterest rates, the variable rate is going to pop back up. And ifthat also happens to hit the rising--SPEAKER(?). It's a temporary agreement.MR. BOEHNE. Yes, that's a temporary agreement, but it ismore marketable.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They don't limit the amount of theinterest rate movement each year?MR. BOEHNE. Well, [that varies]. But they certainly canaccommodate a 1- or 2-point change after one year. This came up inthe context of a [discussion with a] large retailer in Philadelphia.That's the same kind of technique that has been used in retailing foryears, but it's an interesting development--that people would ratherhave more points up front knowing that the rate is going to pop up ina year. I don't know how widespread the practice is but these weresome fairly conservative thrift bankers I was talking to, and theywere nearly gleeful with the discovery that they had found thismarketing element. It may very well have a bigger impact than wethink. I believe that was your point, Pres, but I was surprised tofind this.MR. WALLICH. I think the fundamental fact in the outlook isthat we have a $200 billion deficit. Now, we would take back, so tospeak, $100 billion of that by sending the money abroad. That leavesus with $100 billion of net stimulus; and to get a weak economy wereally have to argue that that much stimulus is not adequate to keepthe economy growing. That seems to me like saying that the economy isinherently very recessionary, that the expansion or impulses forinvestment incentives and so on are very small. I really don't findthat plausible. After all, high interest rates and the high currentaccount deficit are the result of the expansion that we're gettingfrom the deficit; they're not independent factors that are cuttinginto the expansion.MR. PARTEE. If I might, I would like to ask Governor Wallichsomething. You have a declining domestic stimulus, don't you? Thatis, using your terms of reference, you have $60 billion of financingabroad and $140 billion stimulus [last] year and in 1984 you have $100billion financing abroad and $100 billion stimulus. Doesn't itdecline, and wouldn't that give you a reduced stimulus?-18-1/30-31/84MR. WALLICH. Well, since the structural component of thedeficit is rising and the cyclical component is falling and by thetime you get to full employment it's all structural, I would think--although I haven't studied this--that in terms of the full employmentbudget deficit we are increasing the stimulus.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a bigger full employment tradedeficit too.MR. PARTEE. Yes, it's hard to do the arithmetic.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It sounds to me that in the scenariothat most of us tend to think is more likely than not--if not in '84at least in '85--of rising interest rates combined with a fallingdollar and rising inflation, that we won't get a tapering off of thecycle but a very quick turnaround. Then 1986 might be a period ofdistinctly negative growth or recession rather than a tapering off.That seems to me more likely, given this set of imbalances we'retalking about basically coming to a head.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. As I look at these projections, Mr. Chairman,I think that the risk is probably on the up side in terms of higherinflation and growth than projected. I think the staff's projectionsare very reasonable. The only point of departure I have is on theinflation number, which I think will be higher. Some of the reasonshave already been stated, so I'll skip over those but one of the majorfactors is the effect of the structural deficit plus the projecteddecline of the dollar. I must say, though, that I have some questionabout whether that really is going to happen in 1984. But one pointthat hasn't been mentioned and that I take into account somewhat isthe monetary stimulus that we had in late '82 through the spring of'83. I realize those numbers have just been revised downward a littlebut, as I read the Bluebook, the numbers indicate a revision upwardfor the last couple of months. So, I think that stimulus is stillworking its way into the economy. For those reasons I think we mightvery well get higher growth and higher inflation than the staffprojects.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think this is the time to have a cup ofcoffee.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod will tell us how to resolvethis.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, at the end of my preparedremarks, I would like to make a few unprepared comments that relate tothe issue President Morris raised. I interpreted him as saying thathe thinks M2 ought to be higher for this GNP and, if anything, myprepared comments go somewhat in the opposite direction, although notnecessarily for this GNP but for interpreting M2. [Statement--seeAppendix.]I would add, Mr. Chairman, partly in response to PresidentMorris' question, that there may be a certain amount of uncertainty-19-1/30-31/84with regard to the velocity of M2. In the second year of theexpansion following the cyclical troughs of 1961, 1970, and 1975 theM2 velocity declined, which would argue that for a 9 percent GNPgrowth M2 ought to grow more like 10 or 11 percent. We have an M2expansion less than the GNP growth [for 1984], though not as much lessas shift adjusted M2 grew in 1983. I think that ought to beinterpreted against the actual behavior of interest rates and ceilingrates in the earlier recoveries of 1961, 1970, and 1975. In thesecond year of the expansion after the 1961 trough the ceiling ratewas raised from 3 to 3-1/2 percent. So, despite some little rise in[market] interest rates continuing on into the second year, the spreadremained favorable to deposits in M2, and money continued to shiftinto those deposits. In 1970, in the second year of expansion theceiling rate remained around 4-1/2 percent but interest rates tendedto edge off in the early part of that second year and not rise verymuch thereafter and the spread again remained favorable and in factbecame more favorable in the first two quarters of the second year.So, again, I think it was the structural reason affecting that.Following the 1975 trough, the second year was a period when interestrates began declining and by the end of that second year during whichthe system continued an expansive policy, market rates fell belowRegulation Q ceiling rates, which again jazzed up M2 and led to a dropin velocity. So, now, with M2 having very little of ceiling rates init and a policy of edging down money growth to restrain priceincreases, we believe that the M2 we have forecast is reasonablyconsistent with those objectives, with a slight caveat--that to exertadditional restraint in a somewhat mechanical sense it ought to be8-1/2 percent or even a point lower.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I see you all have absorbed all that.MR. MORRIS. If I may comment, since I raised the issue of M2ranges and the same thing also applies to M3 ranges: Since 1960, inthe second year of an expansion the rates of growth of both M2 and M3averaged 2-1/2 percentage points higher than the nominal GNP, which isto say velocity declined by 2-1/2 percent. We're showing targets herefor M2 and M3 that are at or below the nominal GNP. Now, I am notsaying that Steve is wrong; he may be right. But if he is right, I'mjust saying that these ranges represent a marked departure from thehistorical [pattern]. This does suggest to me the fundamental issuethat the character of both M1 and M2 have so changed that we cannothave any confidence in our ability to forecast the velocity of eitherone of them. And I would extend that now to M3. I've already seenthe First National Bank of Boston at the end of the year make adecision--in a situation where the holding company capital was prettystrong but the lead bank capital was a little submarginal--to moveloans out to their subsidiary banks to improve the lead bank capitalratio. I think what is likely to happen, if we get into a tight moneymarket and strong loan demand, is that we're going to see a repetitionof what we saw in 1969. The banks are going to start moving the loansoff their books entirely. That will mean they will keep the risk butplant the paper in the market someplace, in which case M3 will nolonger be a sensible indicator for monetary policy. If we reallydon't have a good basis for knowing whether M2 velocity should beminus 1/2 or plus 2-1/2 percent--if the range of uncertainty is thatbig--it raises serious questions in my mind as to whether theseaggregates are sensible tools for targeting monetary policy.-20-1/30-31/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might just interject that if you noticethat phenomenon going on in an important way, you might have a littlecounseling session at those banks about how we might look at theircapital ratios.MR. PARTEE. Frank, those subsidiary banks had to financethat loan purchase didn't they?MR. MORRIS. Well, they had subsidiary banks whose capitalposition was okay.MR. WALLICH. But they have to be consolidated.MR. MORRIS. Well, sure. They have to [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have to take it off the balancesheet.MR. PARTEE. I think Frank's second point was much better:that they will tend to put this out in the market.MR. MORRIS. Yes. Shifting the loans among the subsidiariesdoesn't affect M3. I just pointed that out to note that the processhas already started. The first stage is that they move it to thesubsidiary; the second stage is that they move it out of the bank'sbalance sheet entirely.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And keep the risk. It gives themrecourse on the paper.MR. MORRIS. Yes. That's what they did in '69.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One vote for no targets.MR. GRAMLEY. We're starting off well!MR. PARTEE. Well, that's the same way we started off before.MR. MORRIS. Could I change that to read no M1, M2, or M3targets?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want that debt target?MR. MORRIS. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I tell you: That's very strange.Since you raised that subject, the chart [we saw] earlier indicatesthat past patterns of debt [in relation to GNP] are not beingobserved, rather strikingly, and I wonder what the implications are.I haven't been able to figure it out but the debt aggregate is off thepattern anyway. Who else would like to [comment]?MR. CORRIGAN. Just a question to Steve: Did you make anyallowance in M3 in particular for those net capital flows at thebanks?1/30-31/84MR. AXILROD. Yes. I can't find that piece of paper offhandbut there is an assumption of large capital inflows, on the order of$30 billion, at the banks in '84. That's more than in--MR. CORRIGAN. Basically all in M3?MR. AXILROD. Well, that's the assumption--that what comesthrough the branches so to speak that isn't in CDs issued here would[not] get into M3. It comes in as a liability to a branch. If aforeigner invests directly here into a CD, it will get into M3. Butif it's invested in a Eurodollar abroad and then it comes in as aliability to a branch, it won't get into M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A technical question from Mr. Partee.MR. PARTEE. Let's assume, Steve, that Frank is partly rightand the velocity wants to go [down] rather than [up]. So you wouldhave a situation where M2 is 10 percent relative to the same nominalGNP we're expecting and we have a 9 percent limit on our range. Howdo we go about getting M2 down in the range?MR. AXILROD. You raise interest rates.MR. PARTEE. What if we have elasticity of rate setting bythe institutions? Can't they just meet that--MR. AXILROD. Well, our work suggests that there is someinterest elasticity to M2 demand although less than M1 now. Secondly,of course, it comes out of income. At some point income has toadjust.MR. PARTEE. Well, the GNP will go up less rapidly.MR. MORRIS. But would you really want to raise interestrates if the nominal GNP was coming in at the 9 percent that youforecast?MR. AXILROD. I don't mean to sound editorial but in many ofthose periods when we had this negative velocity you are mentioning--such as in '72 and '76 and '70--the M2 growth you had to get was 12and 13 percent and that was followed by substantial price pressure.Now, whether those upward price pressures came from the M2 with a lagor came from the associated M1 with a lag, we could discuss; but Ithink that's the problem you get into. It isn't so much what you dothis year but what the lagged effects of what you do this year happento be.MR. BOEHNE. Do you find yourself in a somewhat absurdposition of controlling GNP to control M2?SPEAKER(?). Yes, but you end up doing it through interestrates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, we might as well go from one extreme toanother here, from Morris to Balles. I would like to speak to the-22-1/30-31/84desirability of restoring M1 as one of the aggregates we target--possibly going back to the old equal weight we used to have for M1 andM2. I'll be brief about this because my reasons for recommending thishaven't really changed since last fall when I circulated a paper toall of you comparing the performance of M1 and M2. Very briefly, andperhaps over-simplified, the conclusions I drew were that the demandfor M1 has remained surprisingly stable through this recent period offinancial deregulation, whereas the demand for M2 as a matter of facthas become progressively more unstable. It's true, of course, withrespect to M1 that we had this very sharp and unexpected decline--avery surprising decline--in its velocity in '82 and even early '83.In our analysis that decline was not caused by a shift in the demandfunction for M1 but was a direct outcome of the decline in inflationand the corresponding and later decline in interest rates. So we havehad an increase in money demanded because interest rates were down andthe opportunity costs of holding money were lower. I think asignificant piece of evidence that this was not a shift in the demandfunction for money but a move along a curve was that the velocity ofthe [broader] monetary aggregates also declined in 1982. I don'tthink that would have happened if the problem had been solely one ofinstability in the demand function for M1.Another thing that I would like to point out is that thevariability of M1 velocity to which Steve referred indirectly isactually a bit less than the variability of M2 velocity. Our staff,using the figures in Steve's excellent memorandum of January 23,compared the standard deviations of one to another and found that thestandard deviations of the annual growth rates of M1 were actually alittle less than was the case for M2. So it's all well and good andproper to point out, as Steve has done in his usual thorough way, thatthere are residual problems remaining with M1. A good part of it nowconsists of Super NOW accounts that may have some interest elasticity.On the other hand, what are the alternatives? Looking at thealternatives, two things clearly stand out to me. One is that M2really has lost any meaningful relationship to future income. That isto say, M2 in recent years has grown at a steady 8 to 9 percent rate ayear whether we had a strong, booming economy or whether we had a deeprecession. We never could have anticipated either one of those twofrom the growth rates of M2 that preceded it. Though I wouldn't putall my bets on M1 by any means, I do think, given the point that Stevemade about the velocity of M1 now seeming to have turned in an upwarddirection even if moderately, that the sharp inflow of funds intoSuper NOWs has tapered off and we have a fairly stable slow growthrate there. So, I would recommend restoring M1 to about equal weightand I would subscribe further to the point that Steve made that if weare going to restore M1, we probably should consider reducing thewidth of the range to 3 percentage points. That would mean somethinglike 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent, giving it the same midpoint, if you wish,as alternative II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, if Frank Morris is on one end and JohnBalles is on the other, perhaps I can think of little old reasonableme as being right in the middle. I'm probably more bullish on theeconomy than most people here and I'm at least as concerned about theinflationary aspects of what may happen this year and next as othersare. But I don't think there is any need to deviate from the-23-1/30-31/84alternative II targets, which are consistent with the staff'sforecast. If we could get a 9 percent nominal GNP, we would be inreasonably good shape. So if these target ranges are consistent withthat--and I have no strong reason for thinking they're not--that'swhat we ought to start with. In any event, if things work out morealong the lines of a stronger economy and somewhat more pricepressures, it seems to me that growth ranges that are as low as 4percent for M1 or 6-1/2 percent for M2 or 6 percent for M3 give us allthe room for monetary restraint we could possibly want. So, I likealternative II as it stands. I don't want to put more emphasis on M1this year. I think that would be a very, very bad idea in a year inwhich I think we're going to need an awful lot of flexibility formonetary policy. And I think we've had more flexibility since weadopted the broader aggregates as our principal targets in October of1982. I don't deny that we may be getting back to a situation inwhich velocity is following historical patterns, but I don't thinkthat in and of itself is sufficient cause for elevating M1 to theprincipal target. If we get into a situation in which the dollarbegins to fall like a stone and interest rates begin to rise and wefind ourselves thinking we have to be constrained by an M1 target inthe way we were during the period before 1982, I think we're going tobe in big trouble.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I favor giving more weight to M1. I thinkthere is some presumption that it is regaining a stable relationship.Now, with more of it being subject to interest, I think its velocityis likely to rise less than it used to. In other words, instead ofhaving a 3 percent advantage in velocity gains relative to M2 and M3,it might have a 1-1/2 or 2 percent relative advantage. As far as itsinterest elasticity is concerned, I recognize that it is important.It seems to me that that depends on how market oriented NOW and SuperNOW accounts become. If NOWs remain at a fixed rate, then they willbe highly interest elastic because the opportunity costs of holdingNOWs as compared to the cost of market instruments will be important.If there are market oriented rates on M1 predominantly--they all havedifferent components--then I would think that indeed the interestelasticity will diminish and one ends up controlling the aggregate bycontrolling GNP. Nevertheless, that is [done] through interest rates.I think M1 is the one aggregate that has some plausibility of having acausal effect with respect to GNP whereas for M2 and M3 and debt itseems to me the causation runs more from GNP to the aggregate. As forthe choice among these ranges, it may seem inconsistent having saidthat I think the velocity of M1 is likely to increase less than in thepast, nevertheless, I lean in the direction of alternative I. And Iwould prefer widening the range there on the down side so that therange would read 3 to 7 percent. I wouldn't be greatly concerned ifM1 were running on the high side of that range. Also, I hope thatgoing to contemporaneous reserves does not mean that we are going backto some form of immediate automaticity--doing what Lyle Gramleyimplied, where as soon as M1 overshoots we immediately rush after itto capture it. I think the kind of approach that other central banksuse to control the aggregates--bringing them back on track over aperiod of a quarter or two--is feasible and less disruptive. Withthose specifications, I would also say that M2 could possibly bereduced on the lower end; but I feel less strongly about that and1/30-31/84would leave it stand the way it is in alternative I. Thank you, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I would like to jump on theBalles bandwagon and make a plea for greater emphasis on M1 for thefollowing reasons, some of which are perhaps repetitious of thingsthat have been said: the revised money numbers imply that M1 velocityhas been more stable than we previously believed; the Bluebooksuggests that M1 velocity is expected to behave pretty normallythroughout 1984; and the Axilrod memorandum that John Balles referredto also suggests that M1 velocity is expected to behave normally notonly in 1984 but in the future as well. Also, the research that we'velooked at in our bank suggests that M1 demand was not nearly asunstable as perhaps we thought it was and that the relationship to GNPdoes seem to be pretty well established, whereas on the other side itseems to us that M2's relationship with GNP is not all that secure atthe moment. The other factor in my thinking is that we did say in ourrecent directives that we would place more weight on M1 as soon asvelocity assumed a more predictable pattern and, as I have indicated,I think that has happened. Also, given that the implementation of CRRin a couple of days was for the purpose of more efficientlycontrolling M1, I ask the rhetorical question, I guess: Hasn't thetime arrived--now rather than later--to place more weight on M1?Having said that, I turn to the alternatives in the Bluebookand what I would prefer. First, let me say that as I look at settinglong-range targets, I think that we are probably looking at objectivesof price stability, some credibility for the Federal Reserve--that is,setting targets that are obtainable and not out of reach and that wedon't change all the time--and thirdly, I guess, a gradual decline ofthe monetary targets over time. With those objectives in mind, I comeout pretty close to alternative II, although because of what I saidabout M1 I would be more inclined to reduce the upper end of the M1range to 7-1/2 percent and raise the lower end to 4-1/2 percent, thusmaking the range 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent. I'm not as concerned aboutM2 but I would keep it in mind for reasons stated in the Bluebook andI would move the range for M2 to 6 to 9 percent rather than 6-1/2 to9-1/2 percent. But I think alternative II is consistent with thestaff's projections and where we ought to be going as the Committee.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just interject: Beauty may be inthe eye of the beholder, but I don't see any normality about thevelocity of M1 ex post. We have had some increases--much less thanthe normal cyclical increases and well delayed in the cycle. Now,this may all be consistent with a presumption that M1 may be gettingmore normal in the future but you can't prove it by what has happened,I think, through the fourth quarter. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do those who are saying that M1should be reinstated as a target mean by that that we should return tothe automatic feedback on the nonborrowed reserve path that we hadbefore, with all the volatility in the short-run [interest rate]movements? Or do we get to the Henry Wallich view--and I want to askHenry what he means by this in practice or whether it is justsymbolism. Since you said you're opposed to that kind of automaticitybut you want to give more importance to M1, by that do you mean we-25-1/30-31/84should target it rather than have it as a monitoring range for thefourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter period? And if so, what does thatreally mean then?MR. WALLICH. I meant to say that if we're driven off path,we shouldn't rush after it by sharp changes in the volume of borrowingand, therefore the funds rate, in order to bring it back on track butwe should do it gradually the way we did in a way early last year.Interest rates were allowed to go up 1 percent maybe and thatcontributed to bringing M1 back on track and not overshooting. Idon't know how influential this move in interest rates was, but itseems to me that that was about the right way of managing M1.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, if I understand you, Henry, youwould continue with intermeeting directives that are written in termsof more or less restraint rather than returning to the language of theearlier intermeeting directives?MR. WALLICH. I would be reconciled to that. Of course, thatreally means funds rate management. It's what we did before 1979. Wewould have a little more flexibility and we wouldn't intervene in thesecurities market in order to peg, or almost peg, the funds rate orhold it between narrow limits. We would intervene in order to supplyor drain reserves regardless of whether the rate is at a particularpoint. And it seems to me that that is a pretty good form ofmanagement provided it is guided by looking at M1. And if M1 getsaway from us continuously and for a long period of time, then it seemsclear that the interest rate and the borrowing level that weestablished weren't the right ones.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, of course, I have much lessdifficulty with that approach because what you're really saying isthat we allow significant movements in M1 to influence our managementof the fed funds rate gradually over a period of time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Manage our reserve position.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, in managing our reserveposition we're guided by the fed funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who is?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It shows the accuracy of our reservecalculations, right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Seldom.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Anyway, on the alternatives, eventhough alternative II strikes me as acceptable, I think there is somecase for reducing M2 to 6 to 9 percent rather than 6-1/2 to 9-1/2percent. But that's probably a quibble. At first, I was in favor ofmoving the M1 monitoring range to 4 to 7 percent, but I think thatdetracts from the de-emphasis that I, like Lyle Gramley, continue toprefer. So, I would stick with alternative II with the suggestionthat M2 be cut 1/2 point both on the top and bottom.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.-26-1/30-31/84MR. CORRIGAN. In general, I think the case for trying topreserve as much flexibility as we can in 1984 is overwhelming.Therefore, regardless of what we do with the targets themselves, Ihope that we as a Committee would be even more willing to look throughthem to the GNP, the inflation rate, exchange rates, and so on, eventhough we probably don't want to do that in any more direct waypublicly. On the question of M1 as a target or a monitoring range,I'd want to keep it as a monitoring range. Look at the revisions.Forget about velocity, just look at the numbers themselves. Steve, ifI read the appendix right, the growth rate for the second half of theyear was revised up from 5-1/2 percent by 1-1/2 percentage points. Infive of the last six months I think the revisions have raised themonthly growth rate in M1 by 3 percentage points or more. I just havea great deal of trouble hanging my hat on a statistical series withthose kinds of properties, particularly since it's my hunch that atleast for the first half of 1984, M1 is going to be more noisy becauseof contemporaneous reserve accounting and the [trickiness] involved,if nothing else, in applying seasonal factors for weeks that end onMonday when they used to end on Wednesday.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Is it seasonal or is it revision dueto the benchmark mostly?MR. CORRIGAN. The ones I'm talking about here are acombination of benchmarks and seasonals, but most of the changes comefrom seasonals. But when we go into 1984, looking prospectively withCRR, I think it's going to be a noisier series anyway. In addition tothat, seasonal factors are going to have to be different in naturebecause they reflect a week that ends on a different day. So, I wouldkeep M1 as a monitoring range. Generally, I'd be comfortable with thealternative II specifications, although I do have a preference evenwith M1 as a monitoring range for going to 4 to 7 percent or 3 to 7percent--it wouldn't matter to me either way--just because I think thelower range might give us a little more flexibility in the event wewere faced with a situation in which we thought we had to firm up abit. So, I could go with alternative II for M2, M3, and debt. AndI'd favor alternative I for M1 and would keep M1 in a monitoringstatus for at least the foreseeable future.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. Well, in line with the long-run plan of reducingranges over time, I could go along with either alternative I oralternative II. If alternative I had the kind of flavor that Henrytalked about--or really anything that goes along with more or less a 6percent path for M1--I would find that satisfactory. I suppose thatstates my position in one sense on M1: I'd like to raise M1 inimportance for reasons that have already been stated. I'd take itseriously and I'd particularly take long-run nominal GNP seriously.But on the way to taking M1 seriously, I'd stop short of any kind ofautomaticity. That approach has been outlined by several people. Myreasons are very much in line with the reasons that Jerry justmentioned and that Lyle mentioned earlier. This is a time when weneed a great deal of flexibility in how we interpret [the aggregates]and how we interpret what is happening in the economy. The economicforecast we've just listened to is based on some very strongassumptions. And the economy is very sensitive to those assumptions,not the least of which are the velocity assumption and all the-27-1/30-31/84international assumptions and the assumptions on the deficit as well.So, I would argue for alternative I or II, with M1 moved up inimportance but, at least within the Committee, for maintaining ourflexibility as we might be dealing with any of a wide variety ofsituations that we haven't yet been able to forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like first of allto ask a question, perhaps directed at Steve. I notice that yourseasonal adjustments and benchmark revisions bring the growth rate ofM1 for the last 6 months of 1983 to 7.2 percent. But I also note thatusing the experimental model that you have been tracking over the pastyear would drop M1 growth from 5.5 percent to 5.3 percent.MR. AXILROD. We haven't rerun the experimental model yet, soI'm not sure what that will show. It is being checked.MR. GUFFEY. Well, my point is that there's some uncertaintyas to the seasonals with respect to our confidence level that M1 grewfrom the base period at 7.2 percent. Would that be a correctstatement?MR. AXILROD. Yes, except with a caveat: that I don't knowwhat the experimental model will show when that is rerun. We simplyhaven't had the time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The experimental model would show a littlemore rapid growth rate, if the seasonals did not change, because ofthe benchmark I suppose.MR. AXILROD. Yes, the benchmark itself does some raising--MR. PARTEE. Well, it would, certainly.MR. GUFFEY. By 1/2 percent or so.MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. GUFFEY. My only point in asking is that I'm uncertainwhat the growth rate of M1 has been over the last 6 months, which onlyadds to the concerns that I have. There are lots of uncertainties,not the least of which is the strength in the economy that we mayexperience in the first half of 1984 and through the year. And thatis coupled with concern about the implementation of CRR and what willcome about this week and for the period ahead. I would just note inthat regard that the last real big bust that we had in the moneysupply numbers was at a time when Manufacturers Hanover chose tochange its reserve accounting computer program. We missed by a verylarge amount and it took a while to figure out what caused it. Now wehave some 10,000 banks or so that are going to be dealing with CRR.Having said all that, I want to climb on the band wagon orthe wagon that Lyle is leading to say that flexibility is perhaps themost important aspect of policy in the next 6 months as far as I'mconcerned. As a result, I would not elevate M1 to a target butrather would maintain it as a monitoring range. With regard to thealternatives, I would select alternative II in the Bluebook with the-28-1/30-31/84modification of moving the M2 range down another 1/2 point to a 6 to 9percent range. And if we maintained M1 as a monitoring range ratherthan a target, I would not object to seeing the M1 range moved downanother 1/2 point to 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent, which is about half-waybetween the alternative I and II ranges for that particular aggregate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think there's a good bit to what Frank said.I have a lot of doubts about the aggregates. But probably myMidwestern upbringing leads me to where Lyle is, somewhere in themiddle. I think we do need the targets, but I would put a great dealof emphasis on the need for judgment in the use of these targets. AndI would judge them in the context of what happens to the real sectorand credit conditions. I think there is a need for flexibility bothbecause of the lack of dependability of the aggregates and also theuncertainties in the economy. As for M1, I would keep it as amonitoring range. There's probably some case for giving it a littlemore weight within a monitoring status; there's some evidence that itis beginning at least to move in a direction of behaving itself alittle better. But I think the evidence is far from conclusive thatit has. I could live either with keeping [its weight] about where itwas last year or moving it up a little within a monitoring status, butI don't think there's a case for giving it equal status. Maybe movingit from double probation to single probation might be a good way to[describe it]. I would go with alternative II in the long-rangealternatives. The goal for monetary policy [over the] next year oughtto be keeping the recovery going. I think the recovery is too youngto abort within the context of making cyclical progress againstinflation. And, that being my objective, I would not chop off a pointor two at the tops of any of these ranges. It seems to me that we mayvery well need that room at the top and I think we have plenty of roomat the bottom. So, I would keep it as it is in alternative II in theBluebook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm a little confused bythe financial legerdemain of these benchmark and seasonal revisions.But, as I look at them, it appears to me that we have more growth inmoney than we [thought we] had before but we still have a ratherprecipitous decline in the second half of last year from the firsthalf--from 12 percent to 7 percent. And that concerns me in terms ofthe near-term outlook for the economy. I think we have enoughmomentum to carry us through the first quarter, but we could verylikely see some leveling temporarily in the second quarter.Therefore, I would want to see moderate growth in money for the yearas a whole. I think the time clearly has come to reinstate theprimacy of M1 in our policy directives since it is really the onlything we control and since it has the demonstrated relationship topredicting the economy. I think that CRR coming along gives us agolden opportunity to improve our control over M1. While obviouslythere's a transitional period to go through, we ought to use this newtool as soon as possible and be willing to see the funds ratefluctuate if that's necessary to control the growth rate of money--which is really the important thing to do. We have made a major moveon inflation and it has been at the expense of great pain and misery;and it would be a terrible disaster if we missed the opportunity now-29-1/30-31/84to try to continue that improvement. And I think the way to continuethat improvement is to tighten the ranges that we apply to themonetary aggregates, particularly M1, and to reduce monetary growth.Therefore, I would be in favor of a 4 to 7 percent range andapproximately 6 percent growth in money, which I believe is somewherebetween alternative II and alternative III.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Alternative II and alternative III?MR. PARTEE. Are you talking about the long run?MR. ROBERTS. Alternatives B and C, I'm sorry.MR. PARTEE. You're talking about the short run.MR. RICE. You mean alternatives I and II.MR. BLACK. You're looking at the short-run [alternatives],Ted.MR. RICE. I know he is, but he has been talking about themoney supply.MR. PARTEE. I think you meant between I and II.MR. ROBERTS. Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I want to agree with Lyle and Henry, ifthat's possible. In agreement with Lyle, I think that a 9 percentnominal GNP increase for the year would be about right, and I break itdown roughly as half price and half real. If it runs substantiallyabove that in either real or price or both, it ought to be stepped on;and if it runs substantially below that, it ought to be given a littlecare and feeding. So the question is: What aggregates would beconsistent with that kind of an economic performance? Now, I want toagree with Henry in the sense that I do believe that M1 has had apretty reasonable record recently and I can't see anything superiorabout M2. So, I think M1 should be reestablished as one of ourtargets but not given primacy. I wouldn't agree with Ted on that, butI'd have it as one of our targets. But we ought to avoid theautomaticity that we used from the fourth quarter of '79 to some timein '82. I think that experience indicated that, because of the lagsin adjustments in the demand for money and changes in conditions, wereally did overshoot on the up side and the down side in thatexperiment. We need to treat it more gently, along the lines thatTony was talking about [rather than] along the lines that we did in1979. So, I would put it back very much as it has been done in thealternative directive language the staff proposed.Now, what targets? I don't think we really have a clear viewas to what kind of velocity performance to expect in M1 in the comingperiod. I'm inclined to agree with Henry that it probably will beless of a rise than in the past because of the inclusion of Super NOWsin that category. So I would be reluctant to see us narrow that rangeof 4 to 8 percent that we have in alternative II. Chances are thatgrowth for the year probably will come in at 6 or 6-1/2 percent, if-30-1/30-31/84what I expect to occur in velocity does occur. But there's just toomuch risk that velocity won't show that much strength as the year goeson. I wouldn't reduce the M2 range from 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percentbecause I'm somewhat sensitive to Frank's comment that velocity maynot go down for M2 in the year to come. Now, it may be that it was astatistical error that led us to adopt 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent before;but having made that statistical error publicly, and having had itaccepted, I see no reason not to take the benefit of it and leave itas we did when we talked about ranges for this period initially lastJuly. It gives us just a little more room. For M3 I think 6 to 9percent is probably okay because in addition to M3 financing therewill be borrowing abroad that will give us a little more lift in totalinstitutional credit than the 6 to 9 percent seems to imply. So, Iwould urge that we reestablish M1 as a co-equal in targeting; that wethink in terms of supporting something like a 9 percent nominal GNPincrease fourth quarter to fourth quarter; and that we use the rangesspecified on page 5 for alternative II as an indication of what wethink will be consistent with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I would agree pretty much with Lyle and Tony,and with some exceptions with Henry and Chuck. We really should giveourselves--as has been said many times--as much flexibility aspossible. One of my reasons is that I think the international sceneis not going to be like any of the alternative [scenarios] that havebeen presented. And we will need everything we can have in order tocope with that because I don't think we know what is going to happenout there and what the interrelationships are going to be. I woulddisagree with Chuck and Henry in that I don't think M1 should beelevated at all. I think M1 is an indication that we have found thewrong interest rates. I feel very strongly that the relationship withmonetary policy to gross national product is through the interestrates and not through the Ms and that any change in the rate of growthof the Ms is an indication that we found the wrong interest rate.There are other indications that we found the wrong interest rate aswell: whether inflation is going too fast, or business fixedinvestment is going through the roof, or inventories are out of whack,or a lot of other things. So, I tend to look through the Ms to whatis going on in the world out there rather than at the rate of growth.I do not discount them entirely but I give them a fairly low [weight]as they are only one of many indicators of what is happening. I wouldstate that we need to keep [an approach] where we can change interestrates when we think it's necessary. I don't want to go back topinpointing them. I would follow the procedures that we have used inthe last year, moving them gradually in response to changes ineconomic developments.Given that background, I come down for alternative II. Ithink that we want to continue the recovery. We need to figure out aswe move into the year what the appropriate rates are to do thatwithout choking it off. And this seems to me to give us a lot offlexibility. Also, I would adopt the attitude that if it goes wrong,I'm willing to change the ranges. I just don't think the ranges areall that important that they should restrict us as a corset would tosome dictate of policy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.-31-1/30-31/84MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, initially I was inclined to supportgiving more weight to M1 as a nod to the tendency of its velocity tomove toward normality. But I was talked out of it pretty much bySteve and by Lyle. Steve reminded me, although he shouldn't have hadto do that, that if interest rates turn out to be significantlydifferent from the outlook for them at the moment, we really don'tknow what will happen to the NOWs and Super NOWs. Therefore, thebehavior of M1 and its velocity are much more unreliable than I thinkwe should accept. Given the need to keep the aggregates within ourstated ranges, I would not want to give more weight to M1 in the senseof putting it on an equal plane with M2 and M3. I think we shouldwait a little longer and have more observations or indications of howit's really going to behave before we rehabilitate it and give itequal weight. So, I would keep M1 as a monitoring variable andmonitor its performance rather than rehabilitate it as a target.I also would support alternative II for the reasons that weestablished those ranges initially. Alternative II does allow forsome reduction in the target ranges in the direction of pricestability. Also, it seems to me that alternative II provides the bestchance of maintaining market conditions pretty much as they are now.Alternatives I and III would risk significant changes in interestrates and I would not like to see that happen over the foreseeablefuture. I think the best chance for maintaining the recovery and asteady expansion is to maintain steady money market conditions at thepresent time. I would, however, reduce the range for M2 from the6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent [shown under alternative II] to 6 to 9 percent,mainly because it would represent an effective 1/2 point reduction,which it does not now. And that would make it more consistent withthe reductions in the ranges of the other aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. It seems to me that one message that comesrather clearly from our discussion is that we have the usualdifficulties of forecasting, projecting, and tracking what are in somecases new relationships between and among variables here and that wehave an even wider range of probable outcomes around any kind offorecast assumptions this time than is typical. Add to that thedifficulty of looking ahead at the interaction among unknownrelationships themselves and we're really in terra incognita here. Wereally don't know when it comes to the elasticity of some componentsof M1 what the new market situation will be, given changes in exchangerates and given changes in interest rates. We don't know what sort ofimpact the money fund competitors and the thrift institutioncompetitors will have. That compounds to me the uncertainties of theelasticities. In such a situation, of course, we are subject to thedisequilibrium impact of shocks. The Argentines haven't come to thetable yet; the Brazilians can come back with demands for concessions;and some kind of disturbance could arise from international creditshaving to be written down over some period of time. Translate thatinto what might be required in terms of domestic lending from write-downs of that sort. I only mention this to indicate that we need theflexibility that the Volcker standard would give us. Therefore, Iargue for utilizing the bit of additional knowledge we seem to havewith regard to velocities in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony on averbal basis rather than restoring M1 to the pantheon. I don'tbelieve the markets have ever given up M1. As far as the markets are-32-1/30-31/84concerned, I think they project M1 into our targeting. I'm not surethere has ever been very much of a belief in our monitoring it. If weput it back on Olympus, the market will say that is the FederalReserve's target; the Federal Reserve has no others.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If it's put on a co-equal basis, itwill become primary.MR. MARTIN. If it's co-equal, I think they will read that asprimary, Tony. I would stress it a bit more in testimony and in otherpresentations to the public and that will in effect make it co-equal.I think one must be extremely careful with regard to the handling ofM1 for another reason and that is that we are as an organization,after all, a creature of Congress. The Congressional consideration ofthe monetary aggregates has been one of a heightened degree ofskepticism. Therefore, if we aren't sure, why should we subjectourselves to the possible pressure to go to some other kind of perhapsunreachable target such as the unemployment rate? With regard to thealternatives, I would join the majority here with regard toalternative II. I'd leave [the M1 range at] 4 to 8 percent, where itis. My druthers would be to raise it to 4 to 9 percent, but 4 to 8percent is a signal to the world that we are still aiming towardlonger-range disinflation, whereas 4 to 9 percent might give adifferent signal. I would leave [the M2 range at] 6-1/2 to 9-1/2percent, right where it is, for reasons of the Volcker standard. I'dlike to have all the flexibility we can get there, particularly whenwe still have a good many unknowns. As I mentioned before, it is thepossibility of shocks and unknowns that troubles me about changingthat. So, I vote for alternative II as is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] 17 good men and 2 [good]women. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, if there's any word that's consistent inall of our comments it is the word "flexibility." I concur that weare at a point where we need a maximum amount of flexibility and thatwe ought to preserve our options as long as we can. I might do it abit differently: I would raise M1 from a monitoring status, and Iwould rather deemphasize M2 and M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Make them all monitoring ranges? Where isMr. Morris?MR. KEEHN. That is a way of saying that I would prefer the[Bluebook] alternative for the directive that accomplishes that butwith softer language. We can change the words to shift the emphasisin a way that I would suggest. It just seems to me that if we'reworking with three [variables] we have more options and moreflexibility than if we're working with two. But having said that, Ithink we certainly are in a period and will continue to be in a periodwhere we're going to want to look through all of this to theunderlying economy and to use the flexibility that I hope we will beable to accomplish by choosing this particular alternative. Withregard to the specifics, I'd be in favor of alternative II. I'dprefer the broader range, the 4 to 8 percent range, [for M1]. Again,I think it's consistent with a higher level of flexibility. The 6-1/2to 9-1/2 percent range for M2 is reasonable, but I would be in favor-33-1/30-31/84of using M1 to a higher degree than we have, and I'd be in favor ofalternative II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, a while ago Chuck said that hethought he agreed with Henry and Lyle; I might go even further and saythat I think I agree with parts of what even more people than thathave said. I started off this morning thinking the staff was prettynearly right on real GNP and the unemployment rate, but then I joinedLyle and his cohorts when I concluded that inflation probably will bebuilding over the 1984 period as a result of the usual cost/pricepressures we get in an upswing and also as a result of the delayedimpact of the large growth in the money supply that we had earlier.That gets to the question--if indeed that's right about what is goingto happen--as to the best way to finance that. I think we have to beconcerned about the risk that Ted Roberts outlined--that we might infact have slowed the aggregates down too fast. But I don't believewe've captured all the seasonal factors in that yet, Ted. I thinkmoney market mutual funds and MMDAs were used to take care ofChristmas payments instead of demand deposits, and since the buildupof demand deposits that we ordinarily had before Christmas didn'thappen we took it out [in the seasonally adjusted numbers]. I thinkwe probably will find out later that that was still understated,despite the upward revisions.Also, I think we ought to be concerned about what Lyle saidabout inflationary pressures and the economy looking pretty strong. Ithink both possibilities are risks for us. So, I would go withalternative I, which I think is broad enough to take care of both ofthose risks. I like the idea of restoring this balanced proviso inthe directive. Since we're not sure which way the aggregates willbehave, we ought to be prepared to act if they go one way just as weshould be prepared to act if they go another way. And I like Arabicalternative 2 [in the Bluebook] for the long-run portion of thedirective, which would restore more emphasis on Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would also put more emphasis onM1, particularly if it were used as Governor Wallich described how hewould do that. All of the uncertainties that we have in both theforeign and the domestic situations lead me to fall back on at leastwhat I feel fairly certain about, and that's what the long-runobjective should be: price stability. In looking at the variousalternatives, alternative I as prescribed in the Bluebook is at leastto me more consistent with that than the other two. And I find therationale used in the Bluebook for explaining alternative I veryappealing. From the standpoint of flexibility and judgment, Istrongly favor that. I'd favor it even more if it were solely mine!But given the fact that it isn't, it does seem to me that historyshows that this Committee has exercised flexibility and judgment ascircumstances dictate, so I don't have a great deal of concern that wewouldn't. So, in this uncertain world let's stay with what we've saidour primary objective is and that is price stability over time. Andif things don't work out under alternative I, we'll do something else.-34-1/30-31/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. When you say we exercised judgment,are you referring to good judgment or bad judgment?MR. BOYKIN. I think it has been pretty darn good.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure we have ever said clearly asa Committee that our objective is price stability.MR. BOYKIN. No.MR. BLACK. We split evenly on that and you didn't vote, Mr.Chairman.MR. BOYKIN. What I was saying is that as far as I'mconcerned it is the objective.MR. PARTEE. We don't want to clash with Humphrey-Hawkins onthis.MR. WALLICH. Well, I think we can say that price stabilityis becoming the orphan of this expansion. We're having a lovelyexpansion if nothing sensational happens to the dollar. But inflationcontinues to mount. And the suspicions around this table are that itis going to go up more than projected. That is why I think we oughtto lean a little on the side of price stability, recognizing thatwe're not going to get there, of course.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mind leaning on the side of pricestability but I raise my eyebrows a little at your earlier statementwhen inflation has done better than we projected.MR. WALLICH. Well, I mean from here on out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a projection. Do you want to addanything to your earlier comments, Mr. Morris?MR. MORRIS. I thought they were quite comprehensive!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In their way they were, but a littleconfused--MS. TEETERS. If you had to pick an alternative, which wouldit be, Frank?MR. GRAMLEY. None of the above!MR. MORRIS. When we talk about the objective of theCommittee to move toward price stability, I think the concept of howwe do that is important. It seems to me that our objective in thisphase of the economic expansion should be to keep the inflation ratefrom going up above the 4 to 5 percent range, not to try to deceleratethe inflation during an economic expansion because I just don't thinkthat's a reasonable objective. But if we can keep it within a 4 to 5percent range during this expansion, when we come out of the nextrecession it ought to be in the 2 to 3 percent range. I think that'show we're going to get inflation down. We're deluding ourselves if wethink that we can so manage monetary policy that we can have both anexpanding economy and a decelerating inflation rate. I don't think in-35-1/30-31/84history, at least in the American economic history with which I'mfamiliar, that that has ever happened.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 1920.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Farm prices in the late '20s.MR. MORRIS. Farm prices, but not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. OPEC is going to have to play that rolefor us. Well, we have a variety of comments. I haven't noticedanybody coming out for alternative III, so that narrows the options.I think we ought to return in the morning and see whether we candispose of this after mulling on these comments. We are scheduled toreconvene at 9:00 in the morning?MR. BERNARD. 9:00 a.m.[Meeting recessed]-36-1/30-31/84January 31, 1984--Morning Session(Executive Session)CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I tried to draft a somewhat differentdirective, which is being typed. I would judge that the consensus,when we get down to the language, is to give a little more weight toM1 but not full weight. I think everybody is groping for somecombination of flexibility and discipline. Those two things are hardto combine. We can combine them in an individual's mind, but it's alittle harder to combine them in a directive. But that seems to bethe recurrent theme I heard yesterday.MR. RICE. Everybody is for flexibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And everybody is for discipline.MR. WALLICH. If you get very flexible, somebody will comeand push you.MR. MARTIN. Not if you have a chance.MR. BLACK. Not if you have flexible discipline. They can'tpush you but so far.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In terms of numbers, there clearly is alot of support for just staying about where we were tentatively [inJuly]. If we wanted to make a little gesture, which is all we aretalking about in any of these minor deviations that most people aresuggesting, nobody suggested anything more liberal than alternative IIbut some people said generally they would like one way or another tobe a little tighter for either M1 or [M2]. There was not any greatconsensus for either one of those, but if you added together all thepeople who thought there should be a little reduction in one or theother, there was some sentiment [in that direction]. In my mind itcomes down to taking alternative II to start with. Do we want toreduce the range for either M1 or M2 slightly? It might be going toofar, judging from what people said, to reduce both of them. I guesswe're talking about a 1/2 point reduction for either of them. Thereis an argument to reduce M2 if you believe in all the technicalanalysis.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Psychologically, it makes more senseif we're going to cut 1/2 point to do it on M2 and not M1. First ofall, M2 still would be getting greater emphasis than M1 even if we[reinstate some] emphasis on M1. Secondly, if we start using rangeslike 4 to 7-1/2 percent, that implies a precision that is [unwarrantedfor] M1. If we do want to make a tightening gesture, it seems to methat the logic is for making it on M2.MR. MARTIN. I would certainly support that. After all, weare talking about 4 to 8 percent [for M1 for 1984] versus 5 to 9percent [for 1983]. Though it might be considered a gesture, we'vealready made a full percentage point [reduction], which may be agesture and a half, versus 1/2 point in the [M2 range to] 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent.MR. WALLICH. Well, I'd like you to look at chart 3 [in theBluebook]. It doesn't say so, but in retrospect it was not a happy-37-1/30-31/84move, I think, from the earlier 4 to 8 percent range to the 5 to 9percent. It proved unnecessary. We're in either range now, and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you mean that we're in eitherrange?MR. WALLICH. I'm looking at the M1 chart. If you draw a 4to 8 percent range in there--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the last year?MR. BLACK. For the last half of last year; I think it's inchart 3.MR. WALLICH. [M1] is in there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what you mean. That 4 to 8percent was a tentative range we put down [last July].MR. PARTEE. He's taking it all the way back.MR. WALLICH. Well, it's also where we came from. We had 4to 8 percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we never would have been within that 4to 8 percent range last year, if that's what you mean.MR. BLACK. I think he meant just for the last half of theyear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The 4 to 8 percent was for the whole yearlast year and we were way above it.MS. HORN. Rebased 4 to 8.MR. BLACK. A rebased 4 to 8 percent is what he's talkingabout instead of rebasing to 5 to 9 percent, I believe, Mr. Chairman.MR. WALLICH. We rebased at that time and I took the samebase here. But I don't know that it would come out differently if wewent back to the fourth quarter of 1982.MS. TEETERS. If you go back to the fourth quarter, M1 growthwas 10 percent.MR. WALLICH. Yes, well, that's right.MS. TEETERS. I have a preference for whole numbers. If wejust knock off the halves on the M2 range, it looks like we're notbeing quite so precise. That's much better than saying we're going toget to a half point--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One has to concede it's a round number.MR. BLACK. It looks as if it's a mysterious act orsomething.-38-1/30-31/84MR. RICE. Well, I would prefer to see [any reduction] comeout of M2 than M1.MR. ROBERTS. I'd like to see us tighten the range tosomething like 4 to 7 percent in consideration of the inauguration ofCRR. But I could live with 4 to 8 percent because I think a target of6 percent is in the right direction, and that's in the middle of that[latter range].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, do we have somewhat of a consensusto have the ranges at 4 to 8 percent, 6 to 9 percent, 6 to 9 percent,and I guess 8 to 11 percent [for debt]? I might point out that itbothers me analytically, but I don't know what to do about it, thatcredit has been growing faster than the GNP in recent years and wejust say that's fine and we will continue to have ranges that permitit to grow faster than the GNP. I don't know what the significance ofall that is, but I just note it.MR. WALLICH. It violates Ben Friedman's law.SPEAKER(?). Yes, but if you compete--MR. MORRIS. That's only if you're looking upon it as apossible range. If you're looking upon the debt target as themidpoint--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's a weak credit [measure except]for mergers and acquisitions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, perhaps it would come close to themidpoint, but the staff projections show that its growth will go up.They may be right or wrong. They over-estimated last year, but thecurrent projection--MR. MORRIS. Well, the debt range could be cut because Ithink 11 percent is too much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I say. But the staffhas a projection of 10-1/2 percent, if I recall correctly, and that[11 percent] is not much above what they have.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I wasn't being entirely facetious.Just in this proposed Texaco takeover of Getty there was $8 billion ofbank credit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's all the repayment of equity, whichdoesn't appear in the debt figures.MR. MARTIN. Well, some of that financing is paid back[unintelligible]; if it replaces equity, obviously it isn't.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did debt actually increase by in '83?MR. AXILROD. Debt was up 10-1/2 percent last year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was the nominal GNP?SPEAKER(?). 10.4 percent.-39-1/30-31/84MR. KICHLINE. 10-1/2 percent.MR. AXILROD. They both increased exactly the same.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, last year we anticipated--I rememberthis discussion--that debt would increase faster than GNP. It didnot. We also are anticipating that it will increase faster than GNPthis year, rightly or wrongly.MR. MORRIS. The normal relationship is that it shouldincrease about 1 percent faster than GNP in the second year ofexpansion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we lower it, we violate the roundnumber.MR. GRAMLEY. I don't think we gain anything by lowering it.Nobody's expectations are going to be markedly altered if we leave itwhere it is or lower it. So why not just leave it?MR. MORRIS. The virtue of leaving it is that we would havesomething to reduce in the future.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does 4 to 8 percent, 6 to 9 percent,6 to 9 percent, and 8 to 11 percent capture where we want to be? Thismay or may not be reflected in what we say in the language, but we arethinking very roughly of M1 somewhere around the middle [of itsrange]. I say all this with a question mark. What the staff assumesfor M2 and M3 is 8 percent and I think their projection for credit isabout 10 percent or so.MR. PARTEE. I think we're rather tight on M2, so we will goover on that one.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me state it this way. Inthinking of testimony I don't want to say we expect to be at the topbut if asked why the range wasn't higher I'd say we expect probably tobe in the upper half of the range.MR. PARTEE. Yes, for sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Someplace between 7-1/2 to 9 percent iswhat we expect for M2 and M3 and very tentatively around the middle ofthe range for M1, but subject to its own [unintelligible]. Well, wehave to wait until we get some text to look at. Let me see where thetyping stands on the text and have it run through a Xerox machine.MR. MARTIN. On page [15 of the Bluebook], in paragraph (b),is it appropriate to use language that might put a little more weighton M1 at this stage, Mr. Chairman, or would you rather--?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to defer that.MR. MARTIN. Until we get the full text?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know that there's anything muchthe matter with trying to make it a little fuzzier, frankly, as toprecisely what weight [we are placing on M1]. It's clearly more; we-40-1/30-31/84wouldn't talk about a monitoring range but would express someuncertainty about it.MR. PARTEE. I'd like to take Frank's suggestion and monitorall three.MR. MORRIS. That would be a step in the right direction.MR. RICE. [Unintelligible] the movement of the velocity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's see whether we have somethingwe can work from. How are we doing?MR. BERNARD. Not a lot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why?MR. BERNARD. They are having some problems finding a Xeroxmachine. Here's the original.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This isn't what I'm talking about at all.I'm talking about the directive that Catherine was typing. Troublefinding a Xerox machine?MR. MARTIN. There's one right across the hall.MR. PARTEE. She was typing something. The Xerox machine hasbeen--MR. GRAMLEY. We have a special Xerox machine in [thiscorridor] that only the Board Members' secretaries can get to.MR. MARTIN. It's the building of all word processors, andnow we can't--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. While we are waiting, is there anyway of making the phrase [about international transactions] in theopening sentence somewhat less silly?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I gazed at it and had no conclusion, so Ileft it. We are always trying.MR. PARTEE. Certainly [unintelligible].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm sure of it. "Any lesssustainable"--MR. PARTEE. "Move back toward a more sustainable"?MS. TEETERS. Or maybe "improve."MR. MARTIN. "Avoid a catastrophe."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be nice to change that sentenceif anybody has a [suggestion].MR. PARTEE. That was put in several years ago, Tony, andwe've never been able to change it since then.-41-1/30-31/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't able to rewrite the sentence thatwas given so I just left it. But the assumption is that it's thereand it would be--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. "Minimize the damage on theinternational...." No, I mean it; that's what we're trying to do.MR. ROBERTS. "Accomplish the roll-over of existing debt."MR. PARTEE. Well, to the extent necessary--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can you think of a different phrase? Icouldn't think of one last night.MS. TEETERS. Well, we can say "to improve internationaldebt."MR. WALLICH. That says specifically once the dollar isdown--MS. TEETERS. Well, we often do.SPEAKER(?). It's not bad at these levels.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says we're going to do all things.MR. BOEHNE. How about "and contribute to achieving asustainable"?MR. PARTEE. "And contribute to a more sustainable"?MR. MARTIN. That implies it's sustainable.MR. PARTEE. Yes, but it implies it now, just barely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Contribute to an improved pattern? Idon't know how we do that.MR. PARTEE. No, I don't either.MS. TEETERS. Do you propose just to leave that wholesentence out?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I just didn't repeat it here.MR. WALLICH. But I think "improved" would be a good change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we put in "an improved pattern."I just assumed that that sentence would [stand], but that sounds alittle less--. At least it recognizes that it isn't very good now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's going to get worse.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This [draft that you now have before you]is designed to follow that first sentence. For the ranges we wouldsay 6 to 9 percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 4 to 8 percent. It's only thefirst two paragraphs. In this second part, I just went on and addedthe short-run language, which we'll get to later.-42-1/30-31/84MR. KEEHN. What if we left off the phrase after the comma"aggregates, which for the time being would continue to receive moresubstantial weight"? Doesn't the first part of that sentence give usthe flexibility we need?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would make the opposite suggestion:Delete "for the time being."MR. ROBERTS. I think Si has a good point.MR. PARTEE. Well, I would go with Si's suggestion, too, butI think we're quite split on this question. Did you count half[unintelligible]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, another way is to take out the word"more." But I would not protest taking out that whole phrase.MR. PARTEE. I think the first phrase does capture it.SPEAKER(?). That's a good sentence.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I guess we're pretty evenlysplit, but for those of us who would like M1 to be kept as amonitoring range rather than a target, this makes it a target withcaveats and it seems to me that that phrase is important. But themarkets tend to overreact--we all know that--in terms of theimportance it attaches to M1. It's in that context that we have tolook at how our language will be received.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, just to point out: Technically, it istrue that if M1 were in the bottom part of that range--at the midpointor below--and the economic forecast is correct, velocity growth wouldnot be less than in past periods of expansion. It is [M1 growth in]the upper part of the range that would make [velocity grow] less thanin the past.MR. MARTIN. It would be more, would it not? It would besomething around the neighborhood of 4 to 5 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what the average is ofpast expansions--3 to 4 percent, I guess.MR. AXILROD. It has been between 2-1/2--MS. TEETERS. If we get 9 percent nominal GNP, that puts therate at 2-1/2 percent.MR. MARTIN. Yes, but not for the first quarter; we start outhigher than that. What's our first-quarter nominal [GNP estimate]?MR. PARTEE. 10 percent.MR. ROBERTS. It's 10 percent, so it's about 3 percentvelocity in the first quarter.MR. MARTIN. With 10 percent in the first quarter, you couldget 5 and 5.-43-1/30-31/84MR. ROBERTS. [Unintelligible] 7 percent money growth for thefirst quarter.MR. KICHLINE. We have 10 percent on GNP.MR. MARTIN. But the Chairman's hypothesis was: Suppose moneygrowth is below the 6 percent [midpoint], at 5 or 4 percent.MR. ROBERTS. I see, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it's below the 6 percent, I don't thinkone can say that velocity would be less than it has been historically.MR. MARTIN. It's probably more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure. It might be more,say, 5 or 4 percent.MR. MARTIN. Well, if the staff is forecasting--MR. PARTEE. Actually, it seems to me that we are assumingputting normative velocity in the range.MS. TEETERS. Instead of saying "likely" and really meaningthat it might be less, why don't we say it might be different becausewe don't know where it's going to go?MR. PARTEE. About 3 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How about unpredictable?MR. PARTEE. "Its velocity as [well as that] for M2 and M3would remain unpredictable."MR. CORRIGAN. That's the problem that I have with thislanguage about velocity. The same argument that we're making aboutthe velocity of M1 could easily be applied to M2 as well. I agreewith the need to hedge M1 more, for the same reasons I think Tony issuggesting that. But I think logically we have a little problem herein that the hedge that we're creating could easily be said to apply toM2. As a matter of fact, if interest rates are rising, it might applymore to M2.MR. BOEHNE. Well, the second paragraph--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The second paragraph hedges it all, I'dsay.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would you rather say something about"in light of the changing composition of M1, its erratic behavior"?That's a little too strong, right?MR. PARTEE. Volatility.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Use "volatility of M1" rather thantalk about velocity.-44-1/30-31/84MR. WALLICH. Well, we might have little velocity growthwithout volatility. And why should we denigrate a good aggregate?MS. TEETERS. Why don't we say "Its relationship to grossnational product may be different than in past periods of expansion."That gets away from the technicalities of velocity; it says what we'rereally talking about.MR. CORRIGAN. But we still have the problem that it appliesto M2.MS. TEETERS. I know, but if we just say "different" it isnot leaving us open to whether it is going to be less or greater.MR. GRAMLEY. To some degree, however, the problems with M1tend to get cancelled out in M2. That is, the staff argues that ifinterest rates go up, because of the higher interest elasticity demandfor M1 now we might get a sharp slowdown of M1. That would not applyto M2 because the nontransaction components will probably continue togrow. So, there would be a less marked movement.MR. CORRIGAN. There's a wild card in that, though, Lyle, asto how banks would respond.MR. GRAMLEY. True.MR. CORRIGAN. My hunch is that in [an environment of]climbing and rising interest rates banks are going to price Super NOWsand MMDAs very, very aggressively. And if they do that, heck, wecould have a positive interest elasticity of M2.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What happens to interest elasticity,Steve, if the Congress removes the prohibition of paying interest ondemand deposits?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are assuming that that's not going tohappen, and I think we ought to say that. You have now brought it up,and we ought to put in the policy record that this is all based uponan assumption that that's not going to happen during the course ofthis year.MR. PARTEE. That will certainly change things.MR. AXILROD. When that happens, we believe after some timethat it would reduce the interest elasticity of M1 with respect tomarket rates.MR. GRAMLEY. I have a little problem with the sentence about"taking account of emerging evidence that in the light of the changedcomposition of M1 its velocity growth over time...." I think webelieve that on the basis of theoretical considerations. That is, wethink the more elements that bear interest in M1, the higher theincome elasticity of demand will be and the less tendency there willbe--the more we have Super NOW accounts--for M1 velocity not to slowdown as interest rates rise. But that's primarily a theoreticalproposition. We really don't have much evidence of that yet.-45-1/30-31/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can make it a little more neutral bysaying "taking account of the possibility that in the light of thechanged composition of M1, its relationship to growth in GNP over timemight be shifting."MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, that's better.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can only shift it in one direction, I'msorry--MR. GRAMLEY. Do you want to read that again--the possibilitypart?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The possibility that in the light of thechanged composition of M1 its relationship to growth in GNP over timemight be shifting."SPEAKER(?). That's good.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're putting in the nonfinancial debtrange here, by the way, of about 8 to 11 percent. Well, the remainingquestion is: What we do with that part after the comma? Threealternatives: leave it, drop it, or take out the word "more."MR. MARTIN. In terms of this discussion, I think the wordingthat you have there is perfectly appropriate. If you recall theamount of time we've spent on M1 and its velocity, its futureconfiguration, and its components, that expresses the sense of thegroup.MR. GRAMLEY. A question may arise as to what a reader wouldinterpret "more substantial weight" to mean--more substantial weightthan M1 or more substantial weight than they had previously. Onecould get around that problem, if it is a real one, by simply puttingprincipal weight instead of more substantial weight.MR. MORRIS. Well, it says "continue to receive," whichimplies the same weight as in the past.MR. GRAMLEY. Perhaps there's not a problem.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think there's too muchdanger, Lyle, for misinterpretation of that.MR. GRAMLEY. Maybe not.MR. PARTEE. I think maybe the word "more" should be takenout.MR. BLACK. It's more weight than what?MR. GRAMLEY. The "more" is the problem.MR. PARTEE. Substantial weight.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right.-46-1/30-31/84MR. KEEHN. By showing M1 below M2 and M3 and by having asentence in there which deals with the uncertainty of its velocity, itseems to me we are setting the reader up for what is the[unintelligible] fact if we drop the whole phrase. The additionalphrase is not necessary.MR. BOEHNE. That would make sense if we added "in the lightof the growth in the other monetary aggregates and economicconditions" or something like that. Then we could have a period.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's true. In that case, then, in thenext paragraph I guess we'd have to drop--MR. BOEHNE. Oh, I see.MR. PARTEE. We've already captured part of the nextparagraph in the phrase that Paul put in there about interpreting M1.But I think that would be a sensible way of doing it.MR. KEEHN. Not incidentally, in the third paragraph whenwe're dealing with the short-term ranges we use M1, M2, and M3 in thatorder.MR. PARTEE. M2 and M3 and M1.MR. KEEHN. M1, M2, and M3.MR. BLACK. I wish you hadn't brought that up, Si; they maywant to change that now!MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think they will.MR. BLACK. Change [unintelligible] in there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And leave out the last few words at theend of the paragraph "as tentatively agreed" and go down on all theothers.MS. HORN. 10 to [unintelligible]?MR. MORRIS. In the reference to growth in debt, rather than"financial debt" don't you mean "nonfinancial debt"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where?MR. MORRIS. In the last paragraph it says "Growth infinancial debt is expected to be within the range established for theyear."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, "growth in nonfinancial debt." I'minclined just to take out the word "more." These things are all verynarrow.MR. GUFFEY. Well, that's just suggesting that if M1 returnsto some historical relationship, we would not place as much weight onM2 and M3.-47-1/30-31/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Relatively, yes. It says "for the timebeing."MR. GUFFEY. I would prefer to leave "more" in.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Second.MR. ROBERTS. Take it out.MR. WALLICH. More than M1 or more than in the past?MR. PARTEE. That's not clear.MR. AXILROD. It's lost in here, Mr. Chairman. The languagethe Committee had adopted before didn't have the word in. It said "Inimplementing policy, the Committee agreed that substantial weightwould continue to be placed on the broader aggregates."MR. GUFFEY. That's when M1 was described as being only amonitoring range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You know, we are not going to get itperfect. We cite the other two ranges first--period. Then we say wehave a range for M1 and we have to interpret that in the light ofthese other things, which receive substantial weight. It seems to methat fairly well captures what we're talking about.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What about "principal weight"? Isthat any better? It says it more succinctly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's putting "more" back in.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. It's putting it in but in adifferent way. But we do say "for the time being."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it says "for the time being." Itclearly leaves open the possibility that our next step might be--MR. PARTEE. It says M1 would receive more substantialweight.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. I think the reading of thishas to be that we're more tentative about M1 than we are about theother ranges.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Sure, it's hedged all over.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is the way it is whether ornot the "more" is in there.MR. GRAMLEY. If we understand what we're doing, whether thatword "more" is in there or not isn't going to make a lot ofdifference. If we agree that what we're doing is putting principalweight on M2 and M3 and that we will continue basically as we have inthe past with a bit more weight to M1, I don't think the inclusion orexclusion of the word "more" is going to rock markets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think not. I am sure it's not going to-48-1/30-31/84rock markets. But let me restate that what I think we're saying isthat we moved M1 out of a purely monitoring status but we are moretentative about it than we are the other ones. We'd be more preparedto change that range if evidence showed it [should be changed]. Or ifthese other things were in line and M1 were moving peculiarly, wewould in that sense put less weight on it. But it has more [weight]than it did before.MR. MARTIN. That's just what it says.MR. GRAMLEY. In this phrase about interpreting M1 in thelight of growth in the other [aggregates] do we want to say "monetaryand credit aggregates"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think not. I would argue that thecredit aggregate is there but it doesn't have the weight the othershave. It has less weight than M1, I guess.MR. GRAMLEY. The reason I raise this is because in the nextparagraph we talk about continuing appraisal of the relationshipsamong the various measures of money and credit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. This next paragraph is general andrefers to them all. But the hierarchy here as I see it is still M2and M3 together, M1 coming up, but with some uncertainty and--MR. GRAMLEY. With the jockey holding them in!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. And the credit range is anassociated range rather than a [principal one]. If no one has anyfurther brilliant suggestions, we're talking basically about the firsttwo paragraphs of this [draft]. But I just anticipated here when Iwrote this up that, in contrast to last month's approach which wasunbalanced on the restraining side, we would lean a bit to the easingside--that we would be quicker to ease than to tighten.MR. PARTEE. I thought it was pretty evenhanded. What do youmean? Did you do that by putting in "somewhat greater restraint"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. One says we only have somewhatgreater restraint if both the aggregates and business expansion werestrong. The other says we would ease if the aggregates were weak. Ithink it is fairly evenhanded, but we don't have to debate that now.Just look at the first two paragraphs. Are we ready to vote?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesPresident Morris NoGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roberts YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich Yes-49-1/30-31/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can have the other [staff] people comein. I don't know what we'll do in the future, but we have a littlelapse before announcing [this decision on the long-run ranges] and Ithink people can know this on a need-to-know basis. I am going to betestifying and we probably will release it either Sunday or Monday.MR. BOEHNE. You're testifying on Monday?MS. TEETERS. Tuesday.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I am testifying on Tuesday, but wewill send the material up by Monday. We'll send it up late on Mondayand that's probably the latest we will release it in order to avoid--MR. PARTEE. We'll release it before you actually present it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just a thought: I might do it on Sundayand everybody would get it together on the weekend.MS. TEETERS. That's a considerable change in the[Congressional] committee's procedures; usually they want to have itreleased at the time that the committee meeting is held.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I got a letter from Mr. St Germainyesterday, an irritating letter, saying "I direct you to release itimmediately." I sent him back a letter telling him it's not hisdecision to direct us [unintelligible] release. And the Senatecommittee isn't very happy about--MR. PARTEE. Which is first this time. Senate or House?MS. TEETERS. House. It's the Senate's turn but I think it'sthe House first.MR. BALLES. Paul, I'd like to suggest that in order to avoidthe kind of problems we had last July--or at least as far as my Bankis concerned, I'd just as soon not have a copy of the directive thatis sent to New York. In fact, I've already told my economic adviser Ido not expect to notify him of what went on here in this meetingtoday. And I think the rest of you might abide [by that] and do thesame thing. If we just kept the directive--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's fair unless somebody has aneed to know, and I don't think anybody does except presumably thepeople in New York who are already here. This is just an excess ofcaution, but it gives us a defense if something happens between nowand--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Because this time if there's a leak,it's squarely going to be on us.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.MR. BOEHNE. I might add to what John Balles said: I wouldn'twant to see a copy of the testimony even 15 minutes before it'sreleased to the public.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Agreed. Okay.-50-1/30-31/84SPEAKER(?). [Unintelligible] time?MR. BOEHNE. Well, I say 20 minutes before. But I'd rathersee it 20 minutes after.MR. PARTEE. Do you mean that you wouldn't send the wirethere?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can send it to New York.MR. PARTEE. It's a procedural requirements thing.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I don't know what the proceduralrequirements are.MR. BALLES. What really blew it last time was the fact thatthe copy of the directive that went to New York was sent to allReserve Banks. And then all sorts of people, including clerks andsecretaries, handled it.MR. GRAMLEY. That opens it up.MR. BALLES. And when the GAO came around, we had to have allthose people interviewed. I strongly [recommend] that the directivenot be sent until after you testify.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the only question is NewYork.MR. BALLES. Well, the [New York staff who need to know] aresitting here. They know what the directive is. It's up to them, ofcourse, whether they need it in writing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll make an arrangement that's basicallyin accord with what you're saying.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but we're overlooking the mainpoint, which is that everybody at this table has heard the decision.And you can count--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not overlooking that.MR. GRAMLEY. You are supposed to forget, Tony!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The question of whether they come toNew York or not is only one aspect of it. I don't want everybody toassume that because it comes to the New York Reserve Bank [that anyleak is from] the House committee or New York.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can proceed to the short run.Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, I really have very littleto add to the discussion in the Bluebook. Alternative B essentiallycontinues the path that was adopted at the last meeting of theCommittee, which had 8 percent growth in M2 and M3 from November toMarch and 6 percent growth in M1. [We have projected a very strong]M1 increase in January, which is still subject to doubt because we-51-1/30-31/84don't have the figures for the last week of January yet and we areassuming that that is a very high figure. If that is a high figure,then we would expect M1 growth in January to be quite strong and tohelp sustain growth over the four months at the rate suggested there--around 6-3/4 percent. So, we would have suggested that a somewhathigher growth than 6 percent would be consistent with the 8 percent[growth in M2 and M3]. However, I think there's enough doubt aboutthat to suggest that there is no particularly strong technical need tochange the Committee's specifications from the 6 percent that is nowin there for alternative C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did we have last time: 8 percent, 8percent, and 6 percent?MR. AXILROD. [Yes.] But I don't think there's any strongtechnical need to change that 6 percent even though [6-3/4 percent] isour best estimate, based on an uncertain January. The other twoalternatives, Mr. Chairman, are simply: alternative A, which is formore rapid growth in the aggregates; and alternative C, which is forless rapid growth in the aggregates. We believe that alternative B,continuing on the same path, would be about consistent with the sameconstellation of restraint on reserve conditions. But, of course,there is some uncertainty given the introduction of CRR and what thatmight mean specifically. In particular, there is the possibility thatin a transition period we might place excess reserves even higher thanwe've had in recent months recognizing, though, that there is a 3percent carryover in two weeks. So it's not clear that excessreserves would stay higher for very long periods. Our explorationwith banks as to how they are situated would suggest that possibility,at least in the transition period.MR. MARTIN. Steve, did this exploration include explorationof small banks?MR. AXILROD. Well, they in particular were the ones thatsaid they thought their excess reserves would be higher. The bigbanks mostly said they would be a little conservative to begin with,but believe they will be close to where they were fairly shortly afterCRR is initiated. So, over a sustained period it might be mainly thesmaller banks. The borrowing relationships--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might say I have a little suspicion fromwhat people have said that we're not going to have the weekly moneysupply figures for a week or two, or at least with long lags. I don'tknow how prepared you are out there to produce these numbers in atimely fashion.MR. AXILROD. Our information is that the Reserve Banks arein varying states of preparedness, but we expect everyone to be on thestarting line tomorrow or the day after.MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but even if the Reserve Banks areprepared, the problems with the commercial banks are a great unknown.There are very, very, conflicting views and opinions. I must say I ama lot more concerned than I think you are or Steve is.MR. AXILROD. That may very well be, President Corrigan. Thereports that we get from the banks indicate that they are as ready as-52-1/30-31/84they're ever going to be. And, of course, they have a strongincentive to be able to monitor their deposit flows. There may beproblems as there always are in a switch-over in the reportingsystems. I would assume that there will be and that we will missmaybe the first Thursday publication or the second and have to delaythem a bit. And I would not doubt, Mr. Chairman, that in the firsttwo weeks the money supply figures will be subject to much morerevision than normal. But our information is that the banks arereasonably well prepared and the Reserve Banks are reasonably wellprepared. I have no doubt, however, that there will be some glitchesin the first two or three weeks.MR. BOEHNE. I wonder if it would be well when the moneysupply figures are released for the next several weeks to make thepoint that these are subject to greater revision than normal becauseof the switch over to CRR.MS. TEETERS. We've already said that.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I'd say it again.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it will be part of the release.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the only other technical point Iwish to make is that we assumed that alternative B was consistent withcontinuing a borrowing level of $650 million. There are uncertaintiesabout excess reserves. There probably also are some uncertaintiesabout borrowings because we can't really be sure exactly how banks aregoing to decide to manage their positions. If they make mistakes,they may be forced into more borrowing than they are otherwisethinking about; or they may have an excess of caution and so much inexcess reserves that they're not going to have much borrowing; or thelevel of excess reserves will show more variation because of theswitch-over. But I think a degree of uncertainty can be attached toboth excess reserves and borrowing in thinking about reservepositions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are not unrelated. [Unintelligible]supplies of reserves. If they borrowed less, the excess reserveswould be less; if they borrowed more, the excess reserves would bemore.MR. AXILROD. That is true.MS. TEETERS. Are you building additional excess reservesinto the reserve paths?MR. AXILROD. We will do so in the first two weeks. But thenthere's a 3 percent carryover and after that I'm not sure how we willend up. But certainly in the first two weeks we'll put in more excessreserves than normal, not merely because of this but because there isa reserve requirement reduction of $2 billion in the phase-down formember institutions. That in itself ought to add $100 million or soto excess reserves.MR. ROBERTS. Steve, have you been hearing from the banksabout the free ride in both the vault cash and other categories?1/30-31/84MR. AXILROD. Yes, but that's built into the transition.MR. ROBERTS. I know the larger banks are anticipating[unintelligible] capitalize them.MR. AXILROD. We have not seen much of an increase in vaultcash related to that in the aggregate numbers. We've looked at it,and it doesn't seem that the banks are behaving very differently.MR. STERNLIGHT. The free ride is over in the vault cash.And in that period I think it was exercised in just a modest degree.I didn't hear very much about the free ride on the deposits side. Thefact that there are 10 to 12 days that never get reserved didn't getmuch attention.MR. PARTEE. How was there a free ride? I don't understandthis at all.MR. STERNLIGHT. There was a period of a couple of weeks whenvault cash in effect counted double. It counted with the normal lagthat has been going on--MR. PARTEE. Now I see.MR. STERNLIGHT. --but also banks get more on their [vaultcash] schedules in the first couple of weeks of February.MR. PARTEE. So we ought to have more vault cash for twoweeks?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For two weeks.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we've paid them to hold more. Butthey didn't do as large [unintelligible]; they did it to only a minordegree.MR. BOEHNE. It's nice to know that the entrepreneurialspirit is alive and well in some places!MR. MORRIS. Apparently, it's too well!MR. GRAMLEY. May I ask a technical question of another kind?The selection of November to March as the period to focus on isexplained essentially by the fact that that is the same period we usedat the December meeting. Why does that take precedence over aDecember-to-March calculation, given the fact that we have fairlysolid figures for December?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the December-to-March equivalentof what you have here for November to March?MR. AXILROD. For M1--I have to make a few [calculations]--it's 7.3 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. For M2 and M3 it's about 7.7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7.7 percent.-54-1/30-31/84SPEAKER(?). You're saying that's the same as alternative B?MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That means that if we made itDecember to March the numbers would probably be around 8 percent [forM2 and M3] and around 7 percent [for M1].MR. GRAMLEY. I think December to March is 7.7, 7.7, and 7.3percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. But rounding them we wouldprobably come up with a 1 point rise in M1 then.MR. GRAMLEY. I'm not quite sure why you want to round up.MR. AXILROD. There are two comments I could make, GovernorGramley. One, it was just simpler in presenting the alternatives notto have to present a lot of numbers--the November-to-March numbers andthe equivalent December-to-March numbers. That is one minor factor.The other is that the November base happens to be pretty close to thefourth-quarter average. So at 6 percent, M1 is at the midpoint of the4 to 8 percent range. But that's happenstance to this period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have discussed a lot oftechnicalities. What do you want to do in substance? Do you want tomaintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve conditions ordon't you? If you do, then that means alternative B.MR. PARTEE. There's another point, which we began todiscuss: We were expecting last time that there would be astrengthening in the aggregates and in the economy, and we wereprobably right on the edge of tightening up. The question is: Shouldthat stance be more neutral now because, after all, we didn't get thatstrengthening?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, it is more neutral now; we'resimply saying "maintain." If I remember correctly, last time we said"at least maintain."MR. PARTEE. It all dropped off one side of the--MR. BOEHNE. Right. But it ought to be an evenhandeddirective indicating we would tighten or loosen depending on incomingdevelopments. The [previous directive] was asymmetrical.MS. HORN. I would argue that, although some individualmonthly and quarterly numbers have come in perhaps not quite as strongas we expected, Lyle's general point about the risks in the economynext year being non-symmetrical on the strong side for a variety ofreasons should make us want to be at least evenhanded in thisdirective.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When does the leading indicator [index]come out?MS. HORN. Oh, that's a point.-55-1/30-31/84MR. PRELL. It was up 0.6.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did the housing number come out?MR. KICHLINE. The housing starts?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, not starts; did the housing sales comeout today?MR. KICHLINE. That I don't know.MR. PARTEE. The leading indicator was up 0.6? And was theprevious month revised?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. They are strong in any event.MR. STERNLIGHT. It is up 0.2 now; it had been slightly down.MR. GRAMLEY. I had come into this meeting prepared to arguethat the weight of the evidence, as I see it, leans if anything in thedirection of suggesting that we ought to be just a bit tighter. Istill interpret the fourth quarter as a very strong quarter with verystrong private domestic final purchases. We have money numbers nowwhich fortunately--I mean fortunately for my argument--look strongerin the fourth quarter and continue to be strong into the firstquarter. We're talking about a December-to-March increase in M1 ofabout 7-1/2 percent. The M2 and M3 figures are much more tranquil.At a minimum we ought to be evenhanded, I think, in the statement ofthe alternatives.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. CORRIGAN. That's about where I am. But I could use--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Excuse me, but are these figures on page10 [of the Bluebook] all revised figures? Is that why I don'trecognize them?MR. AXILROD. Yes, they are all based on the revised series.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And to get that 12 percent in January wehave to have a big increase in the last week in January?MR. AXILROD. Yes, close to $4 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Boy! What makes you think we're going toget that?MR. AXILROD. Our projector is often right!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unfortunately, you could also make thestatement that he's often wrong.MR. MARTIN. I would take some issue with Lyle's thesis. Ithink there were several areas in which the data were disappointing orsurprising. Some series came out for December and for the fourthquarter that indicate that there are risks and vulnerabilities inseveral areas. The leading indicators, of course, may now have been-56-1/30-31/84reversed. But the international situation is certainly notencouraging. Housing has vulnerabilities that I think have not beenadequately analyzed by anybody--no reflection on our staff. And thefact that a lot of equipment has been purchased by industries is notthe whole answer; a lot has been purchased from foreign sources. Itwasn't all just imports to the consumer; there were imports tobusiness. And we have not had the kind of investment revival that hasbeen typical in recoveries. This has been kind of a defensiveretrofitting. That's not a gross private domestic investment surge.It's a defensive [approach]: How can we stay in there with theprospect of a diminishing market share? I think there are a greatmany vulnerabilities in several areas here. It isn't all on thepositive side. I would go for an evenhanded language format, but Idon't think we can ignore the downside risks in this situation.MR. MORRIS. I agree with Pres. I think the weight of theevidence in the last month is that the growth rate in the economy isdecelerating. And the fact that the leading indicator series indexwas up 0.6 confirms that because that's a standardized index where thenormal month's change is 1 percent. So, the 0.6 increase suggests aslowing in the rate of growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you mean the normal increase is 1percent?MS. TEETERS. There is a built-in increase, a trend.MR. MORRIS. The trend norm for that index, Paul, would be a1 percent growth rate.MR. MARTIN. And the GNP isn't back at a 1973-to-1980 trendline. If you put any kind of trend line in there, we're still below.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. That's news to me. How isthat index constructed so its normal increase is 1 percent a month?That means the average of all the components has to go up 1 percent amonth? The work-week has to go up 12 percent a year and the stockmarket has to go up 12 percent a year?MR. MORRIS. No, the index--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the money supply has to go up 12percent a year?MR. MORRIS. Maybe we ought to get a paper out on how we--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have stimulated me to look intoit. But it seems very strange.MR. MORRIS. I'm quite sure I'm right that anything less thana 1 percent rise would suggest some modest deceleration in the growthrate of the economy.MR. PARTEE. Well, forgetting these more abstract issues that[unintelligible] in the GNP, the production index is up less and theemployment is up less than it was before. I would point out that thestock market has declined significantly. And, therefore, althoughLyle could be right, I think we have to wait for evidence to confirm-57-1/30-31/84that there will be more strength than the 4 to 4-1/2 percent kind ofnormative number that people have in mind.MS. TEETERS. Well, if the world turns out the way the staffhas projected, it is pretty obvious what policy should be. I don'tthink we are going to get this smooth, even, deceleration of the rateof growth. We're going to get a good quarter and a bad quarter and agood quarter and a bad quarter. And if we don't look through that,we're going to make mistakes. We have to take into account theaverage of where we think we're going, and the trend seems to be thatthe economy is calming down. So, it seems to me that we should waitand see whether that has really happened or not before we tighten up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether we're close toa conclusion. Is it clearly the consensus that--forgetting about whatwe do in the future--right now we "maintain." Is that the right wordto put in there?MR. MARTIN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Nobody wants to ease up and nobody wantsto tighten now?MS. TEETERS. Which draft are you working from?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it doesn't make any difference forthis purpose, but I'm now working off of mine. Do we just put theword "maintain" in there?MR. PARTEE. That is [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know that. The [housing salesnumbers] are out?MR. ZEISEL. They came out at 10:00 am.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had some strange figures for new housesales. They went way up--28 percent--and it's all in the South;everyplace else they went down. It's the highest figure since I don'tknow when. [Unintelligible.] The [press release] says you have gotto go back years before you find a month this high.MR. GRAMLEY. Existing home sales are the bulk of the buying.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. This is new house sales or existinghouse sales?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. New.MR. GRAMLEY. Existing house sales came out earlier. Theytoo were up, but not--MR. ZEISEL. They were up 8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have to go back--I forget, but I thinkit's 10 years or so to get a new home sales figure this high. Ormaybe it was 1978. I think it was.-58-1/30-31/84MR. BOYKIN. There are sold signs everywhere in Dallas.MR. RICE. Is it all over the South or is it restricted to--?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't look at the data. I was told itwas in the South and that the West is down, the Central region iseven, and the Northeast is going no place. It's all in the South.Very strange. It's all in Dallas, [Bob]?MR. PARTEE. Everybody's going to move to Dallas!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if "maintain" is the right word,let's look at this draft I gave you.MR. WALLICH. You've dropped "at least."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Oh yes, I think that's desirable.MR. MARTIN. I do also.MR. PARTEE. It ought to be more evenhanded.MR. GRAMLEY. Why don't we just take the sentence out of thelast operational paragraph and use it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's the sentence out of the lastoperational paragraph?MS. TEETERS. You're going to add that reference to CRR. Isthat it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just stuck the CRR reference in the lastsentence. But before we get to the CRR issue, this was deliberatelychanged from what it was last time, rightly or wrongly. I put thepossibility of lesser restraint first and said we're not going totighten unless we have in effect both more rapid growth in theaggregates, within some limit, and good business news.MR. GRAMLEY. I don't think that's the thing to do. I muchprefer an evenhanded treatment, and I think evenhandedness in thiscase would mean staying with the existing language. The existinglanguage lets the qualifying comment about the strength of therecovery affect both.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where's he reading from?MR. MARTIN. Where are you reading from, Lyle?MR. PARTEE. I don't know where you're reading from either.MR. GRAMLEY. I'm reading from the draft domestic policydirective that the staff passed out.MR. PARTEE. Page 6?1/30-31/84MR. GRAMLEY. On page 4, line 77. The old language is"depending on evidence about the continuing strength of the recovery"and so on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, before you get there, let me justnote that the first thing my draft does is list M1, M2, and M3 alltogether. And that immediately follows this other language about therelative weights.MR. PARTEE. I think that's all right.MS. TEETERS. I object to that. We didn't put M1 back intothe primary position again.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it is to be read in thelight of what is in the previous paragraph.MR. GRAMLEY. I don't think so. I don't think the marketsare going to interpret it that way.MS. TEETERS. I don't think so either. I think we shouldhave an M2, M3 sentence and then an M1 sentence. And I would put itback in a monitoring range because that's where it still is as far asI'm concerned.MR. PARTEE. Shouldn't we have a show of hands on who wantsto put M1 back in and give it more equal weight? I don't have acount on that; maybe you do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we disposed of that for the long-term ranges.MR. PARTEE. Yes, and it comes up every time we have any kindof discussion.MR. CORRIGAN. It's easier to do [unintelligible] short term.MR. PARTEE. Everyone is quite predictable as to what theywill say.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think your position has changed,Chuck, hasn't it?MR. PARTEE. I've been putting it back in for quite a while.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, one way we can do it is to say M2,M3, and M1. I don't think it's read in the light of what the previousparagraph says.MR. BALLES. Let sleeping dogs lie.MR. PARTEE. Well, we could do M2, M3, and M1. We could say"M2 and M3 at annual rates of about blank percent and blank percentrespectively, and M1 at about blank percent."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. It's a little moreconsistent.-60-1/30-31/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have been given the following figuresfor alternative B if we use December to March: 7.8, 7.8, and 7.3percent. I suppose what we would put in there is 8, 8, and 7 percentif we cite December-to-March figures. We have 8, 8, and 6 percent forNovember to March, if you want to be essentially where we were lasttime.MR. CORRIGAN. You're talking about putting 8, 8, and 7percent in with Governor Partee's language?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. "...with growth of M2 and M3 atannual rates of about 8 percent and M1 at 7 percent respectively fromDecember to March."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that makes more sense.MS. TEETERS. Doesn't the "respectively" go before the Ml?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't need the "respectively."MR. PARTEE. We don't need it at all, I guess, because it'sthe same number [for M2 and M3].MR. GUFFEY. I'm sorry. How would it read again?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "In the short run the Committee seeks tomaintain the existing degree of pressure on bank reserve positions,anticipating that approach will be consistent with growth of M2 and M3at annual rates of about 8 percent and M1 at an annual rate of about 7percent during the period from December to March."MR. PARTEE. Maybe we ought to say "M2 and M3 each at annualrates of about 8 percent."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To make sure we're not adding up the two!MR. PARTEE. Well, I sort of miss the "respectively," too.But "each" becomes a substitute for "respectively." Then the nextsentence is nonfinancial debt.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then the growth of nonfinancial debtsentence is the language we've used before. Is that acceptable?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we get down to what we might do andhow, going back to what Lyle was talking about. Let me look at thisagain and decide.MR. WALLICH. There seem to be four elements that areweighted in favor of lesser restraint. One is the phrase "lesserrestraint would" whereas the other says "greater restraint might."Also--MR. PARTEE. That should be "would."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had nothing in the last directive aboutlesser restraint.1/30-31/84MR. GRAMLEY. That's right.MR. MARTIN. That's correct. It was asymmetrical.MR. GRAMLEY. But the language as it is put here was on page4 [of the draft directive]. If we changed that lesser restraint from"might" to "would," that would make it perfectly symmetrical or almostperfectly symmetrical. Maybe we'd have to put the "somewhat" in therebefore "lesser" to make it perfectly [symmetrical].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the sentences become almostidentical except that the order is reversed by putting "lesserrestraint" first. In the "lesser restraint" sentence the differenceis "might" and "would," as you noted; otherwise, I think it's thesame. The language of the other draft has "somewhat" too. It's veryclose, but I myself think it's a little better showing [we need moreevidence] to tighten than to ease at this point.MR. WALLICH. I don't care about the order and whether thelesser goes first or not, but the asymmetry in the words does strikeme as meaningful. I would rather not have it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, what asymmetry in the words do youmean?MR. WALLICH. Well, either "would" in both cases or "might,"but I prefer "would." And I'd eliminate the "somewhat."MR. PARTEE. Well, it's going to be a moderated response inany event in either direction.MR. WALLICH. Then we could add "somewhat" on the easingside.MR. BLACK. That's his fallback position!MR. CORRIGAN. But the asymmetry goes even beyond thatbecause we would be saying less restraint subject only to thecondition of a shortfall in money and credit growth. Whereas on theother side, it's not just the "might," it's more rapid growth of moneyand stronger business and--MR. PARTEE. I don't read it that way. I read that wholefirst phrase as applying to both parts, the lesser or greaterrestraint. We're taking into account the economy.MR. GRAMLEY. No, Jerry's right, I think. The "evidence ofstronger business expansion, inflationary pressures" and so forthmodifies the "greater restraint" whereas nothing--MR. PARTEE. You think that modifies "greater restraint"?MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's what it was meant to do.MR. GRAMLEY. The way to be evenhanded is to go back to thelanguage on page 4 of the draft directive and put that sentence on the-62-1/30-31/84front end that refers to depending on evidence about the continuingstrength of economic recovery and other factors bearing on theinflation outlook.MR. PARTEE. That's what I was reading.MR. GRAMLEY. But Paul is not.MR. PARTEE. Oh, I see. Okay.MR. BLACK. I think we ought to decide which sheet we'regoing to read from. It's close.MR. PARTEE. That's why I said it seemed to apply equally oneither side.MR. GRAMLEY. We've come to agreement too easily. It's nottime yet!MR. BLACK. We could have a long coffee break.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that Steve's proposedoperational paragraph on page 18 is quite evenhanded.MR. PARTEE. Page 18?SPEAKER(?). In the Bluebook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's the same wording, isn't it? I thinkthat's the same as what you're looking at on page 4 [of the draftdirective].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It takes care of Lyle's point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but it's the same language he islooking at, isn't it? Exactly.MR. AXILROD. Yes, Governor Gramley is reading from page 4 ofthe draft directive, which is the same as page 18 of the Bluebook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's the same language, isn't it?MR. AXILROD. Well, the language you're talking about--thatparticular sentence--is exactly the same.MS. TEETERS. If we do that, in the phrase "significantshortfall" do we want to take out the "significant"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is a small difference; nonetheless,that's the only difference of significance, I guess, here. My ownfeeling is that I'd want a little more evidence before tightening thanI would before easing at this point.MR. GRAMLEY. I'm on the opposite side of that.MR. MARTIN. I would support the need for a little moreevidence to tighten.-63-1/30-31/84MR. PARTEE. I think we ought to be pretty evenhanded.MR. BLACK. In face of the evil [unintelligible] at alltimes.MR. CORRIGAN. I certainly want to be at least evenhanded.The problem I have is that if events work in a direction where we wantto ease between now and the next meeting--which is an unusually longtime--it's a pretty easy thing to do, but the opposite is not easy todo. To me, that in itself argues for trying to keep it symmetrical.I don't know what is going to happen, but I personally don't think anasymmetrical approach is the prudent thing to do. I still think thatthe risks are on the other side.MR. BOEHNE. I'll buy the evenhanded directive with theunderstanding that the Chairman would just think a little longer.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is certainly the Chairman's mood.MR. GUFFEY. This directive isn't adopted for that purpose.It's for the public.MR. CORRIGAN. I don't have any problems with Mr. Boehne'ssuggestion at all. It's the written word we have to worry about.MR. GUFFEY. That's correct.MR. ROBERTS. Well, I understand the nuance, but if we hadall those things together--if we had more rapid expansion of theaggregates, stronger business, and inflationary pressures--theChairman probably would take the action and we wouldn't be worriedabout those things.MR. GRAMLEY. The point is: Suppose the business news comesin strong, which I expect it will, and the aggregates tend to fallshort. Then what do we do? Do we ease or not? And I don't want toease in those circumstances. I don't want to ease because I think therisks for the year as a whole lie predominantly on the side of moregrowth than the staff is forecasting and stronger inflationarypressures. If I'm right--and, of course, I may not be--then easingnow in response to those [monetary aggregates] signals would be thewrong thing to do.MR. PARTEE. What if the opposite should occur? What if theaggregates come in strong--and, after all, for January they areprojected to be strong--and the economic news were to continue to besoft? What would you do then?MR. GRAMLEY. If it were soft enough to really question thecontinuation of recovery along the lines that the staff isforecasting, then I would plan to ease.MR. PARTEE. So it's the economic indicators that are movingyou rather than the aggregates?MS. TEETERS. Why don't we move the phrase "in the context ofthe business expansion and inflationary pressures" to the front of thesentence? Then it will modify both.-64-1/30-31/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, then it becomes more neutral.That's the way Steve had it, but it depends upon whether you want tobe that neutral.MR. WALLICH. I would favor that. The lesser restraintwithout some business signal seems to be an almost purely monetaristicreaction.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we've had some business signals.MR. WALLICH. We can write that in if we have business news.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The question is whether it takes more, Iguess.MR. MARTIN. I think it takes more to tighten.MR. PARTEE. We could leave it at the end, Paul, but put inanother comma and, using your draft, say "both viewed in the contextof continued strength in business expansion..."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I vote for neutrality in relation toLyle's scenario. I see no reason why we should signal that lesserrestraint is more easily triggered than tighter restraint.MS. TEETERS. If we are going to take Chuck's suggestion, wecould say "both viewed in the context of economic and inflationarydevelopments."MR. PARTEE. After all, we would always do that anyway,wouldn't we? We wouldn't set policy without looking at the economy.MR. GRAMLEY. I hope. We've done it.SPEAKER(?). In 1982.MR. KEEHN. Would it be too revolutionary to take the wholething out?MS. TEETERS. Yes, because we're not going to adjust policyon the basis of the aggregates, I hope. They have been much tooerratic to base a decision on them [just] because they're going up ordown relative to the rest of the world.MR. KEEHN. Well, it seems to me we would do what this saysanyway. It's part of our normal operating procedure. And if we takethe whole thing out, we're going to operate in the way that wenormally would.MR. GRAMLEY. Do you mean take out the whole works--thereferences to more restraint and lesser restraint?MR. KEEHN. Yes.MR. GRAMLEY. That takes away some of the lack ofevenhandedness.MR. MARTIN. Let them guess! Right, that builds character.-65-1/30-31/84MR. GRAMLEY. So, if things don't work out this way, theCommittee will decide what to do about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my problem is very simple. I don'tfeel evenhanded about this.MR. ROBERTS. I agree. I don't think it should beevenhanded.MR. GUFFEY. But is it important to put that in thedirective--that you just described as evenhanded the understandingthat I think is fairly consistent [with the views expressed] aroundthe table that we would operate in such a way that it would takesomewhat more evidence to tighten up?MR. MARTIN. It hardly meets the criticism that we fail tocommunicate the nuances of our policies to the public.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I think it is more important that we befairly consistent with what we've done in the past. And there is anuance, if you will, by simply making it evenhanded now as opposed tothe greater inclination for restraint that was in the immediatelypreceding directive. So I think there is a nuance that can be read init if we use evenhanded language.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why don't you ask for a preliminaryshow of hands between evenhanded and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know where my hand is.MR. PARTEE. He doesn't particularly want to see the otherhands!MR. GRAMLEY. I would like to be clear that I am a lot moreconcerned about policy than I am about words. And what I would liketo have some indication of is whether everybody is leaning in thedirection that you're indicating--that they would rather ease thantighten. To operate erring on that side is one thing; I want to go inthe opposite direction, if anything. I will live with evenhandednessbut I care a lot more about the policy than I do about the words.MR. ROBERTS. Well, for clarification: Why wouldn't you havegreater restraint if the aggregates were growing faster and if therewere strong evidence of stronger business and inflationary pressures?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would. I want all those things.MR. ROBERTS. Why do you need to say "might" then? Iunderstand you want to be careful but if all those things applied, itwould seem to me that it isn't necessary to be that careful about it.MS. TEETERS. Well, not spoken here is the point that we haveto keep an eye on what is happening on the international scene too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is part of my problem.MR. ROBERTS. That's a point, sure.-66-1/30-31/84SPEAKER(?). Well, that has been a continuing problem allalong. But it is true that there is a clear expectation ofinflationary pressures later this year.MR. PARTEE. No, I don't think so.MR. MARTIN. Commodity prices don't show it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It certainly is a market[expectation].MR. PARTEE. It's a very good possibility, but I don't thinkthere's clear evidence.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A quarter of a point is probably themaximum we're talking about and I don't think that is going to changethe international situation in terms of LDCs and the debt problem.MR. CORRIGAN. Again, the way I look at this is that part ofthe problem is that the better we are in the short run, the worse weare in the long run. I wouldn't mind necessarily if we had a firstquarter and a second quarter that were even a shade lower than thestaff projection because I think the possibility of being able to keepthe expansion going throughout the balance of the year into 1985actually is enhanced by that. From my vantage point that is theprimary reason why I would favor being evenhanded. If we ended upwith a really robust first quarter and robust money growth in thefirst quarter, that just complicates the heck out of the task in thesecond quarter.MR. MARTIN. But the premise is that if we have a weak firstquarter, we would have very little sign of inflation. We would havethe Argentineans messing up their restructuring. Those would be thecircumstances.MR. CORRIGAN. I don't think there is anything we are goingto do here that's going to influence the Argentineans.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Amen.MR. CORRIGAN. If we have to ease, that's easy to do. Idon't have any problem with that side of it at all. It's the otherside that I worry about.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Economic recovery in the otherindustrialized countries is picking up faster than we expected. Thevery minor changes that might result out of this policy in terms ofinterest rate levels are not going to be a significant factor.MR. MARTIN. Unless you're talking about--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Unless we have a move of a wholepoint. But if we're talking about what I assume you are talkingabout--say, a quarter of a point--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I'm talking about depends on how farthings are off. Well, I'm not going to die with this language here.I am just picking this up: "Lesser restraint would be acceptable...-67-1/30-31/84[etc.] while somewhat greater restraint might be acceptable given morerapid expansion of the aggregates, both viewed in the context of thestrength of the business expansion and inflationary pressures." Ifeel a little biased at the moment as I look at the situation. Butthis is all in the context of not doing anything at the moment. Isthat language acceptable?SEVERAL. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When do we meet here again?MR. BERNARD. March 27. That's eight weeks from now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if anything happens, we'll have aconsultation anyway before we decide to move. That's for sure. Andwith that understanding, I think we can just leave it. What that nextsentence says is that we aim at a little higher excess reserve levelsat least during the first couple of weeks and play it a bit by ear asto whether we pull it down thereafter. We could get a good deal morevolatility in the federal funds rate during this period. I don'tthink we ought to be too sensitive to that but at some point I supposethat would be a measure of how much excess reserves were needed. Butif it bounced up to 10 percent or so for a while or went down to 9percent or below, I don't think we have to be jumpy about it. Just totake a guess, do we add about $200 million in excess reserves in thisfirst two weeks?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, $200 or $300 million perhaps, in lightnot only of CRR but also the phase-down in reserve requirements.MS. TEETERS. You've been putting in around $400 million,haven't you?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It has been $400 to $450 million,although the average in the last several weeks would probably be morelike $500 to $600 million.MR. PARTEE. You're talking about $200 or $300 million morethan that?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. AXILROD. If we were ordinarily putting in about $400million, at least $600 to $700 million.MR. PARTEE. So, it's about even on the marginal reservemeasure with borrowing of $650 million and excess reserves of $600 to$700 million?MR. AXILROD. It may run higher and then borrowing may run abit higher. We just don't know what the pattern of borrowing is goingto be over the course of the two weeks. If they borrow an enormousamount early--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the implication is that you'llprobably be aiming at small positive free reserves for these first twoweeks.-68-1/30-31/84MR. BOEHNE. What's the advantage in this transitional periodof allowing the funds rate to bounce all around rather than containingit some?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have to allow a certain amount ofbouncing around, I think, even if it shows up in the last two days;otherwise people are going to feel that we're really pegging the rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's the only problem here. Wecould just peg the federal funds rate during this period, but I don'tknow that we want to create that--MR. BOEHNE. I'm not advocating that. I'm just curious as tohow you--MR. ROBERTS. Well, there is a danger that we might over-supply reserves too if we did that, and then we would have the problemof withdrawing them later on.MR. BOEHNE. We could under-supply them too.MS. TEETERS. Didn't we have a pattern of very low borrowinguntil Wednesday and then borrowing shot up the last day?MR. AXILROD. Recently, that's what we've had.MR. ROBERTS. Every day is going to be Wednesday now.MR. AXILROD. I don't contemplate that going on for 13 days.MR. BOEHNE. As long as the funds rate bounces around overthis week or several weeks that would be okay. But if it tended tosettle in at 10 percent or 9 percent, that might be telling ussomething.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it might. I don't disagreewith that. I'm a little reluctant to say we want the fed funds rateat 9-1/2 percent or something, so let's use [unintelligible]. On theother hand, if we're not using it and, as you say, it settles in atsome high or low level, I think that's evidence of the level of excessreserves they want.MR. GUFFEY. May I ask a technical question? At the end ofthe two week maintenance period will there be a carryover available?Will a 3 percent carryover for the first two weeks really amount to 6percent on a weekly basis?MR. AXILROD. Well, it's twice as much, in effect, on thelast day. That's right.MR. GUFFEY. So, you could come to the end of the period andapply a 6 percent carryover factor the first two weeks and you couldhave very high excess reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, it's 3 percent. It would be 6 percentif it was one week but they will have a two-week settlement period.-69-1/30-31/84MR. AXILROD. In the first two weeks if you're in deficiencyor surplus, you can carry over 3 percent into the next two weeks.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, I understand that. But is there anycarryover that applies to the first two weeks?MR. AXILROD. Oh. You mean from now.MR. GUFFEY. Is there a 3 percent carryover?MR. AXILROD. No.MR. GUFFEY. It's still the 2 percent?MR. AXILROD. Yes. I'm not quite sure how we worded thattransition, now that you mention it.MR. BLACK. It's 2 percent or--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You'll have fights with all your banks asto whether they had a carryover, if we're not clear about it.MR. AXILROD. If they have a carryover, it would be the 2percent of the [unintelligible]. Last week they carried over 2percent.MR. GUFFEY. But for the second week in the two-week periodwhat's the carryover?MR. AXILROD. I think they would carry it over into the two-week period. I don't think it would be carried over into the firstweek. I would think the proper interpretation is that they carry itover to a two-week period.MR. BLACK. Just think of it as an elongated carry-over.MR. GUFFEY. If we don't understand it, they won't understandit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, things may not vary very muchbecause they won't know what to do either so they'll continue to tradefederal funds just at the level they are now. That is quite apossibility. We just have to evaluate this as time passes and assumethat we could have lower excess reserves in the second two-weekperiod, particularly if there are signs of persistent ease during thefirst two weeks.MS. TEETERS. It may move up when we get into settlement.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be correct. Well, are weprepared to vote? I guess so. What we say is "seeks to maintain theexisting degree of pressure...M2 and M3 each at annual rates of about8 percent and M1 at an annual rate of about 7 percent from December toMarch. Growth in nonfinancial debt is expected to be within therange....Lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context of ashortfall in money and credit growth from current expectations, whilesomewhat greater restraint might be acceptable with more rapidexpansion in the aggregates, both viewed in the context of the-70-1/30-31/84strength of the business expansion and inflationary pressures." Andthen we have this sentence on contemporaneous reserve requirements andthe usual sentence on the federal funds rate range, which I presumewe're keeping at 6 to 10 percent, which is now hallowed by tradition.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roberts YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're finished already?MR. BERNARD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Coffee break time.END OF MEETING-71-