Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 21, 1984A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 21, 1984, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMs. SegerMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Stern,and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account8/21/84Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Henderson, Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMessrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Keran, Parthemos, Scheld,and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, San Francisco,Richmond, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofBostonMr. McCurdy, Research Officer, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofAugust 21, 1984CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we can come to order, I need a motionto approve the minutes.MR. MARTIN. Move approval.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. You have received areport on the examination of the System Open Market Account. I assumeyou all have examined that with care.MR. PARTEE. It's very straightforward.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any comments? In the absence ofany comments, we could have a motion to accept it.MR. MARTIN. Move approval.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Cross,MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions? It left everybodyspeechless! We have nothing to approve, right?MR. CROSS. Nothing to approve.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's turn to Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments or questions about theearlier part? Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Peter, do you regard this recently wideningspread between the discount rate and federal funds rate as atransitory phenomenon that's likely to be reversed fairly soon? Ifso, how would the Desk react to that?MR. STERNLIGHT. I consider it transitory in the sense that Idon't regard it as permanent, but I have some real question aboutwhether it will reverse very soon. I think it might tend to narrowgradually but I don't have a strong sense of confidence as to thetiming or extent of that.MR. BLACK. If it did happen pretty soon, would you hold toyour borrowing target and let the federal funds rate come down?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, that would depend a good deal on thenature of the discussion around the table here. I think [the answeris] mechanically, yes, but there are nuances in the day-to-dayexecution of policy in that we'd want to take guidance from theCommittee's sentiment.MR. BLACK. That would be the mechanical [response].8/21/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Peter, I too am sort of mystified by this up-creep in the funds rate relative to borrowings. It's really quiteobvious and seems to be rather enduring. You mentioned Continental'sborrowing in a negative way--as not being a factor--but I'm inclinedto wonder whether in fact it isn't a factor. I seem to recall that weobserved the same kind of phenomenon when Franklin borrowed sizableamounts in the summer of 1974, and I'm wondering whether there isn'tsomething about the channels of distribution that could have somemarginal impact on the rate relationship.MR. STERNLIGHT. I mentioned the reluctance to borrow as themost reasonably clear and persuasive reason to me. I didn't mean todismiss entirely the Continental borrowing and the cutting of newchannels. I'm not thoroughly persuaded; that has some plausibility tome, but I can't really pin down well in my mind just how the wholeprocess worked.MR. PARTEE. You seem to have the same view that I do. Ifeel that there might be something there too but, of course, one can'tprove it and the arithmetic doesn't support it. But, still, there arequite different channels. The reason I mention it is that it doesn'tlook as if Continental is going to be out of the [discount] windowanytime soon; in fact, they may borrow substantially more over theweeks and months to come. So, if there is a tendency for that [tooccur], it could be exacerbated. And if we had to [unintelligible], Idon't know what to do about it. But I wonder whether it isn't afactor.MR. BLACK. We took a cursory look at it--and this is by nomeans definitive--and it looked as if there was reluctance to borrowby large Chicago banks more than anything else.MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, one thing that happens when wecount it as nonborrowed is that what used to be Continental'sborrowing from time to time automatically gets excluded. Now, thatcan't be quantitatively very big. That would be one factor.MR. BLACK. We figure the Chicago banks wanted to make darnsure nobody felt they were in the same situation as Continental andthey might be more reluctant to borrow.MR. KEEHN. The big banks have not been in.MR. BLACK. That was the most striking difference that wefound in just a quick look at it.MR. KEEHN. In fact, proportionately the District borrowingsare down.MR. AXILROD. We had reports that one or two banks--for sureone New York bank--were told by their executives to stay out of thewindow.MR. BLACK. I can imagine some of them are reacting that way.8/21/84MR. STERNLIGHT. We've had that information from two or threeof the very large banks. And some of them think that it's true ofothers, but not everyone admits to it in a direct way.MR. BLACK. We might see some more, given FinancialCorporation of America's problems.MR. STERNLIGHT. That is possible.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments?MR. KEEHN. This is really an observation. WithContinental's large and prospectively even larger borrowing and withFinancial Corporation of America likely to come in, several peoplehave asked the basic question of what our technical limitation is byway of a borrowing level. What is the operational limit? If there isa possibility of a problem, it might be helpful if we had a ratheruniform statement as to how we might reply to this type of inquiry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we want to give anyimpression that there is any limitation under these circumstances.Unfortunately there is, which surprised me. We have a collateralrequirement for Federal Reserve notes which cannot be met by lendingto banks unless the loans are secured by eligible paper. So, we mayhave to put in a little effort to get some eligible paper to securethose borrowings and to keep track of it. The limits are not all thatfar away, if we get another big bank coming in to borrow or ifContinental's borrowing keeps going up. It depends upon circumstanceselsewhere on a day-to-day or week-to-week basis. That troubles me.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The way I've heard the question isnot so much the way Si has heard it but: At what level will distressborrowing complicate open market monetary policy operations? Willthere be a limit on the amount of borrowing the System can makeavailable to banks that need liquidity because of the problem itcreates for our open market operations?MR. PARTEE. I think the answer is that Paul has [noted]something that is going to hit before the limit on open marketoperations hits.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's going to hit earlier?MR. PARTEE. Yes. That hits early. Hardly anybody knowsabout it, but we have to collateralize those notes and it's a criminaloffense to issue them without proper collateral. So, it would come upwith another ten billion in borrowing.MR. BLACK. When banks are out of Federal Reserve notes wejust send them coins!MR. PARTEE. Well, that's what we would have to do--justwithdraw currency from circulation.MR. MORRIS. Maybe that's how we can get the Susan B. Anthonycoins in circulation!8/21/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon what the marketcircumstances are. If market circumstances are disturbed, as theymight be in those circumstances, we couldn't offset it. But it may bethat we wouldn't want to [do that] in some circumstances.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There are a lot of questions of thatsort floating around and there is a lot of uneasiness. And if FCAcomes into the [discount] window, I think we're going to see asignificant increase in concerns. You know [about] the actions thattook to help FCA out--they are a very tough bunch,strictly profit oriented--and for the first time I heard them sayingthat part of their motivation was their worry that the FCA situationwould extend to other thrifts and just cause general problems which,of course, would affect them, too.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, so everybody will be up to speedon the FCA situation, it's quite likely that they will be in to thewindow this week, though not in a big way in the sense that we've beenpressuring them hard to get lots of collateral with us and all theyhave come up with so far is $2 billion. And that is all very largedenomination commercial real estate loans. We have a team analyzingand evaluating this on a crash effort basis but initially, if they dorequest accommodation, we're going to take at least a 50 percentmargin on that stuff and may never go above that margin. So, forcollateral reasons, we couldn't go above $1 billion right at thismoment. And it's doubtful that they are going to be able to get muchmore collateral into our Bank--at least this week. I might add thatnone of it, of course, is eligible commercial paper. It's all largedenominations of commercial real estate loans. So, it won't help thatparticular aspect of [our collateral] problem.MR. MARTIN. Yes, it may be that it will require a FHLB orFSLIC guarantee behind even a collateralized loan to provide enoughliquidity even in the very short run on a day-to-day basis.MR. ROBERTS. Can we lend to the Home Loan Banks?MR. BALLES. Well, that's an issue I've raised and I hope wewill get a firm answer to that pretty quickly. We may need it. It'sunder discussion now, I understand, but I don't know what the answeris. We did raise the issue of whether we could lend to the Home LoanBank based on collateral promissory notes that they have from theircustomers. FCA has been scrambling hard to get billions of collateralinto the Home Loan Bank; that's where they put their big effort. Buteven there they may run out of gas, in terms of acceptable andavailable collateral. We hope to avoid the loans [to] the HLB itself;it would make many less waves in terms of all sorts of things if wecould lend to FCA, but we are exploring direct loans to the Home LoanBank as a fallback position. We've asked our staff along with theBoard's staff to explore the legal and other aspects of such loans.MR. PARTEE. I'm sure it can be done. That's a paragraph 3loan.MR. AXILROD. Unless things have changed, by law at themoment a loan to a Home Loan Bank--unless it's secured by somethinginterpreted as government securities--would require a 5-man vote ofthe Board and a declaration that it is because of unusual and exigent8/21/84circumstances. It's technically possible by law but it would need atthe moment to be within those confines.MR. FORRESTAL. The press is reporting $800 million borrowingfrom the Home Loan Bank. Is that accurate?MR. PARTEE. No.MR. MARTIN. No.MR. ROBERTS. Paul, if borrowing burgeoned, let's say, to $25billion in the System and we didn't have the collateral to sell, justtechnically isn't it possible that we could raise reserverequirements? I understand the psychology, but that would be themechanical way to resolve it, wouldn't it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mechanically, yes, we could resolve itthat way.MR. ROBERTS. If we announced that that was the purpose.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends on the circumstances; I can'tsee offhand that that's likely to have any advantages over selling inthe market.MR. ROBERTS. But if we didn't have anything to sell--.MR. BLACK. That's not the problem, I don't think.MR. STERNLIGHT. We have plenty of short-term securities tosell.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, actually, that might be a way tomaintain the assets that we need. I suppose that's what we could bedriven to in order to maintain the assets we need to collateralize thecurrency. That could make all the banks love us!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But at that point we probably wouldneed some ease in the financial markets and, if anything, in thebanking system.MR. ROBERTS. We could ease. If we're expanding reserves bythe borrowing, we could less than offset them by the reserverequirements and still ease.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, you could get the same mechanicalresult. I guess we could do it--protecting our assets that we need toback currency.MR. PARTEE. That's hard to explain, though. Can you imaginesaying that on account of the financial crisis, we're raising reserverequirements?MR. ROBERTS. It's better than the alternative, Chuck, ofsaying "We can't accommodate you at the window."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have to raise the reserverequirements quite a lot, I guess.8/21/84MR. MARTIN. Bob, back to your question again, the lastfigure we had yesterday on the American Savings & Loan borrowing fromthe HLB--and I can be corrected by staff--was about $2.3 billion.There was a reduction because of the payback out of thecredit extended on a portfolio of single-family residentialmortgages. So, they paid down part of a HLB balance that was runningabout $3 billion. They--temporarily, I stress--paid it down to about$2.3 billion yesterday. Of course, this morning at 9:00 a.m.California time, they may be right back to that or even higher.MR. FORRESTAL. Is the HLB's limitation basically collateralor their own funding problems?MR. MARTIN. It's a combination of things, including the bitmore autonomy that a HLB Board of Directors has compared to a FederalReserve Bank Board of Directors.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do they have a run on?MR. MARTIN. Of course they have a run on. They have had arun on now--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I see comments in the press. First,they talked about the institutional deposits they were losing. Thenin the last few days, ever since the revised earnings report, I sawthat it was retail deposits.MR. BALLES. Tony, that's totally inaccurate. That New YorkTimes story was especially bad yesterday about their losing only $200million and that most of it was retail. In fact, in the last 4 or 5business days the net loss has been a half billion dollars a day onaverage and the great bulk of it is in these jumbo accounts.MR. MARTIN. So, the so-called retail is very frequently aresult of telephone solicitation in a city like Washington, D.C. by anemployee of FCA or by American. That's so-called retail. It's notfrom Merrill Lynch. That makes it retail.MR. BLACK. They had 300 people doing that, didn't they?MR. MARTIN. 1,000.MR. BLACK. It's 1,000 now?MR. MARTIN. Counting everybody.MR. BLACK. The press reports have been inaccurate on thattoo, then.MR. MARTIN. The only matter that one could say was well donein this whole thing--and not from a moral point of view--has been themanagement of news by these folks.MR. BALLES. They lie very well.MR. MARTIN. I was trying to avoid that term, John.8/21/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have this question of limits. Are you[unintelligible] convinced by Mr. Sternlight's analysis?MR. PARTEE. He's in a better position than we are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [I need] somebody to make a motion.MR. STERNLIGHT. Again, it's very uncertain and a lot dependson the extended credit. If I were sure that that were going upsubstantially, we wouldn't really need the [additional] leeway and Iwould just wait until the situation arises. I'm just asking as amatter of prudence because I see the possibility at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you asking for specifically?MR. STERNLIGHT. An increase from $4 to $6 billion, Mr.Chairman.MR. PARTEE. And this will be in reserve absorbing--MR. STERNLIGHT. That more or less assumes extended creditunchanged.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That isn't exactly likely to happen. Dowe have a motion?MR. PARTEE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a second?MR. MARTIN. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any opposition? If not, it'sapproved. We have to ratify the transactions. Without objection.Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have a question about yourprojection on inflation. You are projecting, as you just said, 1percentage point higher inflation in '85 compared to '84. But if Iunderstood correctly your analysis 6 weeks ago, you are projectingabout a 1 percentage point rise in unit labor costs. Now, that alonecould account for a 1 point rise in inflation but on top of thatyou're also factoring in a 10 or 15 percent reduction in the exchangerate, and presumably you'll get some some increase in utilization ofcapacity. I don't see how, based on your assumptions, you end up withonly a 1 percentage point increase in inflation in '85 over '84.MR. KICHLINE. We now have unit labor costs rising in 1984 atabout 2-1/2 percent and for 1985 we have them up in the neighborhoodof 4-3/4 percent. It's a substantial rise, in part becausecompensation is rising and in part because we have smaller gains inour forecast for productivity. So, we get a substantial rise in unitlabor costs, but from a level in 1984 that is quite moderate. Withrespect to the dollar, you are quite correct that we have the adverseeffects there but they really show up very late in the year. As timehas gone on, in fact, two things have happened. One is that Ted keeps8/21/84saying the dollar in our forecast should come down 15 percent. Thething we don't talk about is from what level; and the level always ishigher in the short run. So, in part what we're dealing with is morefavorable prices from the dollar occurring early on in 1985; it'sreally in late 1985 that the adverse [dollar] effect occurs.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But don't the price effects show up alot earlier than the trade effects?MR. TRUMAN. They certainly show up earlier, but Jim iscertainly correct. If you had [a dollar decline of] 15 percent forthe fourth quarter of the year--which is not what we're projecting--bythe fourth quarter of next year you would only have half of the priceeffects of that. And if you spread out that 15 percent decline overthe next 5 quarters, then you're really talking about having arelatively small component of the price effects of the dollar[decline]. In fact, we have nominal import prices going up over the 4quarters in 1985 by about 14 percent, so even there we don't have allthis coming through, with lags and so forth, until after theprojection period.MR. WALLICH. But even if the dollar stays where it is, sinceit has been rising over time we have some benefit for inflation fromthat rise if it stops.MR. TRUMAN. That's Jim's point.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could follow onthis with a similar question. I generally agree with the staffforecast but, if I understand your analysis correctly, you haverevised your growth forecast upward and you have revised the inflationnumber downward for 1985, whereas the unemployment rate associatedwith both of those is unchanged. There are obviously severalexplanations for this--the strength of the dollar, perhaps increasedproductivity, and so on. But, frankly, I'm a little confused aboutwhat seems to me to be a somewhat inconsistent forecast. Can youenlighten me?MR. KICHLINE. First of all, I would say that given themargin of error I view our real side forecast as not significantlydifferent from what we had before. But you're quite correct that tothe extent we made changes over the 6-quarter period they are up--especially for 1985, where it's a quarter point or so higher. On theinflation side, I'd mention several things. One is very important:food prices. Indeed, we now have a food price increase of about 5percent projected for this year and next. That had been in the rangeof 6-1/2 percent and earlier it was up to 7-1/2 percent. That's a bignumber in terms of the overall price picture. There we think we justmissed; it may show up later but frankly we've held onto that forecastin making downward revisions along the way. But, again, it's veryimportant. The dollar we have talked about. In the very near termthere is energy; we had gasoline prices dropping at something like aseasonally adjusted 12 percent annual rate in the third quarter. Thathas lagged in the PPI; we haven't really seen much of that in the PPIand it should be showing up. When we get the CPI it ought to beshowing up soon; so, in the very near term, we think energy marketsare quite weak. We have noted that also spilling over into coal andnatural gas prices. The only thing that seems to be happening is that8/21/84electricity rates are going up. But that's important for us in theshorter run. More so, I'd say, is our assumption on oil prices whichis that in fact they will be drifting down a little in real terms.So, we have taken a more optimistic view on some of those things. Iwould also note that on the wage side, the numbers that came in on theGNP revision over the last 3 years tended, especially in 1983, torevise down rates of increase in compensation. Part of it is on thebenefit side but as more information became available, compensationincreases in the past now look different--that is, lower and morefavorable. On the wage data, we had been expecting fairly goodnumbers and they were better than we thought. The employment costindex now is running at 4 percent over the first half of the year.It's down more than a percentage point from 1983. The contracts thathave been settled to date so far this year are averaging a 3.8 percentincrease for the first year. Basically, we sat down and looked at abroad range of information from many different sources and concludedthat it would be prudent to knock some tenths off of various things,which we did. And it added up to a more favorable picture.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know as we can stand all this goodnews!MR. BLACK. Just one short question, Jim. [Unintelligible.]Do you have a gross domestic business product fixed-weight index forthe second quarter now?MR. KICHLINE. Here comes the bad news. It was revised up to4.1 percent; the preliminary number had been 3.3 percent. I would saythat that is of virtually no concern because nearly all of it occurredin the residential structures component. The Commerce Department nowsays that prices associated with the residential construction arearose at an 11-1/2 percent annual rate in the second quarter. At thispoint, much of that is really fiction as much as fact. They don'thave very much information.MR. PARTEE. How do they get it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems like an extraordinary rate ofincrease in prices of residential construction.MR. KICHLINE. Well, keep in mind that there was somethinglike a 2 percent increase, I believe, in the first quarter. Theyreported a 5-1/2 percent increase initially in the second quarter andnow they have 11-1/2 percent. If history rings true, they could havezero or minus 3 percent for the third quarter. That number reallyjust flips about. So, it's not in an area that we think is a realproblem, but it was revised up.MR. BLACK. They're probably capturing improvements inquality, as I understand it. What do you think?MR. KICHLINE. I don't know. At this point they really dohave limited information and they have a great deal of trouble withmix problems. We have been getting a lot of increase in multifamilyconstruction and they may well end up revising that away later on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand, all the constructionmaterials prices are steady or down and wage rates are steady.8/21/84MR. BLACK. And there are no changes in the implicitdeflator. It's an unusual phenomenon.MR. MARTIN. In support, Jim, of our outlook for inflation, Ithink we need to be careful not to assume that the projected changesin the value of the dollar--I'm being serious now--will have the kindsof impact on domestic producers and on prices of both business goodsand consumer goods as was true in many other expansion periods. Itseems to me that the loss of share of the market to foreign suppliers--to the out-sourcing entities--is to a large degree a fairly long-term loss of those markets. Domestic producers and domestic sellersmay get those markets back or they may not, and those are importantmarket gains to the foreign producer. He is going to hold on to thatmarket share if that means price concessions or price steadiness. Ithink the American consumer will benefit from that. So, the loss ofshare of the market has a positive impact on domestic inflation inthis country.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the other hand, although there may besomething to what you say, we're going to get some protectionistmeasures that may lead to some direct price [effects] in steel andcopper and other things.MR. MARTIN. And those industries will find all kinds ofingenious ways to get around those measures unless they are very, verybroad and firm indeed.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not sure that your basicproposition is clear because [foreigners had] even a much smallershare of the [domestic] market in 1978 when the dollar was down[unintelligible], and other exporters were giving discounts to keeptheir share of the market. What you're really saying is that becausethe foreign share of the market is larger than it was, they are goingto be more willing to make concessions.MR. MARTIN. They are going to have slow growth in their owneconomies, Tony. Their own markets are not expanding the way theirshare of our markets is expanding. They have a very great incentiveto hold their prices or not increase them much, and that puts pressureon our price setters. These are administered prices and it is veryimportant to keep them steady because they have just gotten that shareof the market. If you have just penetrated it, you are going to bevery careful in your pricing. These are cartel mentalities from theseother countries. They have a different legal scheme where they aregoing to administer those prices carefully, I think, to maintain theirmarket share in the world's biggest market.MR. PARTEE. Do you think they would tend to hold theirdollar prices and eat the change in the exchange rate profit?MR. MARTIN. I do, sir. We're talking about the short run.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Empirically what they do, Chuck, as Ihad occasion to follow it very closely, is that they don't hold theirdollar prices but typically will split with their distributor half thecosts of the exchange [rate change]. The distributors also have aninterest in preserving the volume and share of market, so they will-10-8/21/84cut their own [profit] and the manufacturer will [unintelligible] andbe willing to accept some of the smaller profits.MR. MARTIN. For a while.MR. PARTEE. For a while. This is part of the lag that Tedis talking about.MR. MARTIN. I think we'll have more lag.MR. WALLICH. It troubles me that most of the good news aboutinflation does seem to be reversible over time--not all of it, butmost. It's reminiscent of the early '50s when we were tellingourselves that we had finally achieved price stability and what washappening was that food was coming down for several years andeverything else was going up and the net was stability. This islikely to catch up with us again after a year or two.MR. MARTIN. In a recession?MR. WALLICH. I hope that will give us some boost. I wasjust assuming that the economy would be growing at a stable rate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If you analyze what happened toinflation in the last recovery which was almost a 5-year period goingfrom the third quarter of '75 to the first quarter of '80--and I'm notsaying I've done it scientifically, but I've asked a lot of questionsabout this--we hit double digit inflation problems. Part of that, ofcourse, was a very large drop in the dollar. First of all, I wouldput the oil shock as [unintelligible] and then the drop in the dollar.And part of it, I guess, was monetary policy. Even though the moneysupply numbers looked pretty good for most of that period, interestrates really did not rise and in hindsight the experts tell me thatthere was a shift in the demand function--whatever that means, I don'tknow.MR. PARTEE. Unexplainable!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The interest rates would not keep therise [unintelligible] agreed-upon proposition. Until the dollar begandeclining, which forced some major rises in interest rates,[unintelligible] interest rates probably did not keep the economy fromoverheating. It's interesting to analyze when you look back if thereis any way to give weight to these certain factors. Was the Systemmore to blame than the Arabs and OPEC? I don't know. It's true thatwe probably are not going to have an oil shock. That looks to be thecase. It looks as if there are going to be a lot of assurancesagainst another oil shock almost permanently--I mean by permanently inthe next 5 to 10 years. And presumably we're running monetary policynow somewhat more tightly. We are more sensitive to an inflationarythreat during a recovery. On the other hand, we don't really know howthe dollar will behave and what the impact of that would be. So, itseems to me that there's a useful lesson to be learned from doing morescientifically what I was trying to do--analyzing what is different inthe factors affecting inflation in this recovery than in the last one.That is relative to Henry Wallich's kind of pessimism about[unintelligible]. Are we going to end up doing any better or not? Itseems to me that there are two things going for us that may make a-11-8/21/84significant difference. One is the likely absence of any oil shockand the other is the way we are running monetary policy now.MR. WALLICH. Well, I was speaking about an even more distantperiod. In the early '50s we had no particular oil shocks; we had afood shock. As I look at the numbers for the future, capacityutilization now has been upgraded in this staff projection by almost 1percentage point for the end of '85. Nominal GNP is about the same,but real GNP is significantly higher in the latest projection. Idon't know what happens to unit labor costs but they certainly risevery sharply from '84 to '85. And in that environment, to think thatinflation will rise by only 1 percentage point is on the optimisticside.MR. FORRESTAL. And nobody has mentioned fiscal policy.MR. WALLICH. Right. There is an increase of $20 billion inthe full employment deficit--in other words, something we would haveregarded as enormously stimulative some years back.MR. AXILROD. Governor Wallich, do you think interest rateswill rise in that scenario?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We tend to think there might be somerise in interest rates in '85, which would hold things back a little.MR. ROBERTS. Well, it's interesting how the deficit hasdisappeared from the market's thinking. It was pervasive and now it'ssomewhere in the background.MR. MORRIS. The one positive factor that you didn't mention,Tony, is that if you compare this expansion to the one of the late1970s, the rate of wage advance is substantially lower now than it wasat the same stage of that expansion.MR. MARTIN. And the rate of productivity increase is muchhigher.MR. MORRIS. Not yet.MR. MARTIN. Relative to the 1970s.MR. MORRIS. I don't think we can really document that yet.MR. MARTIN. 2.9 percent and 3.3 percent are the numbers.MS. SEGER. [Unintelligible] in the early '70s.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the trend was. But Frank is talkingabout the same period of expansion. We had a very substantialimprovement in productivity as we came out of the 1974-75 recession.MR. MORRIS. Unit labor costs are doing much better now butprimarily because the rate of wage advance is much lower.MR. PARTEE. And, of course, real interest rates are muchhigher.-12-8/21/84 -13-MR. BLACK. But, Frank, it's interesting if you look atconsumer prices. So far in this expansion they have been 5.6 percent,which is the second largest amount of increase in any of the 6 postwarrecoveries. And the fixed-weight price index is up 6.2 percent versus6.5 percent in the 1970-72 period, which means more is going to profitdespite wage restraint. It doesn't look that different. It's ratherscary as a matter of fact looking at some of these, which I have doneon a preliminary basis but not as thoroughly as I need to. Producerprices look a lot better; they are half as much so far as in 1970-72--2.3 percent versus 4.6 percent for the first six quarters. That hasfood in there; if you look at the nonfood part you might get adifferent impression. I just happened to run across these rightbefore the meeting.MR. WALLICH. Why is it that the projection for the outputper hour--that is, productivity--is so pessimistic for 1985? I missedthat; it goes from 2.5 percent in 1984 to .8 percent.MR. MARTIN. I'm glad you asked that question, Henry.MR. KICHLINE. Because we think that we've overshot trend.The way these things are done, in looking back at history one wouldassume that over time we would get down to a trend rate of growth.Our view is that in 1984 we're dealing with trend growth ofproductivity of around 1-1/4 percent. That's subject to debate, butthat's the number we used. We're getting more than that and we expectwe will slowly be approaching trend, so that in 1985 we fall below1-1/4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In looking at these summaries of Districtbusiness conditions, I thought I detected a considerably more cautioustone than had been reflected earlier. Did I detect wrongly?MR. GRAMLEY. Do you mean on the price side or business?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, on the business [side].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In my District I noticed that myboard reflects that more cautious tone. They are heavily influencedby retail sales, car loans--the [industries] they are in--and theyseem to feel that [business conditions] are not quite as ebullient asthey were. Still, that's just a nuance of tone, I think.MR. BOEHNE. Part of that is that in the business communitythere is nothing very tangible except the old conventional wisdom thatwhat goes up comes down. Things have been going along pretty well andthey think it has to come to an end sooner or later, so I think thatmakes them cautious. Looking at it from an analytical point of view,while expansions vary all over the lot in terms of length, we aremoving up toward an average life for this recovery. And I think Presmade a point on the inflation outlook that things are going alongpretty well right now. As you look out, you can see certainpossibilities of being ambushed but one that hasn't been talked aboutis the possibility of a recession. We have a great reluctance toproject recessions around the table. In fact, most people do. But Ithink at least some mild recession out over the 1985-86 horizon is areasonable possibility. And that is clearly a negative as far asinflation turning around. Being this far [into a recovery] with the8/21/84positive signs that we have--. We really have made a remarkabledownward adjustment in inflation from the last cycle to this one. Andit seems to me that most of those gains are going to be maintained,largely because we have circumstances that are favorable and also justbecause expansions wear out in time and finally they die. That, Ithink, is the basic assurance of it really [not] getting away from us.MR. PARTEE. I really don't understand how you can say that,Ed. We're 2-1/2 years into the recovery. At 2-1/2 years into themiddle 1970s recovery, we didn't have much inflation. Bob was givingthose figures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're only 21 months, I guess, by agenerous interpretation.MR. PARTEE. It took quite a while for that inflation to heatup in the middle 1970s.MR. BOEHNE. Yes, but that really got going, I think, as aresult of the oil shock.MR. PARTEE. Well,--MR. BOEHNE. It contributed to it, but was not a factor to[unintelligible].MR. PARTEE. Yes. The oil increase was about early 1979,wasn't it?MR. BOEHNE. No. Which one are you talking about?MR. MARTIN. The first one was in 1973.MR. PARTEE. I'm talking about the second oil shock.MR. BOEHNE. The second part of the 1970s?MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. WALLICH. That was in '79 and in '74 we had one.MR. PARTEE. I'm talking about the second half of the '70s.It took some while for the inflation to really accelerate. Then onceit accelerated, it accelerated fast.MR. WALLICH. But that was not oil, I think. Oil came afterthat, in '79.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think what happened was this: Inthe first years of the Carter administration basic inflation wasrunning only around 6 percent but they admitted privately that therewere a lot of built-in factors in the policy that was being followedthat would bring that inflation rate up substantially even without theoil shock. But it probably would not have gone to double digit rates;it probably would have gone to 8-1/2 percent without the second oilshock.-14-8/21/84MR. BOEHNE. I think we have much less room here forinflation to get going as it did then because of the level of interestrates. If we had a turnaround in inflationary psychology, I think wewould get a big push-up in long-term rates. And I don't think there'sthat much room between where we are now and what it would take to tripthe economy into a recession. So, I think it would take less of achange in inflationary expectations now than it did then to get theimpact on interest rates that would give us the slowdown.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. Just responding to this question of attitudes,we've been surveying people in our District and I would say theconsensus is that no one anticipates a downturn this year. They areall feeling comfortable. They are a little more cautious as theysense the slowdown. We've been asking them what they think aboutprices and they give us two responses. One is that there are no pricepressures out there from their suppliers and they are not able toraise prices in the market. Every time they try, they get knockeddown. Looking ahead, however, to the year-end or the fourth quarter--not next year--they are all trying to raise prices about 4 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. This brings up something that I wantto check with Jim Kichline on. My people project that even by the endof 1985, assuming these growth figures that we more or less are inagreement on--let's say 3 percent real GNP in 1985--that utilizationof capacity should not exceed 85 percent because they believe thatcapacity will be growing in 1985 at about the same rate. Therefore,even though we're up now to the 83-84 percent area--I don't knowexactly where in there--we probably will not see 85 percent even bythe end of 1985. Is that correct? Is that your assumption?MR. KICHLINE. That's right. We're at 82.5 percent now andthat is our view. It moves up a little but we are assuming thatcapacity growth is increasing perhaps at a 3 to 3-1/2 percent rate nowand we have growth of output slowing, so that our number at anendpoint is around 84-1/2 percent. So, our view would be consistent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That would make a big differencealso, because as I remember the Carter period we got up to 88 percentand that [utilization rate] was putting on a lot of pressure.MR. CORRIGAN. There is somewhat of an inevitability here tooin the context of the ballpark range of numbers that we are looking atfor unemployment and capacity utilization for 1985. We could be luckyand get the kind of inflation picture that people are talking about.But it is also true, inevitably true, that we're getting near thepoint in both capacity utilization and unemployment rates where itwouldn't take a heck of a lot to get a worse result. And with all thegood things that are going on--and there are a lot of them--if we hitthose points, whatever they are, in capacity and unemployment, we willstart to get price pressure. It's as certain as the day is long.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it seems to me the major risk on theprice side is the dollar. Let me examine the proposition that theeconomy may turn out to be a little softer in the near term than Mr.Kichline has projected. We have housing definitely going down now andI think we have some momentum in business spending with the latest8/21/84number--though it may not mean anything--but the latest consumptionfigures are not so great.MS. HORN. In the Fourth District, Mr. Chairman, we do havereports of some lessening in steel, which is definitely in thatcategory of housing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steel still is showing no pickup from thislittle slump in the spring?MS. HORN. Yes, but you were referring to business spending.We are getting a lot of reports of a great deal of enthusiasm on thebusiness investment side of things. That sort of goes on with anattitude that good times will go on forever--forgetting underlyingproblems such as the exchange rate, deficits, and so forth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that seems to be the strongestthing. I suppose for the short run the economy is going to bedetermined by inventories as always.MR. GRAMLEY. The one thing we do know in that respect,though, is that the revisions of the second-quarter statistics makethat picture look a little better. The upward revision of GNP wasaccompanied by a downward revision in the rate of inventoryaccumulation. So that looks a little better. In terms of theprospects for too much of a slowdown, I think one needs to take intoaccount the fact that the 7.6 percent rate of growth in the secondquarter took place despite a drop in auto inventories. If you takeinto account the drop in auto production, you're looking at anunderlying rate of over 9 percent. The staff has it going down along, long way and I think the basics that we've been looking at forthe past year--including the thrust of both monetary and fiscalpolicies--would suggest to me that worries about an excessive slowdownwould seem premature at this point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We've had the shift of the tooling upin the automobile industry.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes. It isn't going to add a lot to the thirdquarter, but it's going to stop taking off so much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was told it was going to add quite a lotto the third quarter.MR. GRAMLEY. It took out 2 percentage points or thereaboutsin the second quarter and the amount of upward thrust in the thirdquarter I don't think is quite that large.MR. KICHLINE. [It depends on] what you are talking about.If you talk about the auto sector in total, it's a little more than 2percentage points difference from Q1 to Q2. If you go through theexercise of saying "If GM had behaved as the rest of the industry,"then it's around a percentage point or a little more that it reduced[GNP] in the second quarter and it adds about a little more than apercentage point in the third quarter. So, there are [different]questions and different numbers. But we have a little more than apercentage point on that basis.8/21/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The GNP figure ought to look prettyhealthy in the third quarter, but I'm not sure that means anything.It has this bloop in it. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I would certainly support your observation thatthere is a more moderate tone out there. Certainly, in the MiddleWest, those sectors of the economy that have been doing well--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was observing on your observation.MR. KEEHN. Thank you. Those sectors that have been doingwell are continuing to do well but in terms of output, employment,income, and orders, there is far less optimism than has been the casein the past. But as always, to repeat a comment, I continue to beimpressed by how uneven all of this is. The folks in the capitalgoods industries--those impacted by both a high level of imports and areduced level of exports--and anybody who is at all involved in theagricultural sector are continuing to be very, very gloomy about howthings are going. And I suppose to say the obvious with regard to theinflation outlook, the UAW negotiations are quite key. And I can'tget a very good feel as to what is going on out there. Those I talkto conjecture that there's a pretty good opportunity of gettingthrough [the negotiations] without a strike and they say that if thereis a settlement, it will be in the 4 to 6 percent area and [thecompanies] can make that up on productivity. But on the other side ofthat coin, the strike fund is at a record level. The union leadershipthat negotiated the concessions by and large has been voted out and ontop of that the negotiations are described as being terribly, terriblycomplicated. I think that's an uncertain scenario, and certainly keyto the wage outlook would be the results of that particularnegotiation.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I think any effort to try toisolate factors that might result in a sharp slowing [of theexpansion] or, as you put it, even an indication of a possibility--Iwon't even say probability--of recession should take into account thepossibility of greatly increased nervousness on the part of consumers/savers/depositors with regard to the thrift industry and to someextent the heightened concern about commercial banking. I'm preparedto expand on that theme, as I'm sure you're all delighted to hear. Wehave a major holder of household deposits--$900 billion or a trillionor whatever the number is, including the savings banks--and the newsand the facts with regard to those industries are going to be verynegative. I would guess, not out of any expertise, that the mediawill find the ongoing saga of difficulties in thrift institutions andquestions about the efficacy of the deposit insurance system apotentially depressing factor on consumer behavior. I'm only sayingthis in response to your suggestion that we examine some of thedownside factors, and this to me is a real one. I don't know whatprobability to attach to it.MR. ROBERTS. Pres, I'm sure that's a possibility; I don'tdeny that at all. But the experience I had was that the stress in thethrift institutions in Chicago was [met with] a yawn. We had onesituation involving a panic in a small S&L where they made people lineup. But whenever they were working [these situations] out in mergers,people seemed to be totally indifferent.-17-8/21/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They certainly aren't yawning out inCalifornia.MR. ROBERTS. Well, what is happening there? Are the under$100,000 accounts actually being withdrawn?MR. MARTIN. Yes.MR. BALLES. Yes.MR. ROBERTS. So that's a real change.MR. BALLES. In two days they lost between a hundred and twohundred million just in retail accounts.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In an ideal response world, Pres, ifyou had your say in the Congress what would you do about it, if therewere a financial crisis?MR. MARTIN. I would appropriate between $5 and $10 billiondollars for the FSLIC and whatever billion the actual analysis showedme for the FDIC.MR. PARTEE. Of course, we do have the New York Savings Banksyet to deal with. Following FCA, we will have to go East and therewill be something in New York City with two or three of them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This FCA situation is extremely difficult.It is so big I don't know if we can handle it smoothly.MR. MARTIN. It's a $33 billion dollar savings and loanholding company.MR. PARTEE. That, by the way, could have an effect on theasset side too. They have an awful lot of commitments to buymortgages and if they don't deliver on those commitments, there isgoing to be quite a scramble among builders to find alternative funds.I don't know if it will have an effect or not all over the country.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck, you will be interested to hearthat the CEO of one of the major money center banks in New York saidat a meeting in my Bank with S&Ls and quite a few industrialists,[unintelligible] "You would think that the regulatory authority wouldbe able to prevent a situation like that." And I said to him that myunderstanding was that they had--that the whole reckless expansion hadbeen frowned upon very seriously by the regulatory authorities butthey didn't have the legal authority [to stop it]. I said that wecouldn't too easily in our system, given all the emphasis onderegulation, issue a cease and desist order simply because ofimprudence or what we judge to be imprudent expansion when thechickens haven't come home to roost yet. [The question is] whether wereally could prove that in court. What is the ability of theregulatory authorities to slow down an expansion that they think isimprudent?MR. MARTIN. They'd have to resort to Section 207 of the Actin the Home Loan Bank System and find that it was unsafe and unsound.I shouldn't try to practice law here, but they would have to go-18-8/21/84further than imprudent and that's quite a finding, as we all very wellknow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And you can ask where the bank regulatorsare too.MR. MARTIN. Regulation is ex post. Supervision of financialinstitutions is always ex post, by the nature of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Miss Seger.MS. SEGER. I would like to make a couple of comments aboutthe auto negotiations, following up on Si's comments. I know mostpeople seem to be betting that there won't be a strike, but there isalso a chance that there will be. I think the primary risk is thatthe cast of characters has changed dramatically. Doug Frazier, ofcourse, has left as head of the UAW and this has triggered a lot ofmovements within the union. Mr. Beaver is not Doug Frazier and no oneknows exactly how he will come down in the final days of negotiationsnext month. Furthermore, if there is no strike and if they settle fora "modest" in quotes 4 to 6 percent, maybe the auto industry can makethat up with productivity gains; but to the extent that thesesettlements are duplicated by other industries that cannot make it upby productivity gains it can have an inflationary impact. I think, bythe way, that the auto executives are more aware of that this timearound than they used to be when they just went zipping along on theirown, not giving a darn what they left in their wake. I think theyhave come to their senses a little.MR. BLACK. Except on their own salaries!MS. SEGER. Actually, if you compare what some of them maketo what some top people in banks make, including some banks that gotinto trouble, I don't think the comparison is that adverse![Laughter.] Also, if there is a strike--as I said, the jury is stillout--I think we will have to pay some attention to this in ourforecast for the remaining months of this year. I know that theeconometric models show that that is quickly made up, but those of usin the trenches who don't just go by models know that there is anadjustment period that isn't smooth necessarily. It does mean a lossin momentum, particularly at the time of the year when the new modelsare being introduced, and this could have an effect. I generallyagree, Jim, with your forecast on auto sales, etc. but that's assumingthere isn't a strike.A second point about inflation prospects that I don't hearmentioned very much around this table involves the changing attitudeson the part of business management. A lot of these people were reallybeaten up in these two recessions we had back to back and I think theyhave gotten new religion about cost control. Again, the old notion ofwho cares--the attitude of write a blank check to the unions or toanybody else because we can always pass these higher costs along--ifit hasn't been completely eliminated is 90 some percent on its wayout. I think we are going to see the effect of this differentattitude, In line with that is a greater commitment to improving theefficiency of production. This is tied in, by the way, to the goodcapital spending numbers. A lot of those capital expenditures are for-19-8/21/84equipment that will allow them to operate more efficiently--expenditures on robotics, for example. I know it's nice to look backat historical trends but when things of this nature are developingthat are different from history, I don't think extrapolating pasttrends is necessarily going to tell us what's coming up. So, on theone hand, I'm more encouraged about inflation prospects than some ofyou; on the other hand, looking at the auto side, I'm concerned aboutwhat that could do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That auto industry settlement is thesecond biggest threat to the inflation outlook, next to the dollar.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The 4 to 6 percent settlement doesnot include the COLA, which they are going to maintain. Therefore, ifinflation goes up, say, 5 percent altogether, then we're talking abouta 10 percent increase in compensation. Am I incorrect?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think--I hope--when they are talking4 to 6 percent they are including the COLA.MR. KEEHN. They are.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How can that be?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a guess.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I had a presentation which said thatthey were not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A 4 to 6 percent increase without the COLAwould be bigger than what they used to get.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if we're figuring inflation isgoing to be up in the neighborhood of 5 percent, are you talking aboutonly a 1 percent [real] increase?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they don't get a full passthrough onthe COLA, I guess.MR. PARTEE. I don't think it's quite full.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's pretty big.MS. SEGER. They toned down the formula--not the last timearound but two times ago--so that they don't get a complete percentage[passthrough].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I wonder if the staff knows theanswer to this.MR. KICHLINE. I don't know the answer. It is the case thatwhen you're talking about these numbers of 6 percent or so that thoseare associated with the COLA. I know that the COLA requirements thatthey get are less generous than what they used to get. They used toget something close to 90-95 percent, but I don't know what the numberis [currently].-20-8/21/84MR. MARTIN. If you recall the Chairman's data on recentmajor settlements that he gave us six weeks ago, there was a string ofno COLA, no COLA, no COLA, small COLA, and so on in that.MR. KICHLINE. He came up with a little over 3 percent in thefirst year on the collective agreements.MR. MARTIN. But the COLAs were almost all absent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those figures are apart from COLAs. Notall those agreements had COLAs. Mr. Guffey.MS. SEGER. But when the auto industry talks about theircosts they have to think in terms of total costs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to yourquestion "Is there more pessimism?" I'd say things perhaps are morepessimistic in the Tenth District. It's a very unbalanced recovery inthe sense that in manufacturing, particularly auto assembly, aircraft,and other manufacturing, together with construction, things are goingvery well. I don't know that there's been any damping of thosesectors of the economy. On the other hand, I'd just note that thegood projection for inflation in the period ahead is tied largely tothe energy and agricultural food sectors, which will have an effect oflowering the outlook for inflation. In each of those cases--in theenergy sector, for example, the dropping of oil prices and thedropping of natural gas prices will impact the discovery andextraction of petroleum products in the Tenth District ratherdramatically. There has been no increase in rig counts in the mostrecent time; it's fairly level and some ten to thirteen percent higherthan it was April of '83, which was a low point in the rig count. Ifenergy prices fall further, we're quite likely to see that sector turndown again, and it's already in trouble. At the same time, as all ofyou know and as has been recited around this table, the agriculturalsector is in trouble and there is no prospect in the sense of exportsor other factors that will raise commodity prices. That's thesalvation and the hope, [but] there is nothing out there. As a matterof fact, there is a good crop assured at this point and that has acontinuing depressing effect. The one tangible number that I canrecite to you is out of a survey of farm land prices; they havedecreased another 2-1/2 percent in the second quarter of 1984. Thathas an impact, obviously, that rolls back into the financial systemthat we quite likely will see around the first quarter of 1985. Ithink we're talking about the thrifts, for example, and potentially asegment of our financial industry that supports the agriculturalsector that could be in really serious trouble late this year or inthe first quarter of 1985. Again, I don't think the interest rates inand of themselves hold out much hope. Lower interest rates wouldhelp, to be sure, but that isn't what will extract the agriculturalsector; it will be commodity prices, and nobody has any real hope thatthat will come to pass.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, in the Sixth District, Idon't think you would find very much caution. There seems to be a-21-8/21/84good deal of optimism and bullishness on the part of most businesspeople. To the extent that there is a cautionary psychology creepingin, I think it can be attributed to three basic things. One is theweakness in the housing sector and related industries. That sector isdefinitely coming off in our District and is giving cause for someconcern. On the price front, we have an interesting dichotomy, itseems to me. On the one hand, there are a lot of people who are stillconcerned about inflation. They look into 1985 and they see capacityconstraints; they see labor-wage negotiations perhaps bringing us outof this period of moderation; and they are a little worried about aprecipitous decline of the dollar, which would hurt us on theinflation side. But on the other side of the coin, there are otherpeople who are concerned about deflation. I've had a lot of questionsabout that, I guess in light of the newspaper articles that haveappeared. So that's an interesting kind of schizophrenia, if youwill, in the market psychology. Some people are afraid of higherprices and others are afraid that the bottom is going to drop out. Athird thing that has emerged very recently is a very, very realconcern on the part of most people about the financial system. When Iwas here 6 weeks ago I said in my comments that there was a "ho hum"attitude about Continental at that time. That has definitely beenreversed. There is now a very definite concern about spillovereffects of Continental and of course now a very, very great concernabout the thrifts. So, those are the three areas of concerns that arebeginning to emerge in our part of the country. And for what it'sworth, the automobile people that I have talked to recently who havemade their annual pilgrimage to Detroit and have come back arereporting that in their opinion there will be a strike. There doesn'tseem to be any question in the minds of the people that I have talkedto about that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure a strike is the worst thingin the world that can happen, if the alternative is a high laborsettlement.MR. FORRESTAL. Incidentally, they think it's going to berelatively short--4 to 6 weeks.MR. PARTEE. A strike followed by higher wages.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the worst--if we get the high wagesand a strike. If no one else has any pressing comments, why don't wehear from Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll take some brief questions now andmaybe have coffee. Before that, let me just say that when I look atthis directive I'm a little hard pressed to see why we're runningbelow [the specifications for the aggregates]. I know we're runningbelow the track a bit on M1; that's fine. I don't know why. Thequestion that occurred to me right off is: Why reduce the target forM1 for the quarter when we're running a little low--or reduce it somuch, anyway? Then, if it went back up and we got the target we werelooking for before, we'd have to tighten. That's a little odd to me.MR. PARTEE. We have a tradition of not changing much, too.8/21/84MR. MORRIS. My question for Mr. Axilrod is: We're seeing aperiod of relatively modest growth in the monetary aggregatesaccompanied by a period of sustained, very excessive rates of growthin total credit. How do you interpret these different growth ratesand what policy implications do they have?MR. AXILROD. One of my problems in answering your question,President Morris, is that I really would not ever have thought ofrunning policy on total credit. But I would--MR. PARTEE. It makes it hard to communicate.MR. AXILROD. I would tend more, if I were looking in thatdirection, to be looking through it to the economy.MR. MORRIS. Well, put it this way, then: Relative to thenominal GNP, the monetary aggregates have been running very low andthe credit aggregates are about in line with what one would have now.Put it in those terms.MR. AXILROD. If we do get a 6 to 7 percent growth in Augustand September, the monetary aggregates--according to our always shakyequations--will be running about as we expected based on the quarterlymodel; on our monthly model, not quite. The quarterly model wouldhave predicted for given interest rates and GNP enough money demand tocreate this much money growth without much different interest rates.So, that wouldn't be far off. What is far off, as you're suggesting,is the credit growth. I had in my head two reasons that I haven'tquite been able to demonstrate statistically. One is that with thegovernment being such a large element in borrowing--when thegovernment is spending more than it's taking in--it has no real optionto reduce assets. It really has to borrow. So, I think its borrowingpropensity is [virtually] one for any amount of deficit spending.Whereas if other sectors are spending in excess of what they're takingin, they have the option of cutting down on assets, which doesn't getreflected in our credit figures. So, I have a feeling that the largepersistent role of the government is raising credit relative to GNP.Also, and I think Governor Gramley mentioned this at a discussionearlier here, we're in a period where we have much more freedom forcredit to flow at any price relative to earlier periods; there is morederegulation. And that may then be permitting a greater flow ofcredit at the high [rates], and the higher interest rates are exertingthe pressure more than the restricted availability. Those are theonly two factors I have, particularly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll suggest another factor too.MR. AXILROD. Well, right. One other is the stock market.I'm not forgetting stock market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we went over that last time. Ithink the growth of domestic demand has been a lot faster than that ofGNP. And those imports have to be financed too.MR. PARTEE. I looked at that yesterday afternoon. It makessome difference, but not a great deal. What happened really is thatthere was less GNP rise last year relative to credit growth than youwould have expected and this year it's more normal.-23-8/21/84MR. AXILROD. We've had a difficult time isolating thesevarious circumstances, but we could go back and look at it. But thoseare the elements I could think of so far.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we have a coffee break.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let us proceed. Let me indicate that Ihave some bias for not making radical changes in these monetary targetnumbers in the middle of the quarter unless there's a very good reasonto do so. What's more important than those numbers may be what weactually do, reflected in the borrowing and the reserve assumptions.So, let us proceed.MR. PARTEE. I had a thought, in the nature of a question forSteve: If one did feel that there had been some change in the demandfor free reserves--as you say in the technical jargon--that was goingto persist for a while, the way to deal with that technically would beto change the initial borrowing. Is that the way that one would dealwith it?MR. AXILROD. Well, that would be one way to do it. Clearly,another way would be not necessarily to change it but, as we observewhat is happening in the course of operations, to adjust in the way wemight adjust if we observed more excess reserves and a change inborrowing attitudes. We would be more willing to oversupplynonborrowed reserves to accommodate it. We would end up with a littleless borrowing than was plugged into the path. There would be twoways of going at it and getting the same result: one prejudging andone not prejudging.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck, even though we did end up witha higher Fed funds rate than we would have expected for a $1 billionborrowing assumption, it seems to me we'd be imprudent now to reducethat borrowing level. It seems to me a little premature, given thestrength of the expansion, to move down, say, to $700 or $800 millionof borrowing.MR. PARTEE. Well, I was asking this as a technical matter.If you thought that there had been a shift in the demand, the way toaddress it would be to change the borrowing level.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But we don't know how long that shiftwill persist. The usual--MR. PARTEE. But if you thought it was going to endure for awhile--. And we do have now the possibility that FCA and Continentalare not done borrowing. They are going to be with us for some monthsto come--maybe years--with, I think, a steadily larger number. So, itcould be that it will persist.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Continental's borrowing is going to go upat least until that stockholders meeting. There may be a chance ofgetting it down then: I don't know. I would just note, to put it inyour mind, that on this international debt situation a portion of itseems to be going as well as could be hoped. That Argentine situationcould still go very much either way.-24-8/21/84MR. PARTEE. Is all of that special credit washed out now?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they still have $100 million. Isthat what you mean?MR. PARTEE. Yes. And then did they pay back the other LatinAmerican countries?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. They either paid them back or madeother arrangements to pay them back.MR. CROSS. They paid them $125 million.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But, you know, that situation hadreally looked [unintelligible]--without getting into too much detail.Even though the risks are that there will be a higher level ofuneasiness about the banking system and the international system thana relaxation of these special tensions, which probably have beencausing the fed funds rate to be higher than we had originallyexpected, it seems to me that that situation is very unpredictable.Even though we want flexibility to cope with that kind of thing, if itshifts in the other direction, it seems to me that at this point if wewere to reduce the borrowing because we ended up with a higher fedfunds rate than we expected, that would be sending a premature policysignal. The market would interpret that as a fairly significanteasing of the fed funds rate. It would be attributed to a shift[toward an] easing of policy. It would not be attributed to a changeof bank attitudes in regard to reluctance to borrow. Do we reallywant to bring about that kind of policy signal at this point?MR. PARTEE. Well, the rate had drifted up by 1/2 or 3/4 of apoint or something like that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. 50 to 75 basis points.MR. PARTEE. There's nothing in the aggregates that wouldhave warranted that, and the economy has been moving broadly in thedirection we expected it to--although maybe not as far--and the pricenumbers are even better. So, I don't see any reason why the rateshould have drifted up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if you expressed an opinionon these specifications. If you would like to do so while you havethe floor, Governor Partee--MR. PARTEE. Well, all right. I would like to retain thespecifications we had last time and view them somewhat broadly. Wedon't have to be slavish about it. That's none of these alternatives,is that right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's none of these. The only differenceof any significance, I think, is on Ml.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think that's right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What would you do about theborrowing?-25-8/21/84MR. PARTEE. I would reduce the borrowing number by $200million to [a level of] $800 million [unintelligible]. Although Idon't like to talk too much about the funds rate, I would expect [itto decline] but I would want to manage its decline. That is, I wouldwant it to drift down only [gradually], the way that it drifted up,rather than suddenly adjust it down by 3/4 of a point the day aftertomorrow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, if I understood Tony right, Iwould stay right where we are. I would leave the borrowing assumptionright where it is and I wouldn't change the specifications. I agreethat this is not the time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You would make the specifications aboutwhere they were last time?MR. BOYKIN. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And the borrowing?MR. BOYKIN. And the borrowing at the same level.MR. RICE. So would I, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I'd like to just say a word or two about what Ithink we ought to be worried about for a longer period. I have beenworried, as everybody knows, about the prospects of worseninginflation. I haven't been right; the staff has been a lot more rightthan I. But I do think we could make a very big mistake if we don'trecognize the potential for that. This was called to my attention byTony this morning when he talked about the Carter period. There weretwo very large mistakes made then. One of them was misestimating thenatural rate of unemployment; we thought it was around 5-1/2 percent.So, when the actual unemployment rate was 7 percent we thought theeconomy had all kinds of room to grow. The other was a failure torecognize how poor productivity really was. Let me just read to youwhat the actual productivity figures were showing in that period.From the fourth quarter of '74 to the fourth quarter of '75 we had a3.8 percent increase in productivity; in '76 we had 2.2 percent; in'77 we had 2.6 percent. It looked like we were doing beautifully. Infact, those were all cyclical improvements in productivity, notsecular trends. And we didn't recognize how bad things really were.So, I think we ought to be very, very careful in looking at the recentproductivity statistics not to get overly optimistic.The other thing I want to mention is that if you look at whathas been happening to monetary policy and take what I would regard asthe best view of how stimulative it is, you have to look at realincreases in the money stock. When you do that, you find that real M1is going up at about twice the rate of the trend rate of increase,which is about 1 percent a year. It's going up at over 2 percent ayear. So, I would like to take some of the benefits of the recentslowdown in money growth [incorporated] in the lower specs of "B." Inote in this connection that if we stick with "B," according to the-26-8/21/84staff we will end up with about a 6-1/2 percent increase in M1 fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter, which is about the midpoint of the range weset at the beginning of the year. And that would be reasonablysatisfactory. So, I would stick with the specs of "B" with $1 billionin borrowing, and I would accept a lower aggregate growth for thethird quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think I understand theadvantage of keeping the same specifications as last time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to be absolutely rigid onthat.MR. MORRIS. No, without specifying exactly why, I thinkthat's a good idea. On the other hand, I think it would be a mistaketo lower the borrowing guideline because the market has now caught onto how we are running policy. If in following a $1 billion borrowingguideline we were to see interest rates drift down to where we thoughtthey would be at the last meeting, then I think the market wouldunderstand that we were not pushing rates down but that rates weregoing down because of the smaller rate of growth in the economy--ifthat eventuates. If we pushed the guideline down, then I think themarket would have a great deal of difficulty understanding why wechose this particular time to move to an overtly easier monetarypolicy.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It would spark another rally in thebond and stock markets and it would look, I think, like politics if wewere to do it at this time.MR. MORRIS. Yes, exactly. Also, if there's any risk oferror in the staff forecast, I think the risk lies in the economybeing stronger than forecast. Therefore, even though the Julyspecifications would seem to be incompatible right now, if the economyis a little stronger then they could become compatible. So, I wouldgo along with the same package we had last time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. I too would like to stay where we are in termsof the borrowing level, money market conditions, and so on. I'd liketo take the shortfall in M1 and to some extent the other Ms in Julyand put it in the bank and save it for a rainy day. I like the ideaof not changing the darn aggregate specifications at the mid-quartermeeting. I don't know exactly how to get this directive language tosatisfy that objective while satisfying the larger objective ofstaying where we are. But I assume we could figure out a way to dothat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I would support a policy whichwould suggest no change at this time. In my own thinking, that reallycomes out to alternative B. I think that would be the rightspecification at this time to bring us back to the midpoint of therange down the road. I don't think we need to be unduly concerned-27-8/21/84about weak monetary growth because it's likely to be temporary. Idon't know what the August numbers will turn out to be, but I thinkJuly was abnormally low. But more importantly, perhaps, I too wouldlike to associate myself with those who would not want to change thatborrowing number. To bring the funds rate down would send the wrongsignal to the market. I think it's very important at this point thatwe not give any evidence or any hint to the market of easing or havethem interpret our policy as one of easing. If the shift in borrowingthat we've seen is going to continue, as it might, the funds rate willcontinue to drift upward. I would assume, Mr. Chairman, if that wereto happen and we don't change the borrowing number, that we would havea consultation as the rate hit that 12 percent level. If theborrowing pattern were to shift back to a more normal pattern, then Iwould be willing to validate an increase in the funds rate, which inturn would suggest to me some consultation at the 12 percent level.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, as I said earlier, I think weought to keep the $1 billion borrowing. I think the advantage ofkeeping the same M1 monetary aggregate target that we had in July isthat if conditions weaken in the economy, then it's perfectlyappropriate for us not to be locked into as tight a policy. I wouldkeep the range of 8 to 12 percent [on the funds rate]. I would notchange that even though the rate is around 11-7/8 percent now; I'dhave a consultation if we have to. And I would change the directiveso that it's symmetrical. You remember that it leans slightly,through the judicious use of "would" as against "might," in thedirection of our being quicker to restrain than to ease depending onwhat happens. And it seems to me that at this point we probably arejustified in moving to more symmetrical language.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I think we're acting under the impact ofsomewhat temporary factors. We've had a bad month and we are verymuch concerned about the banks, the thrifts, the LDCs, and thefarmers. If we weren't acting under these constraints, I at leastwould favor a tauter policy. That seems to me appropriate for thesituation where we have a strengthening economy--looking ahead for1985, anyway. We have a lower rate of inflation, which to me suggeststhat the money supply should grow more slowly on account of the lowerneed for money. The staff sees ahead that interest rates will rise in'85. So, the question really is: Should this happen earlier orlater? And if it happens earlier, wouldn't it reduce somewhat thedegree of the rise? In that sense, we're really just buying time nowby taking account of the undoubted problems that the System faces. Iwould favor something like a "C+" alternative and I would go toborrowing of $1-1/4 billion. I'd raise the funds rate range 1/2percentage point at each end, to 8-1/2 to 12-1/2 percent. I thinkthen it would be logical to be symmetrical again. If that [range] islower, it seems to me we ought to stay asymmetrical.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sure the staff appreciates that noteof confidence that you see in their forecast.specs!MR. PARTEE. [Henry is] trying to bring it about by his-28-8/21/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I appreciated Lyle's briefanalysis of the difficulties of estimating productivity. He does wellto remind us of the errors we've all made in the past. Maybe thestaff has made fewer than the rest of us; I don't know. I think we'remaking a corresponding error today: We are underestimating. The 1-1/4 percent trend line is not the trend line; it's more like 2percent. I think we're returning to the trend line, but I have adifferent trend line, Jim. My reason is that we're a services andinformation workers society now, not manufacturing. Yet we are--maybenot overly obsessed, but--overly concerned with manufacturing output.Finally, I think that software works. Finally, an ordinary humanbeing, not a wizard, can work a personal computer or a terminal orsomething like that. And that has permeated the services side of oureconomy--the sector from which people said we could not getproductivity increases just as they used to say about restaurantsbefore McDonald's came along and showed productivity in that area.This will be the surprise on the productivity side of our society--therising output in services. I'm not saying the services are going tobe anything we really need, but I think we're going to have a lot moreof them, however you measure that. So, I believe that will keepinflation at the staff's [projected] level or even a touch better.The other factor that is going to contribute to lessinflation is one that I deplore, and that is the impact on thefinancial system of failing thrift institutions against a backdrop, ofa government institution--namely the Federal Savings & Loan InsuranceCorporation--that is too small. Whatever has to be done about that asinstitutions fail--whatever receivership or conservatorship pattern wewill suffer through in the next few years from that side of theeconomy and maybe some additional failing banks, given the rate atwhich banks are failing--will change the consumers' outlook. I don'tthink the American public is prepared for the kind of questioning thatwill result from these failures. And it may well result fromsubstantial volumes of uninsured deposits at one or more institutionshaving to be paid back at less than 100 cents on the dollar out ofasset administration which takes many years. If it is thriftinstitutions, these tend to be long-term assets and the payout periodis long and the interest is lost. I believe this is going to be amaterial factor in the thinking of the American public with regard totheir own finances and their own consumption function, if you will,over the next few years. I think that will affect inflation in apositive direction now, though it's unfortunate that it's coming fromthat side.To translate that into policy, I would go along with theChairman's suggestion, which he says he didn't want to make toofirmly, to keep policy where it is in terms of the directive of a fewweeks ago with the exception that I would join my esteemed colleague,Governor Partee, in favoring $800 million in borrowing. I would leavethe range on fed funds alone and would prefer the $800 million onborrowing to give us more flexibility--not only because of theaforementioned change or possible change in the commercial banks'attitude toward excess reserves, but because I feel that the financialfailures will not only affect the attitude of consumers toward savingand spending, but will affect the attitude of commercial banks and-298/21/84other institutions with regard to borrowing from their respectivecentral banks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. At the risk of sounding somewhat complacent, Ithink our policy for 12 months has been just about as good as anybodycould have dared hope it would be. We came pretty close to themidpoint of our revised target range in the last half of last yearand, with the behavior of the figures in July, we're heading prettyclose to the midpoint of the present target range. So, we're in agood position to finish the year somewhere near that, regardless ofwhich of these alternatives we adopt. And with velocity apparentlypicking up, it looks to me as if that's about where we ought to comeout. I really prefer the [aggregate] specifications of "C" becausethey get us a little closer; by the same token I recognize there's nota whole lot of difference in these things. So, in my usual display ofeclecticism I would opt for the other specifications of "B," whichwould leave the federal funds range unchanged and the borrowing targetunchanged. And, like Tony, I would prefer that we go ahead and makethis directive symmetrical.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Miss Seger.MS. SEGER. I would go along with the idea of keeping thespecifications the same as they were at the last meeting. As I readSteve's words here on page 5 [of the Bluebook], they suggest thatalternative A comes closest to those adopted at the last meeting. So,that would be the one I would go along with. For reasons of concernabout the health of the financial system, I would be reluctant to havethe fed funds rate go above where it currently is, again because Ithink there are some special and technical reasons that are keeping itup there. If it could be allowed to back off a bit, I would certainlywelcome that. In terms of the borrowing target, I would go with Mr.Partee's $800 million number.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, I would agree with Bob Black. It seems tome that we happen to be in one of those times when everything seems tobe going very, very well--indeed, just about right. The comments atour last meeting suggested that the economic expansion was going to bea bit more robust than perhaps has been the case with the passage oftime. I have some feeling that our comments today may suggest agreater degree of moderation than may be the case. I do think thereis an element of moderation out there. Nonetheless, it seems to methat the outlook is excellent; there are inflation risks but theoutlook seems to be favorable. Therefore, I would suggest--since wehappen to be at about the midpoint of the range for M1--thatcontinuing that as an objective and as a target between now and theend of the year is a very desirable alternative. That would put me inthe camp of suggesting that alternative B would be the mostappropriate. The borrowing level would be, say, $1 billion. I wouldleave the fed funds range as it is. I do think that the directiveshould be balanced but also that it should be worded in a way thatwould clearly suggest that we didn't change our basic objectives atthis point; some of the wording could be adjusted accordingly.-308/21/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All these comments that things are goingnicely brings to mind that I just read a book about the battle ofMidway where the Japanese sailed there with their whole fleet thinkingeverything was going nicely and one day later they thought it was notso nice. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I came in to this meeting with some bias toward"B," but as I listen to the discussion, I agree that there is somevirtue in keeping the quarterly specifications where they were inJuly. But I think those specifications are inconsistent with abillion dollar borrowing figure. There is no great virtue inconsistency but I think there is that problem. My own sense is thatthere is something to this business with reserves. As to how much weshould want to adjust for it, I don't think we should do it in anyspecified way but we ought to at least have a bias that attempts tocorrect for it. My bias would be for borrowings of less than $1billion; I think $800-$900 million makes some sense. We have let thefunds rate drift up over the last several months; we start outthinking where it's going to be and it ends up being higher. So, Idon't think there would be any disaster to the economy or expectationsabout what we're doing if it had some downward drift; in fact, thatwould be my bias. I would keep the funds range at 8 to 12 percent andI would have a symmetrical directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Overall, I've been pretty well satisfied withthe posture of our policy. In view of the ongoing strength of theeconomy in most, if not all areas, I think it would be premature toease overtly. On the other hand, I'm particularly aware on the WestCoast right now of the fragility of our financial system and what therepercussions could be of another major institution in serioustrouble--and this time possibly involving outright losses to holdersof uninsured deposits. Unless or until that situation clarifies, Iwould be reluctant to see anything happen to push the federal fundsrate up higher. So, I come out favoring alternative B but along withfour others who have already spoken on the subject, I also would be infavor of reducing the borrowing level to $800 million and would favoradditionally the so-called symmetrical directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. It seems to me that the present policy isproducing about the right results. We had 7 percent growth in moneyin the first quarter and 6 percent in the second quarter. So, Iwouldn't change the borrowing target. I think we ought to pay lessattention to the fed funds rate and, therefore, I would like to seethe band widened by 1/2 percentage point to accommodate theprobabilities there. At this stage of the cycle and with the pastpattern of money growth, it seems to me that the odds favor somepickup in inflation notwithstanding the anecdotal information that wehave. I would favor alternative B, indicating growth of about 5-1/2percent in M1 in the third quarter. This also would have theadvantage of avoiding the base drift and would set us up in a goodposition in the fourth quarter to start our plan for money growth fornext year. In terms of the concern in the marketplace, we have tothink about what concerns might arise if we were to ease at this time,causing concern about inflation and possibly creating the opposite-31-8/21/84result than we intended, which would be higher long-term rates. Long-term rates have eased some at this point and if we hold firm in ourpolicy, the probability is that they could ease some more. I don'tthink that just a slackening of growth in the business cyclenecessarily should be associated with lower inflation. We could havethe worst of all worlds--a slackening growth and rising inflation, aswe've had in the past.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also would opt forthe B alternative. My concern is with the current federal fundslevel. I would hate to see it go any higher and thus would maintainthe 8 to 12 percent range. But my real concern is: What happens ifFinancial Corporation of America does indeed affect the financialmarkets and create a flight to quality and, as a result, the federalfunds rate balloons far beyond the 12 percent? What is the properresponse of the Federal Reserve under those circumstances? Do we tryto keep the funds rate within the 8 to 12 percent range or at the topof that range? Or do we pour in reserves in order to liquify thefinancial system and in order to contain the damage that might be doneby the Financial Corporation of America situation on top ofContinental? I pose it in the form of a question. What would be theproper response? How should this Committee and how should the Deskreact to that? It seems to me there is more potential of that than ofthe fed funds rate falling rapidly and giving some indication to themarket just before an election that we have eased. I would keep thebillion dollar level, to be sure, and the 8 to 12 percent range, but Ipose as a question: How should the Desk react if the FinancialCorporation of America affects the funds rate and pushes it up farbeyond the 12 percent for some period of time? I guess I'm posingthat question to you, Mr. Chairman, since you have daily contact withthe Desk.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we'll deal with thatquestion later.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I still opt for "B" at the moment until wefind out something different.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm left without a comment from Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. I feel that M1 should come in at the end of theyear at the midpoint of its range for a lot of reasons that have beenpreviously stated, and I'm pleased to see that it's near there now.Either alternative B or alternative C or something in between I thinkwould work toward achieving that goal by the end of the year. I wouldbe in favor of maintaining the $1 billion borrowing level and I thinkit would be a mistake to give the markets a signal through the fedfunds rate of any real change. For that reason, I would like toprotect against our producing a reduction in the federal funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess everybody has spoken. Ohno, Governor Rice. No, I have your comment here. We have somedifferences of opinion, I would say.MR. PARTEE. Since I'm guilty of throwing in the $800 milliondollar figure on borrowing, let me just say that I must have picked-32-8/21/84that off the wall. I don't know whether that's the figure or not.The point that I wanted to make is that if there has been a shift inthe demand for excess reserves, I think we ought to recognize that andmake some adjustment. And in my view if that results in a downwarddrift in the funds rate, we were certainly all content to see it driftup, so why shouldn't we be prepared to see it drift down? After all,the aggregates are on the weak side and there's nothing inconsistentin that. But I don't know whether $800 million is the right figurefor what I'm talking about.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Each $100 million represents about aquarter of a point. So, if you put it at $800 million instead of $1billion, you would be bringing down the fed funds rate 50 basispoints, in theory.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's a very horseback kind of thing. Iwould rather have somebody who is technically proficient with thenumbers indicate what they think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me take off from your commentand suggest what may lie somewhere in an area of consensus. Lookingat the borrowing first, I guess it would be consistent with leavingthat first sentence of the directive unchanged and nominally start offwith something around $1 billion. Maybe in the old fashionednomenclature--particularly if the market seems sensitive or somewhatdisturbed in view of all these financial things or if the businessnews softens or if the money supply continues to come in low or all ofthe above--we should start off with some bias toward erring on theside of somewhat lower numbers but we don't aim at those.MR. GRAMLEY. When you say "bias toward lower numbers," areyou talking about borrowing or interest rates or aggregates?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking about borrowing now. I'm notsaying aim at a lower number right now. I'm saying that when we makeall these decisions for the next several weeks--[taking into account]the specific reserve averaging periods--we are willing to err a bit inthat direction, depending partly on our guidance on the funds rate andhow tight things look. I'd keep the funds band where it is, which iswhat most people have suggested. Then we would aim more overtly for alower number if in fact the money numbers came in low or we had someof these other contingencies developing; but we wouldn't do thatwithout that evidence. In terms of the numbers for the variousaggregates, I don't think M2 or M3 are at issue, if I understand [thecomments], except maybe for those who wanted "C." They are so closethat it doesn't make any difference. I'm a little troubled by thethought that somehow we would aim as low as 4 or 4-1/2 percent [on M1]even overtly and with that kind of symmetrical approach withoutknowing a little more about the economy and other things than I knownow. I would at least go higher on M1 than any of those alternativessuggest. That's interrelated with how we word the directive. With ahigher number we certainly can make it symmetrical, recognizing thatwe're starting below so we already have this slight bias towardeasing. If we end up with a lower number, I don't know what we do. Iwould make it asymmetrical in the other direction and, therefore, endup in the same place anyway.MR. CORRIGAN. You lost me on the last loop.-33-8/21/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we started off with an M1 figureof 4 percent and we began running above it, depending on where we are,I would not be very anxious to raise the borrowing level.MR. CORRIGAN. That was the second point. I understood that.On the one after that you lost me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't remember the one after that.MR. PARTEE. I think it was that you would make itasymmetrical in the other direction. If you put [M1] at four percent,then you wouldn't tighten if it came in higher but you would ease ifit came in lower.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I just think that in terms of thevisuals you get more or less the same result. Why change the numberand raise all the questions about whether we had a different numberthan we had last time?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Exactly. And then you can havesymmetrical language too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether it's worthwhile ornot, but we can even off all these numbers and make them 5 percent, 7percent, and 9 percent. I don't know what words of art we have; italready says "around."MR. PARTEE. We can't use "around" because it's alreadythere.MR. GRAMLEY. How would you interpret this 5 percent if youcould have an asymmetrical calculation [for the] 3 months? If youtook that 5 percent literally, it would imply a growth rate of 8-1/4percent for August and September and that's way too high for me to becomfortable with. If you wanted to add -1.5, 5.5, and 8.1 percenttogether and [say that] averages [roughly] to five, then that's thesort of asymmetrical calculation I could agree with.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.] I don't understand.MR. GRAMLEY. My point is that we start from a low base; Julywas negative. If you use 5 percent for the period from June throughSeptember, it implies an August-September increase averaging 8-1/4percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm assuming your arithmetic is correct.Is that correct?MR. AXILROD. Well, pretty close. I think it might be morelike 8 percent with the compounding, but it's right in that area.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's always the case. Of course,[earlier] everybody accepted a minus 2 percent for July, which wasreally a very unusually low number. I presume we would accept a 10 or12 percent for September, which is very well what it might be if theeconomy is reasonably strong. I think we would want to put them alltogether and say the average was not bad.8/21/84MR. GRAMLEY. Putting my point differently: If the staff iscorrect, a specification of $1 billion in borrowing to start with--andholding to that with the kind of federal funds rate which would beimplied if the current demands for borrowing relative to that fundsrate prevail--would not give you 5 percent growth. It would give yousomething more like 4 percent. So, if you were aiming for 5 percent,in fact, what you would do is proceed to lower levels of borrowing,lower levels of the funds rate, and more increase in the aggregatesover time. And I don't think that would be appropriate.MR. PARTEE. You're talking about the difference betweenaccepting and seeking.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.MR. PARTEE. I think that is an important difference. Iguess my feeling is that the market determines what the money numberis going to be in the short run a lot more than we do. And, as youknow, it's a highly volatile number.MR. GRAMLEY. If one were willing to play that game and putin a 5 percent for visual purposes only, then I wouldn't have anyproblem with it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have assumed that the 5 percentbecomes meaningful only if conditions weaken.MR. GRAMLEY. In the economy?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In the economy, right.MR. GRAMLEY. Beyond what the staff is talking about?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's right. Otherwise, theborrowing assumption would prevail and we'll see more or less acontinuation of the present fed funds rate. But if conditions weaken,then I don't think we should have locked ourselves in to a 4 percenttarget, because I think it would be justified that the fed funds ratewould come off somewhat on its own. What I'd be opposed to is for themarket to perceive a clear and overt easing of policy by a move now to$800 million [on borrowing].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're in an area of nuance. That isnot unimportant, but I'm not sure it's going to be reflectedadequately in any directive. I don't know whether this is the bestway to do it, but look at it sentence by sentence. It says "In theshort run the Committee seeks to maintain"--the same language we'vehad. Let me as a first approximation either leave [the numbers] thesame or round them off to the lower levels. Make them 5, 7, and 9percent or where they are. What I would almost do--I wouldn'tnecessarily suggest this because I don't know that I'd want to givethat much of a signal--is reverse the whole next sentence. So"Somewhat lesser restraint would be acceptable if growth in themonetary aggregates slowed significantly, while somewhat greaterreserve restraint would be acceptable in the event of more substantialgrowth. In either case, such a change would be considered...." Wedon't have to reverse the sentence but I certainly would make it"would" instead of "might."-35-8/21/84 -36-MR. MARTIN. If we reverse it, we need to reverse thesentence that shows that we did contemplate the downside risks in thefinancial system that we perceive could occur.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I realize we're nitpicking, but evenso it seems to me that if we move to symmetry by changing the "might"to "would," that's sufficient. If we go ahead and reverse the orderof this, we'd look a little silly if the economy turns out strongerthan we think. It looks as if we're really getting into semanticsignals by reversing those, don't you agree?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Heck, I don't [know.] It might raise somequestions about attaching more significance to little tiny wordingnuances than we want to tolerate through time. That next sentence Icertainly think should stay.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I do too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's probably considered boilerplate atthis time. We have 8 to 12 percent down below [for the funds raterange].MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, while you're on nuances, online 74, given what has happened in July, is it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have any line 74 on my copy.MR. FORRESTAL. The way it's written, right after the "whilesomewhat lesser restraint might be acceptable" it says "if growth inthe monetary aggregates slows significantly." Since we've hadsignificant slowing in July already, I wonder if it wouldn't be helpedby adding the work "further" or something like that.MR. ROBERTS. Well, it has just bounced around month-to-month. April was down, May was up, June was up, July was down, andthe quarter is up.MR. PARTEE. Well, then it gets into ambiguities, Bob. Slowsignificantly further than minus 2? I think it is stated in terms ofthe quarterly numbers. And the "slow significantly" means relative towhatever number is in there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, the two sides of that are notsymmetrical as written. The first half is quite clear. "In the eventof more substantial growth of the monetary aggregates" I assume meansmore substantial quite clearly than what is in the previous sentence.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes. It probably would be wise, though, givenBob's point, to change that "slightly" to "were significantly slower."That would use parallel language to what was in the first part of thesentence and would deal with Bob's point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Use what?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. "Were substantially slower," if youwant to use exact symmetry.8/21/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "In the event of significantly slowergrowth." That's symmetrical with the top part of the sentence.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's like the Delphic oracle!MR. MARTIN. But "were" implies it isn't going to happen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Of significantly slower growth." Now,what numbers do we put in up above?MR. MARTIN. 5, 7, and 9 percent.MR. PARTEE. I'm attracted to try it with the 5, 7, and 9percent; maybe it has been more on our minds than anybody else's thatwe [typically] don't change these rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've changed them in the past andsometimes we haven't changed them. I just have a brief record here.It looks like when we've changed them--well, there's one exceptionwhere we changed [M1] from 7 percent to 5 to 6 percent and kept theother two the same. Others we have not changed at all. Once we had 6to 7 percent and we changed it to well above 6 to 7 percent; once wechanged one from 6 percent to 7 percent and we changed some of theothers by 1/2 point, basically. A 1/2 point is the maximum we'vechanged the others. What we've done before is change the adjective infront of it. We've said "This action is expected to be consistentwith growth of M1, M2, and M3 at annual rates of" and following someprevious pattern we changed it to "somewhat less than" or "around" orsomething like that. That's the kind of thing we've done before. Isuppose that may be an alternative--just to change the adjective infront of it--but I don't think it makes a lot of difference. We cansay "This action is expected to be consistent with growth in M1 ofaround 5 percent or a little less and growth in M2 and M3 at 7 and 9percent, respectively."MR. GRAMLEY. That sounds all right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that sound better to people? "Thisaction is expected to be consistent with growth in M1 at around 5percent or slightly less and in M2 and M3 at annual rates of 7 and 9percent, respectively."MR. PARTEE. We had 7-1/2 percent for M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can leave 7-1/2 percent. Do youwant to leave 7-1/2 percent? Either way you like: 7-1/2 or 7percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd leave it at 7-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many have a preference for 7-1/2percent? One, two, three, four, five, six.SPEAKER(?). Seven.MR. BOEHNE. I'll make it eight; I don't care.MR. RICE. I don't either.-37-8/21/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have six "preferences" and at least two"don't cares." All right, let's try this for the language and thenwe'll discuss the nuances. "In the short run, the Committee seeks tomaintain existing pressures on reserve positions. This action isexpected to be consistent with growth in M1 at an annual rate ofaround 5 percent or slightly less, and in M2 and M3 at annual rates ofaround 7-1/2 and 9 percent.... Somewhat greater reserve restraintwould be acceptable in the event of more substantial growth in themonetary aggregates, while somewhat lesser restraint would beacceptable in the event of significantly slower growth. In eithercase...." All the rest is the same, including the 8 to 12 percent[funds rate range]. We are aiming at $1 billion of borrowing. Werecognize that we're starting out at least with growth a bit on theslow side. If we got evidence of some slowing in the economy--I guessin terms of the earlier discussion, I'm forgetting now about thesespecial financial problems--and there are further upward pressures onthe federal funds rate, we probably would be heading below $1 billion;but if we don't have those signals, we wouldn't, barring this otherfinancial market question.MR. GRAMLEY. Are you talking about slowing in the economybeyond expectations?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I don't know exactly what they are,but that's what I'm talking about.MR. PARTEE. It's hard to [quantify].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we get a weaker employment number,weaker this number or that number--broadly lower than expectations,yes. If we have financial problems that are great enough, we wouldprovide some liquidity. I don't know how one judges that in advance;I think we have to play it by ear. We had this problem for a veryshort period of time with Continental when their borrowing went way upand the market was disturbed and we didn't take the money out rightaway, day-by-day, because the market was tightening up on its own. Icertainly would take into account if this were all reflected, as youput it, in a flight to quality and in fact the federal funds rate andthe CD rates were going way up--and to make rather extreme assumptions--the prime rate were going up. I would interpret that as getting amuch tighter effect on policy than we calculated in making theseassumptions on policy right now.MR. GUFFEY. And, therefore, you would react by providingsubstantially greater reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. If they really got substantial, we'dhave a Committee consultation. Well, that question certainly would beraised.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, you wouldn't have anyalternative.MR. PARTEE. I'm unclear as to what would happen to the fundsrate. I could certainly see a widening spread--CD rates going up andbill rates going down--as an indication of a flight to quality. I'munclear about what would happen to the funds rate.-38-8/21/84MR. AXILROD. Our experience has been, Governor Partee, thatwhen that has happened it has tended to put upward pressure on thefunds rate--[recently], in any event.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is right in this cycle. Ithink what we're getting, and it wasn't mentioned earlier, isrestraints on the supply side of federal funds as well as a reluctanceto borrow from the Federal Reserve. People are cutting back on lines.MR. CORRIGAN. I think there's a husbanding of federal fundsgoing on.MR. GUFFEY. Dislocation.MR. PARTEE. I guess that could happen, if they really becamesensitive. Otherwise, it's a very liquid instrument to put your moneyinto.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a liquid instrument if you have agood borrower. People are a little nervous about the borrowers thesedays. I think you see that in the Euromarket and you expect that toput more pressure on the domestic funds market.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The spread had gotten up to 160 basispoints in Treasury bills and 3-month CDs. Then it went down a littleto about 60 or 70 basis points and now it's back up to about 100.MR. PARTEE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know in these disturbed periodshow good those quotations are that we get on CD rates.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are probably people's imagination;they are rates they would like to aim at for CDs.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, give or take maybe 10 basispoints, I think they're probably fairly accurate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they're accurate for some banks thatcan operate; some just can't operate in these markets. Anyway, it'sunderstood what we're voting on and the nuances have been adequatelyexplained? If there are no other questions, we will vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich No8/21/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess that completes [our agenda]. Imight say one other thing. This is of no substantive importance, butI have found it convenient in defending why we don't release minutesright away among my other arguments to say that when we have a basicpolicy decision we typically do announce it right away. These otherthings are just implementing policy that we've already decided upon.And that broadly is reflected in the directive, it so happens. Wespeak about a policy directive but that refers to the whole thing,which has all the long-range targets. When it comes to what we werejust discussing--the language is probably right here--it's called anoperational paragraph [in the Bluebook]; I forget what it's actuallycalled in the directive.SPEAKER(?). It's about that word.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The phrase "in implementing policy" oftenappears. I'd just like to sharpen up the language a bit in theearlier discussions to make some distinction between policy with acapital P and implementing policy. This paragraph is implementingpolicy.MR. BOEHNE. Do you find that a convincing argument?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It is useful. Is it credible?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, I think it is a usefuldistinction. I don't think it's just purely to handle the substantivepoints. People can say "I want to know what your operational approachis." But in terms of our own thinking we ought to make thedistinction. I don't think we have changed anything here.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but we do say--and it's a littleinconsistent with that--that one reason we don't want to release theminutes right away is that if conditions change during theintermeeting period we may want to adjust the standards. Right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think [unintelligible] policy.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That also sounds like an adjustmentof policy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're talking about semantics. Whatdo you call policy and what do call something else? I think there isa distinction between--to use another phrase--longer-term strategy,which is a more basic approach, and these more tactical decisions.[Unintelligible] be tactical.MR. WALLICH. What would be a "basic approach" short, say, ofchanging the annual ranges?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, obviously, [what we did] in October,1979--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And the middle of 1982.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --and in late '82 or October of '82. Andwe did announce that very promptly. We didn't change the ranges but8/21/84we said we were deemphasizing M1 and we announced it--not clearly, Iguess. It was a more strategic decision.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Isn't this [directive] technically acommunication to my Bank?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, and I think it's written that way.It says--MR. PARTEE. It's a directive to the Manager.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a directive to the Manager and itsays "In implementing policy, follow this operational approach."That's what it says. I think that distinction is in the directivenow; it could be sharpened a bit. The whole thing is called thepolicy directive, but it repeats all the basic stuff.MR. BOEHNE. I have the impression--and it's just animpression--that we have fewer and fewer friends who come to ourdefense on our current release procedure and that we have gotten moredefensive, say, over the last year or so than we have been in a numberof years. Is that accurate or inaccurate?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I think it's probably true. There'scertainly a lot more noise about it. It's the kind of issue that theKemp group has seized upon and they make a lot of noise about it.Certainly, the in-depth analysis is much greater now than it was.It's one of these things that's like fighting motherhood. Just likefreedom of information, it's very hard to argue against it, eventhough you know it's a bad idea.MR. BOEHNE. Yes, I'll agree with that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. All newspaper reporters, even theones who are supportive of us, start off with a presumption that themaximum amount of disclosure is something good. It's very hard toargue otherwise.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve has just pointed out something thatwe can put in this directive we just approved, with your approval.The previous paragraph says "The Committee understood that policyimplementation would require continuing appraisal" and so forth. Theinsert would be: "In implementing policy in the short run" or "Inimplementation of policy in the short run."MS. SEGER. Since I'm still intrigued by this fed fundsmatter, would it be possible to request the research people at theindividual Federal Reserve Banks to call around to some commercialbanks to see if, in fact, they are more carefully analyzing the banksthat they will sell fed funds to or if they've changed their approachin the last couple of months?MR. ROBERTS. I could give you the answer. They are.-41-8/21/84MS. SEGER. Yes, I've talked to two individual banks thathave. I have not done a survey.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd be a little reluctant to do a surveysimply because if we do, that itself becomes [an issue]. They beginasking why we're making a survey.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They interpret that as a signal thatthey should borrow less.MR. BOEHNE. The Continental situation made a lot of [ourDistrict banks borrow less] even before that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's something to keep our earsopen to rather than taking a survey.MS. SEGER. I didn't mean a written survey, just some--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But even if you just call around in anorganized way, it becomes a [survey].MR. RICE. It's still increasing [reporting burdens].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Our manager of reporting burdens pointsout that that becomes a survey too. But apart from that, I think it'sjust the kind of thing that would raise more questions than we areprepared to answer. I have had that comment reported to me--not byany banks, but by nonbanks. Peter mentioned that it was attributed toa deliberate effort on the part of the Federal Reserve to police thediscount window more rigidly. And I assume that isn't the case.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We checked up on that. There's noevidence of that at all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've checked with other Reserve Bankstoo?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. I had my discount officers callsome of the other discount officers.MR. STERNLIGHT. It was a conference call among the discountofficers, and there was no substantiation of that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. This reluctance to borrow is not justat the larger banks. At least two of the larger banks said to us thatsome of the regional banks were more reluctant to borrow. I don'tknow whether you would find any in your area being more reluctant toborrow. Because of the rumors in the market, every bank leans overbackwards.MR. ROBERTS. I think they are torn. This wide spread makesthem want to have mechanical errors on Friday and that sort of thing.MR. GUFFEY. I find it strange under those conditions that weseem to be hitting the'targets not only on borrowed but on excessreserves. I should think that excess reserves would be ballooningunder these circumstances.-42-8/21/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They're not.MR. GRAMLEY. Why would a bank want to hold additional cashassets that are [earning] nothing?MR. GUFFEY. I'm talking about the fact that there's adislocation. In other words, there's a reluctance in regional banksto sell to money center banks.MR. GRAMLEY. But they could put it in other assets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, presumably there's some fine balancehere. I'm just thinking out loud. They try to hold excess reservesand not borrow; then we provide enough reserves to satisfy [theirdemand for excess reserves]. And the equilibrium happens to be at an11-3/4 percent funds rate. [Unintelligible]--well, the M2 is not.MR. PARTEE. I don't think there's any evidence that we'reproviding reserves more generously.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the money supply has gone down.MR. PARTEE. And the reserve numbers are on the weak siderather than strong. So, it's something that we're doing here that isnot ginning up the numbers but ginning them down. In other words, ifthere's something we're doing--MR. ROBERTS. Why do you say the money supply has gone down?It hasn't gone down year-to-date; it hasn't gone down quarter-to-quarter; it was just down in July.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was down in July.MR. ROBERTS. It's back up already in August.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it's going down--MR. BALLES. As a matter of fact, I wanted to ask Stevewhether that July figure is for real--that is to say meaningful--orwhether it might be a seasonal problem.MR. AXILROD. Well, we run concurrent seasonals just to seehow we're tracking once the revision is in. I don't have the figuresin front of me but my memory is that the current seasonal through Julywould change that rate of growth from minus 1/2 percent to plus 2percent and would change some of the others. There's a little eveningout. So, it's still relatively low but it was--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not suggesting that a minus 1-1/2percent is reflective of the trend of M1 growth.MR. AXILROD. It doesn't change the trend.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope it does not.MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems to reflect that M1 is not asreliable as we had hoped it would be.-43-8/21/84 -44-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it is [unintelligible] you haveunrealistic expectations of month-to-month fluctuations. We had azero in April and a big May, and a big June balanced by a small July.If you take the four months together, it doesn't look too bad.MR. ROBERTS. It's very stable quarter-to-quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The sandwiches are out there.END OF MEETING