Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 26-27, 1984A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,D. C., on Monday, March 26, 1984 at 2:00 p.m., and continuing on Tuesday,March 27, 1984 at 12:00 p.m.Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, 1/ Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, 1/ Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Burns,1/ J. Davis,1/ R. Davis,1/ Kohn,1/Prell,1/ Siegman,1/ Stern,1/ and Zeisel,1/Associate EconomistsLindsey,1/Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market Accountsession and Tuesday session before action to adoptdirective.PRESENT:1/ Attended Mondaydomestic policy3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, Mr. Solomon will beelected. We have a list of [proposed] officers, which is virtuallyidentical with that of last year, with a couple of additions from theBoard's staff. Do you want to read the list, Mr. Bernard?MR. BERNARD. Okay.Staff Director and Secretary, Stephen AxilrodAssistant Secretary, Normand BernardDeputy Assistant Secretary, Nancy SteeleGeneral Counsel, Michael BradfieldDeputy General Counsel, James OltmanEconomist, James KichlineEconomist (International), Edwin Truman.Associate Economists from the Board:Donald Kohn;David Lindsey;CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those are the two additions, I think.MR. BERNARD.Michael Prell;Charles Siegman; andJoseph Zeisel.Associate Economists from the Reserve Banks:Joseph Burns;John M. Davis;Richard Davis;Richard Lang; andGary Stern.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As usual, the associate economists fromthe Reserve Banks reflect the nominations of the Bank presidentsserving [as members of the FOMC]. We have two more, I think.MR. BERNARD. They come later.MR. PARTEE. So move.MS. TEETERS. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, those will be approved.Now we have the selection of a Reserve Bank to operate the SystemAccount.MR. PARTEE. Time to move that around, isn't it?SPEAKER(?). Let's bid!MR. BLACK. New York has already got a Vice Chairman!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to propose New York?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I propose New York.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a second?3/26-27/84MS. TEETERS. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We have the selectionof the two Managers. I assume the present incumbents have beenapproved by their Board.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They have been.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a nomination for Mr. Sternlightand Mr. Cross?SPEAKER(?). So move.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Cross is not here today. Second?SPEAKER(?). So move.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. No changes areproposed in the foreign policy--"foreign policy" sounds a little toograndiose to me.MR. BERNARD. The Authorization for Foreign CurrencyOperations and the Foreign Currency Directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the various directives related to ourpurchases and sales of foreign currency there are no changes proposed.Are there objections? If there are no objections, they will continuein force. We have a $4 billion intermeeting limit on changes inSystem holdings; that's the routine limit. I'll ask whether there areany objections to retaining that. If there are no objections, we willretain it. That doesn't mean we can't change it temporarily from timeto time as we go ahead, but that's the basic authorization. I hear noobjection. There is an agreement with the Treasury to warehouseforeign currencies. No change is proposed.MR. PARTEE. That isn't being used currently. Isn't thatright?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is not. But it's thought to be a goodidea to keep the authority active even if the implementation is notcurrently active.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. Does that need a formalmotion?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need at least a "no objection." Again,there is no change [proposed]. I don't hear any objections, so it isapproved. The next item is security of our procedures and relatedmaterials. Mr. Solomon was the chairman of that subcommittee and wewill turn to Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You all have copies of the reportthat we sent around containing our recommendation. I might summarizethe key points. Before I do that, I should say that none of us on thesubcommittee assumed that the leak that the GAO investigated came fromthe Federal Reserve System. But we felt that the GAO report did havesome basis for saying that our procedures were somewhat lax, or couldbe tightened up, and that there was a very large number of people with3/26-27/84access [to FOMC materials]. So, we looked at many alternative ways ofhandling the access problem. Basically, our recommendations were infour major areas: first, updated security classifications, with anaddition of one new category to the two old ones; secondly,refinements in the procedures for distribution and handling ofclassified documents; thirdly, stronger procedures for making surethat people are familiar with the rules; and finally, a reduction inthe number of people authorized to see the more sensitive documents.Briefly, the new procedures call for use of double-sealedenvelopes and distinctive cover sheets and for restrictions oncopying. Also, the rules will be circulated annually to each personon the access list who would sign off on them. In regard to thenumber of people who have access to documents, our proposal calls forcertain numbers. At the Board and at the New York Reserve Bank, thereis a reduction of five each in the Class I list and of six each in theClass II list. At the other Banks there is a reduction of one each inthe Class I list and a limit of seven for access to Class II material.The most important switch we made in the classification of documentswas classifying part I of the Greenbook as Class II. The systemwideresults of these restrictions and reductions in access work out asfollows: The Class I list is reduced from 86 to 67 people other thanthe members of the FOMC themselves; and the Class II list is reducedfrom 348 to 183. Even though we think these are reasonable, we didprovide for ad hoc exceptions by the Chairman and exceptions for adhoc assignments, which could be granted by governors and presidents.I should also point out that the limitations in each category--forexample, seven for Class II documents at Reserve Banks other than NewYork--apply separately to each type of document. Those having accessto Part I of the Greenbook, for example, may be different from thosewith access to the Managers' reports. I think that summarizes themain recommendations. We would recommend that, after discussion andquestions, the FOMC adopt this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there questions?MS. TEETERS. I'd like to raise an issue that was notaddressed, which is the continuation of an existing policy, and thatis providing the Greenbook to the Secretary of the Treasury and fouror five other people at the Treasury, the Chairman of the Council ofEconomic Advisers, and the Director of OMB. We have never been ableto trace the leaks, but it seems to me that there is a potential therefor leaks coming from outside of the System regardless of how much wetighten our own procedures.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what we did do for the firsttime was recognize the de facto practice by including it in the formalproposals. But we did not feel that it was up to us--and frankly, I'mnot sure it's very practical without raising more dust than it'sworth--to restrict access to people in the Administration.MS. TEETERS. Well, there seems to be a lot of access at theTreasury and we don't have any idea what their security provisions arefor these documents.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But they don't get the Bluebook orthe Open Market directives or the policy records. What they do haveare the two Managers' reports, and I think they're entitled to have3/26-27/84them because those are needed both in the managing of the public debtand, of course, in the foreign exchange market where the Secretary ofthe Treasury [has responsibility].MR. WALLICH. Do you mean the Managers' weekly reports?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's the weekly they get.MR. STERNLIGHT. Just the weekly report goes to the Treasury.MR. PARTEE. And, of course, the Greenbook.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What specifically would you proposeto restrict, Nancy?MS. TEETERS. I would restrict them from the Greenbookbecause in the past we have had some distinct and fairly specificleaks of the contents of the Greenbook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My memory may not be perfect on this, butmy overall impression is that the record has been very good in termsof identifiable leaks from them. I can recall one or two occasionswhere a newspaper reported that the Federal Reserve staff was thinkingin a certain range or reported a certain number that sounded to me asif it may well have come from the Administration. It wasn'tparticularly damaging or timely; it wasn't that we sent it to them andit appeared before an Open Market Committee meeting. I can recall oneor two instances that made me suspicious, but generally I think therecord has been pretty good. I don't know if anybody else has adifferent recollection.MR. BOEHNE. When does the Greenbook go to the Treasury?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Within a day or so of the time it'sissued, I guess.MR. KICHLINE. I believe it goes out on Thursday morning.MR. GRAMLEY. We have been sending the Greenbook to thosethree places for at least 20 years, I think. And in the interest ofmaintaining an exchange of views with people in the Administrationthere are times, regularly, when the Chairman is provided access toinformation well ahead of time--about the same time the President getsit--and is one of the very few people who gets that kind ofinformation. There are times when we are made privy to what is goingon in the budgetary process, even at the staff level. I think wewould be jeopardizing that free interchange of information if wedidn't send the Greenbook over there.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The only thing I could suggest wouldbe to advise them that we have reclassified Part I of the Greenbookinto a Class II document and that the Chairman and the FOMC wouldappreciate it if the three principals who get it--the Secretary of theTreasury, the Chairman of the Council, and the Director of OMB--wouldtake comparable measures to restrict access at their own agencies.3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can. The point has been made to thembut obviously it can be made again and probably would be useful to doso.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Now that we're moving [up itsclassification].MR. PARTEE. In connection with the reclassification it wouldbe a convenient thing to do. I do believe that there [has been no]difficulty, Nancy, except for a few times when the Secretary saidsomething. We can hardly stop that. There have been occasions whenit looked as if it had been circulated pretty widely on the staff.But with a redoubling of emphasis on security of the document we mightbe able to take care of that problem, though not the problem of theSecretary saying something.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would agree very much with what Lylesaid about ongoing relationships unless there is an apparent realproblem.MS. TEETERS. I simply wanted to raise the issue. It wassomething that has never been changed and is a potential [for leaks]that we can't control.MR. PARTEE. It recognizes something that we have been doingsince the middle '60s, I think, or certainly since the late '60s.MS. TEETERS. Certainly, in my own mind this latest leak camefrom the Hill. And we have a continuing problem of maintainingsecurity if we release confidential material to someone outside of theSystem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think anybody has proposed that werelease the Bluebook to them. I don't know whether it makes anydifference whether we send it to them a few days before an Open MarketCommittee meeting, which is the usual practice, or a day after. Idon't think we've ever had a leak just before the Open MarketCommittee meeting. Nothing in the document is all that sensitive toissues of timing, I guess. But I don't think the particular day wesend it to them is sensitive in terms of our relationship with them.MR. PARTEE. It probably is generally sent out on Thursdaynow isn't it, Jim?MR. KICHLINE. Thursday morning.MR. PARTEE. That's right away, so they get it very early.Then the following Monday--SPEAKER(?). The Bluebook is--MR. PARTEE. No, not the Bluebook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They don't get the Bluebook at all.MR. PARTEE. It might be better to send the Greenbook to themthe following Monday or something like that.3/26-27/84MR. BOEHNE. These totals of four and seven [with access atthe Reserve Banks]: Does that include members of the Committee, too?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, it does. We did a spot check atabout a half dozen of the Banks and talked with the staff here. Therewas one Bank that had five [on its access list] although most of themhad four. As we analyzed who had a need to know--I don't mean in theformal sense of Class III, but in the sense of how the operations wentat the different Reserve Banks--seven seemed a reasonable number. Andthen Chuck Partee, Bob Black, and I discussed that. Originally wewere talking about restricting it to three but some of the presidentsfelt that would be excessively restrictive and that four would be areasonable number.MR. FORRESTAL. Tony, in that connection--this is a technicalquestion--on page 5 you talk about limiting the Class I [materials] tothe president and three other officers. Do you really intend it to bemembers of the official staff? I think that presents a problem insome Banks. It would in my Bank, for example, where we have somepeople on the research staff who are not officers who are cleared atthe moment for FOMC Class I.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that was our intention. Now,we made some recommendations on systematizing the downgrading of adocument's classification. The Bluebook would be downgraded fromClass I to the new Class II at the time of the release of the policyrecord and directive. And then it would be downgraded to Class IIIfour months later, roughly; in other words, after a six-month periodold Class II is downgraded to Class III.MR. FORRESTAL. It's still Class I prior to the meeting.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's still Class I prior to themeeting, right.MR. BLACK. Bob, I don't think we addressed the issue ofwhether they had to be officers or not; it just ended up as officers.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I think that's something you reallyought to clarify because, as I said, in my particular case I have twopeople who are now cleared for access to FOMC documents--and they doreview the Bluebook--and they are not officials. So, that would putme in an awkward position. On a broader question, I must say that Icertainly understand why you are trying to reduce the number of peoplecleared for access, but I really think clearing only four people isunduly restrictive for the Reserve Banks, particularly if one of thosepeople is the first vice president. With the president and the firstvice president, that leaves us with only two people.MR. PARTEE. We were not thinking of the first vicepresident.MR. FORRESTAL. You were not? Well, that's the question, Iguess. That makes it a little better if you don't include--MR. PARTEE. You can, of course, if he's going to substitutefor you at a meeting. You can clear him for that purpose.3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems there may be somemiscommunication here. You were thinking the first vice presidentwould not get it?MR. PARTEE. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He's an addition to the pot.MR. FORRESTAL. That puts a little different light on it.But again, if the first vice president is going to substitute fromtime to time, it seems to me he ought to be getting the material on afairly regular basis.MR. BLACK. Bob, in our case, since we had to give up one, wedecided that the first vice president would not be one of the fourunless he was substituting. He can give it up more easily. But ifyou were out of the Bank, you could made an ad hoc exception for him.That was the way we were planning to do it. I'm sure that will differfrom Bank to Bank. It seems rather bad to have to deny access to yourfirst vice president, but I don't think we have any alternative.MR. FORRESTAL. My druthers would be to leave it at five,Tony.MR. BOEHNE. On this ad hoc clearance, do you view that asbeing a big deal or is that just something that's handled in eachReserve Bank as it comes?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Each Reserve Bank would handle it butthere would not be a standing ad hoc.MR. BOEHNE. I understand.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And under our new procedures it wouldrequire that the Secretary of the FOMC be notified immediately.MR. GUFFEY. Bob Forrestal has raised a question that'stroublesome to me also and that is restricting the number to four,which would mean I'd have to cut out the first vice president. Underthe by-laws, on all other things he operates in my stead when I'mgone, which is reasonably frequently. To go through the process ofsending a wire to add him on an ad hoc basis for some indeterminatetime while I'm gone seems to me unreasonably burdensome. I'd like tosuggest that this be amended to permit four as designated and topermit the first vice president to have access without this specialauthorization at the time the president is not there. As I say, hehas all the powers that I have when I'm not present.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He doesn't have any powers with respect tothe Open Market Committee.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, that is true. But the fact of the matteris that he stands in my stead and ought to be able to have the kindsof information that I would have if I were there. That seems quitereasonable to me. The only thing I'm suggesting is that there be abuilt-in ad hoc exception without the notification process for thefirst vice president at the time the president is not in the Bank.3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't understand. Given thefact that we all have such good attendance records here, I gather thatyou're not talking about the very rare case when your first vicepresident would be attending [an FOMC meeting] in your absence, Roger?MR. GUFFEY. No, I'm not. I'm talking otherwise.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. He cannot participate on the morningcall.MR. GUFFEY. That's correct.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, I don't understand. What doesthe first vice president do in your Bank in regard to the FOMCdirectives if he's not in on the call?MR. GUFFEY. Among other things, he has handled my board ofdirectors for a discount rate action when I'm not there. He certainlyought to have available to him what the Committee has done and what itis thinking about preceding that kind of action.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In effect, it really becomes five,doesn't it then?MR. GUFFEY. Well, I'm suggesting that it remain four butthat we have an ad hoc exemption without the clearance procedure.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A permanent ad hoc?MR. GUFFEY. Yes, but only when I'm out of the Bank.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I see.MR. GUFFEY. Only when the president is not available. Itwould seem to me to be a fairly simple matter.MS. TEETERS. The most likely occasion would be when thefirst vice president would sit in for the president in a conferencecall. And that has been very rare.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not all that rare.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have no objection to that if thatis the consensus view of the Committee and if it's clearly understoodthat it would only be in the president's absence.MR. BLACK. I think it's a good improvement, Tony. I wouldgo along with that. In fact, I was planning to send Norm a telegramsaying I'd like an ad hoc exception for just that purpose when I amout of the Bank.MR. BALLES. I'd like to support that, Tony, because I foundmyself in the same position as Roger. We have three people in theresearch department who are actively engaged in research and analysisof policy and I would not want to take any one of those off. My firstvice president is on the list to receive the Bluebook now under the[current] authorization, although he never in practice gets it. Theonly time he would look at it would be an overt occasion when he3/26-27/84substitutes for me at this meeting or, alternatively, when he wouldparticipate in a conference call when I was out of town or otherwiseunavailable, or on occasion when I'm out of town and he has to handlea telephone conference on the discount rate, as Roger mentioned. So,if we could somehow get that exception you're talking about carefullycontrolled but built-in to avoid the necessity of formally notifyingthe Secretary every time I'm out of town, it would surely help. Wewould treat it as a true exception, not just a routine everyday accessto the FOMC Class I materials.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, that's also true with regard to theupgraded [classification] of the wire from the Desk. There isinformation there that would be helpful if there were going--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there consensus on this point?MR. MARTIN. It sounds good to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I interpret this, Mr. Solomon, as notlimiting the prerogative of the Chairman to have more limitedexecutive sessions for whatever purpose.SPEAKER(?). And you have even more ad hoc exceptions thananybody else.MR. PARTEE. This would be on a strict need-to-know basis.You would keep a record of when you let the first vice president haveaccess, I take it. So, if we had to follow down a leak, he would becaught up in it. But it wouldn't be a continuous matter; it wouldjust be for specific occasions.MR. FORRESTAL. Special occasions. Did we settle thequestion I raised earlier, Mr. Chairman? Does anybody have anobjection to amending this part A to indicate that Class I is limitedto the president and I would suggest language such as "three otherindividuals designated by the president."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is this?MR. FORRESTAL. Otherwise, I'm going to make some newofficers.MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we'd want them to be on thepayroll of the Federal Reserve Banks!MR. FORRESTAL. Oh yes, of course.MR. PARTEE. You said "three other individuals." That couldbe anybody. Let's see, Jack Anderson and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Three other officers and employees." Isthat the language?MR. FORRESTAL. "Staff members." And they would, of course,be research staff.members?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's the magic word? Employees, staff-10-3/26-27/84MR. BLACK. Staff members, I think.MR. AXILROD. You use "persons" on Class II.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Use "Federal Reserve personnel."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Federal Reserve personnel. There seems tobe a consensus on that point. Any other comments?MR. KEEHN. Tony, it's not part of what you've taken a lookat, I'm sure, but did you also consider the way in which we distributethe Bluebooks? The point I would make is that they are distributed ata time at which our security is at its very lowest level I wouldthink--namely, over the weekend. And each time we have to develop aprocedure by which we're going to handle them. I wonder if there's away we can distribute them to the Banks at a time when our proceduresare best geared to handle them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How, in fact, do they get to the Banksnow?MR. ROBERTS. They don't get there all the time.MR. KEEHN. They come in via something called CannonballExpress. And Cannonball Express delivers at a variety of times; itcould be either Saturday afternoon or anytime on Sunday.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Cannonball Express is a private deliveryservice?SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. KEEHN. I hope it is. And we have to go through aprocedure to deal with that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The alternative, though--to do whatyou have suggested--is giving out the Bluebooks on Monday morning. Wechecked around and there were objections to that because presidentsand members of the Committee would not have a chance to consult withtheir three other people. So, I don't know what the alternative is.MR. KEEHN. I suggest it as a possible alternative because wehave some problems. If they were distributed Thursday night by pouch,I think that would eliminate all the problems and deal with theconcern we were suggesting.MR. PARTEE. They're not ready on Thursday night.MR. ROBERTS. It is a problem. For example, I didn't getmine this time. Usually I have it delivered late Sunday, so I don'thave any time for consultation except while flying on the airplane.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I looked at mine a half hour ago.MR. BLACK. Don't your people work on weekends, Ted?MR. ROBERTS. Up until Sunday at about midnight!-11-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Of course, if it's the consensus viewhere, I'd go along with that. But there is one disadvantage tosending it out Thursday night and to all the Banks having it Fridaymorning: We'd be adding one critical weekend of possible leaks. Andthat two- to three-day period before we have a meeting is when themedia is the most focused. On the other hand, with the general view--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just looking at it from the productionside, what is the problem in getting it out a day earlier?MR. AXILROD. It would have been impossible before the moneysupply started coming out on Thursday night. It's more possible nowto do it Thursday night, but I would say it runs the somewhat needlessrisk of errors. But it's certainly possible now, whereas it wasn'tpossible before.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether we should somedayreview the magic day upon which we hold Open Market Committeemeetings. We wouldn't get into this weekend problem if it--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If it were on Wednesday instead ofTuesday or instead of Monday and Tuesday.MR. PARTEE. We've discussed that too at other times.MR. GUFFEY. There's one other problem associated with this.The way the Bluebook is sent, two copies come to our Bank that are puttogether in one package and we have to designate somebody in the Bankeither Saturday night or Sunday to open that material and repackageit, with one going to Tom Davis and one to me. If each were packagedseparately with our name on it, we'd eliminate that.MR. AXILROD. Normand knows better than I do, but myimpression is that distribution of the Bluebook is a continuing,miserable problem. And I think Cannonball Express is probably onlythe latest in the efforts to find a reliable delivery service.MR. BERNARD. That's primarily because the main deliveryservices just don't deliver on weekends. Given that it's ready onlyon Friday evenings, we have to rely on--MR. BALLES. Well, that's exactly--MR. ROBERTS. In view of all this stepped-up security, Tony,maybe the [additional] day is not that much exposure.MR. AXILROD. We were very close, Mr. Chairman, to having itready this Thursday night. With a little more experience and if wedon't have last minute data that would involve [revisions], it mayprove possible. But I would--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just give you a reaction to it. Ithas the problem of another day, which means the weekend, which I thinkis a problem. We have an existing problem of relying upon thesecarriers, which doesn't make me feel all that happy on the other side.In terms of substance, let me just raise a question with you: What isthe point of getting it so early? You are supposed to be making up-12-3/26-27/84your own minds before Mr. Axilrod prejudices your view. Maybe it's agood idea to get it late!MR. BALLES. I'll speak to that. I think it's a good idea toget it early because we do have people at the Reserve Banks--whetherit's one, two, or three--who spend a good deal of their time onanalysis of policy options and so forth. As things now stand, if theBluebook doesn't come in until Sunday, they never do get a chance toread it or provide input or advice to the principal who comes to themeeting, at least in my case.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why can't they give you that advicewithout the Bluebook?MR. BALLES. Well, they can; it's just better if they knowall the nuances and the considerations that are in the Bluebook. Ithink they would benefit from knowing those before they render advice.And on the other point, Mr. Chairman, Norm knows we have had some realhorror stories in terms of security in getting this material to theWest Coast. It wasn't just a matter of it not arriving but a matterof it getting lost in the mail. It was out there floating around andwe didn't know where it was and Norm didn't know where it was. Wefinally retrieved it after extra copies were sent out to us. He and Iwere both very, very much concerned about the security problem of itjust getting lost in the mail because of this unreliable weekenddelivery service. I'm very nervous about that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How does the ordinary pouch go, whateverthe pouch is? I keep hearing about it. What does it consist of?MR. BLACK. We would get it Monday morning that way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who delivers it?MR. BERNARD. Well, I'm not sure.MR. CORRIGAN. It's our check couriers.MS. TEETERS. It goes in the afternoon, right? It [can't]come out Thursday night.MR. BERNARD. The problem with the pouch is that we wouldhave to have the Bluebook ready by about 5:00 p.m. or it's just toolate to make it into the pouch.MR. GRAMLEY. On what day, Friday or Thursday?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Thursday to get it to us on Friday.MR. AXILROD. Well, we'd never make the Thursday night pouch.We could make the Friday night pouch if that would get it deliveredany better. But I doubt that it would.MR. BERNARD. I don't believe that delivers until Monday.MR. AXILROD. Yes, I know. As I said, I don't think thatwill help one bit. But if we tried for Thursday, we'd be through-13-3/26-27/84about midnight. As it is we could get it out in the course of the dayon Friday earlier than we used to get it out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whom does the pouch go with--our checkcouriers?MR. CORRIGAN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do they get to Washington?MR. CORRIGAN. It goes out of Richmond; it doesn't go out ofor come in to Washington. Everything that goes by pouch in and out ofWashington goes through Richmond.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What you're saying is that if we wereto try and get the Bluebook out to the Reserve Banks on Friday and youdon't finish preparing it until midnight on Thursday, then you are nottalking about the pouch but some kind of special express service thatwill get it to us by Friday afternoon. I don't think we'd all get itby Friday.MR. AXILROD. Well, that's what we do now. We have anexpress service special that goes out whenever it's ready on Friday.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I know, but it comes in over theweekend. What I'm saying, though, is that if it doesn't go out untilsometime after midnight on Thursday, I don't think everybody would getit on Friday in time to--MR. CORRIGAN. There may be a better solution to this. LastSaturday we tested for the first time this new high speed facsimiletransmission among all 13 of us, the Federal Reserve Board and the 12Federal Reserve offices. This thing really works fast and produces avery good copy, and it may be that we can use that. That wouldeliminate the carrier and it would also eliminate the security problemupon receiving it at the Reserve Banks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you control the number of copies?MR. CORRIGAN. I don't know where the machines are in mostother Fed offices, but at least in my Bank--and for precisely thatreason--it's right next to my office and it's very tightly controlled.MR. PARTEE. There's a really good suggestion. We could sayat 2:00 p.m. Friday afternoon or something like that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's fairly easy to deal with. AllMr. Bernard would have to do is call that number and say "We're aboutto transmit" and some designated person would just stand there andphysically take it off the machine.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that in operation now?MR. CORRIGAN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can it take charts?SPEAKER(?). Yes.-14-3/26-27/84MR. CORRIGAN. It really makes good copies.MR. AXILROD. We could try that, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is it secure?MR. CORRIGAN. It's more secure than Cannonball!MR. AXILROD. We have gone through that, Mr. Chairman, withthe Federal Reserve Bank of New York in getting comments from Mr.Sternlight. The transmission has been terrible.MR. CORRIGAN. Not with this new one.MR. AXILROD. I don't know. The new one may work. It's theold one that doesn't work so well.MR. CORRIGAN. It really is good.MR. GUFFEY. Will it print a blue cover? [Laughter.]MR. ROBERTS. It could be transmitted that way and then wecould pick up the regular report when we come down here.MS. HORN. Mr. [Vice] Chairman, would you speak just a minuteto the security [unintelligible]?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Our report doesn't get into thisquestion. It seems to me that if the Chairman wants, he can authorizea trial run on it next time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, let me look at it and we'll seewhether we can make some alteration next time. This doesn't enterinto this report. Are there any other issues? Should we reconsiderwhen we meet? I won't do it now, but--.MR. PARTEE. It seems to me that we once went through all thedays of the week and it turned out that Tuesday was the only possibleday.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but that had to do with the dayof the directors' meetings and the last day of the settlement week.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, I thought that Tuesday was aparticularly awkward day in terms of the data flow.MR. PARTEE. Yes, it had to do with directors' meetings.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do all Banks have their directors'meetings on Thursday?MS. HORN. Thursday.MR. FORRESTAL. We have a lot of ours on Friday.-15-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, it's either Thursday or Friday.No Bank has a day different from that for directors' meetings?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought one Bank had them on Monday orWednesday, but that could have changed. Well, we'll look into thesethings. Meanwhile, I guess we can approve the report with the twoamendments that were made. Do I have a motion?SPEAKER(?). Move to approve.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection.MR. PARTEE. Mr. Chairman, did we take up item 7 on theagenda?MR. GRAMLEY. Not yet. You skipped it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where we are [on the agenda].MR. GRAMLEY and MS. TEETERS. Bankers acceptances.MR. PARTEE. Yes. There was a Manager's recommendation verydifferent from [the recommendation in the memo], and I thought weought to have some discussion of that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where am I? I'm following--MR. PARTEE. You were on number 8. Somehow item 7 got lost.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's go back to bankers acceptances. Iskipped it because it's not on this [summary] memorandum. Anyway,let's consider bankers acceptances.MR. PARTEE. RPs on bankers acceptances.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight, you have a memorandum.MR. STERNLIGHT. As noted in my memo to the Committee, Mr.Chairman, I felt the decision on whether or not to continue doingrepurchase agreements in BAs was a very close one. In fact, I hadinitially written a summary for my own staff summarizing the pros andcons, which came out marginally for staying with the operations. Wekicked it around for a while and were persuaded, with varying degreesof enthusiasm, to come out on the negative side. But again, for someof us anyway, quite narrowly. That was our evaluation of, on the oneside, the modest usefulness of continuing the operations and, on theother side, a small but nonnegligible risk of continuing thoseoperations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the modest usefulness?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, that we do part of our operations inthem when we do repurchase agreements. For the System Account it hasworked out in the last year that about 7 percent was in BAs. Whenthis issue was reviewed a year ago the average had been more like 10to 15 percent. When Mr. Axilrod and I presented a memo just a year3/26-27/84ago on this subject we also thought the decision was close and cameout narrowly for continuing the operations. One factor that weighedin that narrow balance was that our withdrawal might add to generalmarket anxieties about the banking system, which we regarded then asless acute than in the previous summer and fall--that is the summerand fall of 1982--but still present in some measure. We are nowanother year past that relatively sensitive period of 1982, so thatreason for not withdrawing seems to carry a bit less weight. In themeantime the use of BAs in our repurchase agreements has diminishedsomewhat further. So, in my view, those factors tip the scale fromnarrowly in favor of continuing to narrowly for withdrawing. But asour recommendation stated: If the decision is to withdraw, it shouldbe with several months' notice to the market.MR. PARTEE. Peter, am I right in thinking that if you knewsome very, very compellingly bad information about a large bank thatyou wouldn't want to make RPs on their bankers acceptances?MR. STERNLIGHT. We would try to duck it. If it were knownin the market, then I think the market would not present us with sucha name because that just wouldn't be a good name circulating in themarket. But if we had some information and the market in generaldidn't, then we would hate to make the waves that would be made byrejecting it, so we probably would take it.MR. PARTEE. And that would also include a foreign agency orbranch?MR. STERNLIGHT. It could, yes; and that tends to be a fairlysizable proportion of what we do.MS. TEETERS. Are you typically offered more of these thanyou accept?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, but Governor, we don't really have thatchoice. When we are doing RPs, we will make agreements with thedifferent firms to do an even $5 million or $10 million and so on.It's only late in the day that we find out what actual acceptances arebeing presented. They don't present us with a million at such andsuch a rate in a particular bank that is named then; the names usuallycome up later.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What rationale would you give in yourpublic announcement that gives a few months' notice?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, that we have found this of limitedusefulness and that the market is mature and certainly doesn't needour participation for support purposes, but so as not to beprecipitate we are making the change as of 3 months hence or 6 monthshence or whatever. I'd say something like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My reaction to this is that the issuedoesn't turn at all on its usefulness to open market operations, whichseems to me close to nil one way or the other. We were in therehistorically because of some idea that this market ought to benurtured and supported and for a kind of regulatory coloration--thatwe determine what is an eligible acceptance and all that business.And there may be some usefulness there yet. I don't know what it is3/26-27/84but maybe there is. But against that, and given what I know or havefound out about the bankers acceptance market recently--that it isoperating in a high, wide, and handsome way--it strikes me that Idon't particularly want to endorse that. And we get into the messyregulatory question as well--this question you described: Ifsomething goes wrong, do we do it or not do it or what kind of signalsare we sending? We may be well advised to get out. My onlyreservation is: Are we really losing something on surveillance on theregulatory side?MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, we got out of buying andselling them some time ago. Isn't that right, Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. The outright [purchases and sales], yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't examine them anymore.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There are some people, I think, whomisinterpret the Federal Reserve eligibility as a good housekeepingseal. We learned more about bankers acceptances when we looked intothe Mexican line than we did at any other time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what worries me: that wegive this implicit blessing and we don't really use it to see whetherthe market is behaving within certain parameters yet there's thisassumption that we do. If we don't use it, get rid of it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But can we really have anannouncement that we will be discontinuing this within a few monthswithout raising questions that we think some banks are shaky orwithout the market wondering what lies behind our doing this?MR. MARTIN. Deregulation. And we're relieving the reportingburden on financial institutions.MR. PARTEE. Well, we say we have plenty of governmentsecurities and no probability of any shortage any time soon. We saywe don't need it for open market operations and we say the market isstrong on its own and therefore--MR. MORRIS. The market has matured.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't use this now for any surveillancepurposes or any that I can understand.MR. STERNLIGHT. It's not used in a significant way.MS. TEETERS. If we stop using it for repurchase agreements,could we drop that distinction between eligible and ineligible now?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that's a distinction that stillapplies for re-discount at the discount window, and relief fromreserve requirements would still hinge on that aspect. I don't thinkthat would be affected.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You haven't made that distinction in youroperations, have you?-18-3/26-27/84MR. STERNLIGHT. No. We have a requirement for what iseligible for our purchase but that goes to the market acceptability ortradability of the name.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The more I hear, the more I think we oughtto get rid of it.MR. PARTEE. I do too.MR. MORRIS. As far as the regulatory aspect, the New YorkReserve Bank could still exercise some surveillance over the marketeven though we were not operating in acceptances as RPs. Is thatdependent upon--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think it is absolutelydependent but I may be wrong. Historically when we used to buy themoutright--maybe not in recent years but going back to the '20s, '30sand '40s--somebody would sit there and say: Is this a goodacceptance? Has it got the document attached? Does it meet thecriteria of eligibility? That has faded away through the years. Ithink that was part of the purpose of our being in there: That wewould only buy the good stuff and the idea was that the market wouldthen gravitate toward the good stuff because that's the only thing wewould buy.MR. GUFFEY. Wasn't there a time, though, in the recent pastwhen we used bankers acceptances when collateral was otherwise short?MR. STERNLIGHT. Going back some years, yes. When governmentsecurities were in short supply it was helpful but it hasn't been thatcritical.MR. GUFFEY. But that's no longer present. The market ismature; I don't see why we don't get out of it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We could have a line in theannouncement that says that if the budgetary deficit--MR. PARTEE. It is conceivable that we might have someembarrassments looking ahead. We don't have any now. We can get outgracefully now. And it won't present a possible issue later on.MR. BOEHNE. To me, the marginal reasons for being in thishave gotten weaker and weaker over the last few years and there aren'tany good reasons that I can see.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there any point in putting this out forcomment? What do our lawyers say?MR. OLTMAN. You don't need to.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've said that about some other things.MR. MARTIN. You're asking for a legal opinion.MR. BLACK. It might make it a tad easier to resist buyingsomething else if we are going to get any pressure to buy something wedon't want--some favored security somewhere.-19-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You are recommending, though, thatyou continue to have the authority just as you have the authority,although you haven't used it, to buy them outright?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Does this require a formal vote? Orwhat does it require?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are we doing? We would still havethe authority to buy but we're not going to exercise it? I didn'tunderstand that.MR. STERNLIGHT. That's what was done when we withdrew fromthe outright [market]. There was no formal change in theauthorization.MS. TEETERS. Did we announce it when we withdrew from that?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think we did.MR. PARTEE. I think all it takes is Committee acceptance ofthe manager's recommendation, which is to stop in practice doing RPson bankers acceptances over the next several months in a graceful way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I really have no problem with that but itraises the question of why we have the authorization. But we can facethat down the road.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, one could conceive of asituation in which we would want to use the authority and we mightwant to use the authority without waiting for the next FOMC meeting.Presumably the Executive Committee could authorize that if there weresome reason.MR. PARTEE. Executive Committee on what?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is an Executive Committee onforeign currency.MR. PARTEE. No, I think it would have to be a wire by theChairman or a notification vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the time being we don't have to facethat. If there is no objection, we'll leave the authorization for thetime being and review it later.MS. TEETERS. Are we going to have an announcement?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, I guess we're up to [agendaitem 9], the minutes.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, do you want to decide whetherthere should be a length of time between indicating to the market thatwe're not going to be in and actually not being in?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the presumption isn't it?-20-3/26-27/84MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. But I don't know whether agreement wasreached on what that time interval should be. I would suggest about 3months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can delegate that to the Chairman andthe Manager if there is no objection. We have to get to the minutesin a minute. The thought occurred to me in our discussion ofconfidentiality that we have a request--I guess from Mr. Fauntroy, butI'm not sure how hard it is being pressed by Mr. Fauntroy--that wegive his staff rather than the whole subcommittee on the House BankingCurrency Committee Part II of the Greenbook modified to redact thosevery few sentences that have some confidential projection or policyimplication. There is very little of that in Part II. It is mostly apretty straightforward rendition of the business picture and thefinancial picture and so forth. There is an obvious problem with itat least in the sense that we did it recently for the Redbook and itbecomes a question of whether conceding some of these things to themis helpful in terms of harmonious Congressional relationships,assuming it's harmless, or whether it only encourages the nextrequest. The fact is that it is a little hard to make a bigintellectual case about this because there isn't much in [Part II of]the Greenbook that is not in the public domain anyway.MR. PARTEE. But it's our analysis of the statistics, ofcourse, which may differ from other analyses from time to time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a pretty straightforward analysis, Ithink, for the most part.MR. GUFFEY. When is that released--if ever?MR. AXILROD. After five years.SPEAKER(?). Except for the parts discussing foreign banks.MR. GRAMLEY. What about the parts from the internationaldivision?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is one place where some deletionswould have to be made.MR. GRAMLEY. If we do this, it might be wise to put adifferent cover on it and stop calling it an FOMC document.MR. ROBERTS. Stop calling it a Greenbook. That's how theyidentify these things. They hear there's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we did with Redbook.MR. GRAMLEY. Make this one beige too!MS. TEETERS. But Lyle, if we do that, then it is not beinglimited to Fauntroy and his staff. It becomes almost a publicdocument and not an FOMC document.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think one would have to assume this isvirtually a public document anyway whether they promise not to3/26-27/84reproduce it. Copies go to every member [of Mr. Fauntroy'ssubcommittee] of the House Banking Committee.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why not give them a Blackbook?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They already think it is accompanied by ablack file.MR. PARTEE. If I were sitting down in Mr. Kichline's chair,I would object strenuously because I think it would affect the way itis written. I think the Redbook has been greatly affected by becomingthe Beigebook and I think the Greenbook would be affected by becominga public document. One is just much more careful--much more stylisticand formalistic--in the way things are said. For example, the staffwouldn't point out that there's something wrong with the GNP figuresbecause of the treatment of PIK or they would say it in such a subtleway that no one could understand what they were saying. And I thinkthere would be a loss of capability to communicate with the Committee.MR. MORRIS. Couldn't all that be brought over to Part I?MR. PARTEE. Well, I suppose so. You remember, there didn'tused to be a Part I; there was just a Part II. Part I came aboutbecause we thought we would do those projections and that they oughtto be more confidential than Part II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It didn't used to have any projections atall?MR. PARTEE. It had no projections at all when I came here.But I must say, I think it is a way of communicating. What you'llprobably have to do is develop a Part I supplement or something thathas more of the material that used to be in Part II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you're right in worryingabout some inhibition on the way the document is written. I don'tknow how great that is and I don't know whether there is any generalimpression that the Redbook has diminished since it is written to bedistributed or whether in fact that has led to any difference in theway people write it. Is that a common appreciation? We do deletethese sections--they are distributed separately.MR. GRAMLEY. I have the perception from reading theBeigebook that apart from some certain stylistic changes--taking outcomments such as one director said something and taking out the viewof panelists--that the content of the Beigebook is not materiallydifferent from what the Redbook was before.MR. BOEHNE. Another way to approach this is to ask: Whatwill be the next request and is it easier to say no at that point thanto say no at this point?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we took a very strong line that PartI was verboten and that has not been pressed at this point. Now, whatthey will do six months from now or a year from now--.MS. TEETERS. Just looking at the current Greenbook, I thinkthe very first sentences of Part II would have to be totally-22-3/26-27/84rewritten. That reads: "The pace of activity picked up vigorouslyearly this year. Housing activity surged, auto purchases and otherretail sales rose strongly, and industrial production advanced rapidlyin both January and February." There's no question about where theFederal Reserve staff views the first quarter as a result of that.Practically every one of those adjectives would disappear.MR. KICHLINE. We didn't try to leave any doubts in thatdocument.MS. TEETERS. That goes to Chuck's point about communication.MR. MARTIN. You wrote 4 headlines.MR. BOEHNE. That would become: "The economy grew in thefirst quarter on several fronts."MR. KICHLINE. I think there is some concern. When you gothrough these with a little time lag, it's pretty difficult to spot awhole series of things that are a potential problem. They come up inTed's area particularly. On the domestic side, in the past there havebeen occasions when the monetary data we had were not for the fullmonth and we put in rates of growth for the full month. Or we haveput in our corporate bond and stock markets forecasts of variousthings going out several months. With time, I think the sensitivitydeclines. I do remember for many years I was assigned the unpleasantchore of writing the Quarterly Report for Mr. Proxmire's JointEconomic Committee and that report was very different from theGreenbook. It supposedly said the same thing--it was on currentfinancial conditions--but it was quite a different animal. When youwrite something you have in mind the nature of the audience and itmakes you more sensitive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there is something to that. Butof course you are risking that if they really press, we'll tell themwe will reinstate the Proxmire-type reports.MR. KICHLINE. Well, I'm not adverse to that. And if I haveto do this, I would like to get some double mileage out of it. Forexample, we can get some bulletin articles out of doing that and savesome staff time to do something else. If we put a public document outbut beef up Part I in a selected way to cover other things, it'sconceivable that the Committee might be better off with a differentPart I and a Part II that we use [as a public document].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't want to probe all yourminds, but how many people read Part II?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Now you have to ask how many peopleread it some of the time.MR. BALLES. Once a year.MR. PARTEE. [The Governors] don't have the personal staffsthat the Presidents have to give us all that information. We have toread Part II.-23-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we have to linger on thisany more. We won't do anything immediately but I think we ought toreview the whole issue. I don't have any particular feeling that PartI should be longer. But we'll get the answers to Part I when wediscuss Part II. We won't do anything for the moment. Now I'll go tothe minutes. Do we have a motion?SPEAKER(?). So move.MR. MARTIN. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, the minutes areapproved. Foreign currency operations, Miss Greene.MS. GREENE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments?MR. BOEHNE. I have two questions in two quite differentareas. The first question: When the chart show was given in January,as I recall there was a chart that forecast some decline of the dollarthis year. I don't think it was given with a great deal of confidencebut as I recall the chart the dollar was down. The Greenbook forecastis a good bit stronger and I gather that whatever your interest rateforecast was two months ago it is probably higher now. How would youdraw the chart on the dollar now, if you had to do it, compared to twomonths ago?MR. TRUMAN. Fortunately, since we do the forecasting forthat purpose on the basis of quarterly averaging, it allows us tosmooth out some factors. The chart show forecast was based onprojections from the fourth quarter of 1983 through the end of theprojection period and we had particular numbers for the interveningquarters just because we do that for the convenience of it. In fact,we had felt that the dollar was going to stay up longer than we havein this forecast although we have left the projection mostly the samefor the balance of the period--going out after the third quarter ofthis year. So it is the same for the fourth quarter of 1984 and thefourth quarter of 1985. For the first and second quarters we moved itdown just slightly, from 131 to 130 on average for the first quarterand 129 or something like that to 126 or so for the second quarter,because it looked like interest rates, if anything, could have firmeda bit--and also because we have been burned so badly, if I may put itthat way, as you alluded to President Boehne. We had felt that itmight be some time before the cumulative effects of the currentaccount would begin to show through; in fact, they have come insomewhat sooner and stronger than we had implicitly projected at thattime.MR. BOEHNE. My other question has to do with the debtsituation. Is there anything that can be said about that at thispoint?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're looking at me rather than at thepeople at the other end of the table. Well, I think the answer tothat is "Yes." Most of the attention right now is focused onArgentina where, as you know, they have a new government and a verydifficult external problem. The amount of indebtedness is large; it's-24-3/26-27/84half the size of Brazil's or Mexico's, but it is still fairly large.The new government has had a lot on its mind to say the leastinternally as well as externally and they were not moving very rapidlytoward an external--or internal for that matter--economic adjustmentprogram. In a sense they lost a quarter or so while they werepursuing other priorities. As a result, there are possibilities atleast of more substantial problems. I suppose it's fair to say thatthe possibility of getting a letter of intent this week before the endof the quarter is at the vanishing point. It seems very unlikelyunder those conditions that interest [arrears] will be brought up todate through the fourth quarter of last year, which means those loanswill become nonperforming early in April and will affect earningsstatements early in April.But more important than that: This is the first time, Ithink, that this has happened to any of these major borrowers. Andwhat psychological reaction it will have on the banks' attitudes or onthe market, and indeed on Argentina, remains to be seen. That wouldbe amplified further if it is followed by a classification of theloans, which isn't automatic and which seems to be natural unlessactivity picks up pretty rapidly with the [International Monetary]Fund. There are some indications that it is picking up now and therehas been a reasonably straightforward effort going on to reachagreement with the Fund just in the last week--in terms of actualdiscussions with the Fund even in the latter part of last week, to bemore precise. There are indications that the government wants toreach an agreement. Certainly, the Fund wants to reach an agreement.There are discordant voices within Argentina and some very realdifficulties on such little matters as how far they can reduce thebudget deficit, to take one example. Wage policy traditionally entersinto these negotiations. They have been following an ad hoc policyfrom month-to-month of increasing real wages. Inflation isaccelerating; monetary policy is lax; and the [peso] is probably alittle overvalued. And two-thirds of their exports would'be eaten upby the need to pay interest. Otherwise there wouldn't be any problem!I might say in just looking at the Argentina problem thatthey have a big trade surplus, very largely based on agriculturalexports. The country is reasonably self-sufficient. Part of theirbig debt reflects some recent current account deficits, but not halfof it and maybe not more than two-thirds of it. In rough numbers theyhave had proportionally an exceptionally large amount of capitaloutflow, and like some of these other countries they finance privatecapital outflow by the government borrowing the money back. But theassets have flown. They don't generate any income for Argentinabecause the income stays abroad as well as the assets, and it puts avery large burden on their current account to manage their externaldebt. We have a problem within Argentina and, of course, we have thecontrary problem that whatever happens to Argentina--which in and ofitself might be a manageable situation--how can you expect a situationto remain manageable or what are the risks that it will spread toother borrowers and we will have a much bigger problem on our laps?So, that is the focus of concern.Now, there are continuing concerns with other countries.Peru lost a finance minister recently. Mexico continues to look goodfrom the external side but it still has sluggish growth. However, itdoes look as if they may be approaching a situation where they will-25-3/26-27/84not have to rely much, if at all, on net new external expansion.Brazil, on the other hand, is just in the middle of what has finallybecome, I think--there are still some questions about it--a prettyforceful internal adjustment program, tightening their monetarypolicy. But the success of that is still not clear.MR. BOEHNE. Do you think there will be interest rateconcessions forthcoming from the banks?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what you mean byconcessions. It's a very foggy word. The idea of giving what onemight term a subsidy, which Argentina no doubt would like, would be anextremely difficult one for the banks and in itself would raise a lotof questions of precedent for the other countries. Certainly, theArgentines will at the very minimum go for whatever concession--morenarrowly defined as a low spread--they can get. That would give bankssome heartburn too on the theory that the Argentine payments are notas large as the payments of other countries and why do they deserve asnarrow a spread as Mexico has gotten. The Argentines probably won'tbe very happy with the Mexican spread. That poses a problem.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On those 22 reschedulings that havebeen held up, one went through; it was controversial. The newgovernment came in and they basically want better terms. On those,what the banks have offered them is to reconsider the maturities butnot the spreads, and so far there has been no movement becauseeverything is held up in Argentina. It's not only the IMF thing,which of course is the key. There is also still that billion dollarsof money that they could make available to Argentina that would becoming back to them as interest. Then there are the 22 reschedulingson which there is no movement. So, there is an impasse.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One can say increases in interest rates inthe United States don't help any of these problems.MR. PARTEE. It's close to a six month give-up of interestfor them. I think the last payment was October 12th.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was October 3rd or something.MR. TRUMAN. It was the 13th.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. However, some banks have told me that theyhave gotten scattered payments since then.MR. TRUMAN. They are [not] paying the interest. They havebeen paying some of their trade arrears, which in some cases involvespayments to banks.MR. PARTEE. I see.MS. TEETERS. In these renegotiations, Tony, are the ratesbeing offered these countries a spread over LIBOR or prime and thenthe rate moves as those rates move? Is that the way they transmit thechange in rates in the United States?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or in the Eurodollar market.-26-3/26-27/84MR. GUFFEY. How much of that Argentina debt resides in U.S.banks and how much in non-U.S. banks?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's $9 billion dollars or something likethat for U.S. banks.MR. TRUMAN. It's something like $9-1/2 billion for U.S.banks out of the $25 billion.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I looked at the hit that the New Yorkbanks would take if the loans become nonperforming on March 31. Itdoesn't add up to a lot. is the most vulnerablebut the numbers still are not terribly large yet, although it has adefinite impact.MR. GUFFEY. When the loans go nonperforming, what percentagedo the banks have to charge off?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They don't have to charge offanything automatically just because a loan is nonperforming.MR. BOEHNE. They have to take out what they put in, I guess.Don't they?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They would have to not record the accruedinterest for the first quarter and also subtract out from the firstquarter earnings what they already had accrued from the fourthquarter. So they get a double hit in the first quarter.MS. TEETERS. Do they have to put up reserves?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, not at this point. They don't have tobut the process is beginning that leads to classification and then tofurther classification and at that point they would have to.MR. TRUMAN. Our investigation, Mr. Chairman, suggests thatnot all banks would automatically in all cases back out the fourthquarter [accrued interest] under those circumstances. It's notexplicitly required by the instructions. It's an acceptable practice.MR. PARTEE. They would deduct it from their reserve for baddebts, wouldn't they?MR. TRUMAN. They don't always. That's the form in whichthey often would take out the fourth-quarter [accrued interest] ifthey were doing the fourth quarter. But at least my informationsuggests that they don't always do that in all cases. They do stopaccruing after 90 days but the previous period in some cases--MR. ROBERTS. The previous period is usually a reserveadjustment and the current period is a reversal.MR. PARTEE. That's the way they are supposed to do itaccording to the Call Report.MR. TRUMAN. That's right. That's the so-called acceptableway of doing it: to deduct it against loan loss reserves and thenreplenish the loan loss reserves to that extent. That, in effect,-27-3/26-27/84takes the income hit in the first quarter. But in some cases, Iunderstand, banks have declined to do that--or their internalaccounting people have chosen not to do that.MR. ROBERTS. If you had an adequate reserve you wouldn'thave to replenish it?MR. PARTEE. Yes. You might have to later on.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Adequacy is in the eye of thebeholder.MR. ROBERTS. That's right. The bank is the beholder.MR. PARTEE. Banks are supposed to have some outsideaccountants that tell them.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I have a request that may be toodelicate for you to comment on--I'm not sure--but I'm going to read itanyway. I'm scheduled in early April to give a talk to a bankingassociation for foreign trade, as Chuck knows. They tried to get himand had to settle for me. In any event, the point may come up at thatmeeting in terms of comments that have been made in the press that youhave had a role, and maybe a leading role, in urging the banks toreduce the interest rate that they are charging these troubled LatinAmerican countries. If that question comes up, is it true or not?What should I say? No comment? I don't know? Maybe?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think you want to get drawn deeplyinto that subject, but I haven't made any great secret of the factthat in the situations where there has been clear improvement I thinkthat ought to be taken into account in setting terms--whether interestrate terms or maturity terms or the size of the package or whatever.But we haven't gone around on a case-by-case basis [unintelligible]drawing out interest rate spreads. A clear case of improvement isMexico.MR. PARTEE. I think it was stated quite a bit more broadlythan that in the article in The Wall Street Journal that you probablyare referring to.MR. BALLES. It was. That's the article I was referring to.MR. PARTEE. I don't know. As a matter of fact, I called tofind out if anybody knew whether you had been doing this or not afterI read that article and I couldn't find anybody who did. I think itwas more broadly stated in terms of a considerable interest rate give-up. It reminded me of the days when they used to say that the Fedtold the banks they ought to continue with those REIT loans. We neversaid it, but that was what all the bankers said we said.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if interest rates keep goingup, the question is going to arise as to whether the [unintelligible]banks are capable of devising some kind of new relationship in regardto the increase or whether the financing put together by the IMF isgoing to have to be revised in the middle of the year, although thatcould create consequences. In other words, there has been some talk,but it has only been in general terms, about the banks and a cap on-28-3/26-27/84payment of interest rates; and any rise in interest rates would becapitalized so that it wouldn't disturb the cash flow projections andthe financing that has been arranged for the year. So far there isnothing very concrete, even though there has been a good deal of talk.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I detect an interesting phenomenon in thisarea. When you talk to the banking statesmen, if there are suchpeople--or to those who would like to think they are banking statesmenat large banks or small banks or American banks or foreign banks--theytalk very freely about reducing interest rates and the need forconcessions, for caps, or whatever. When their delegates arrive atthe banks' advisory committee meetings that atmosphere seems to benoticeably absent. I think it's fair to say that we can have formalconversations that probably encourage larger thinking but it doesn'tget transmitted very much in their--MR. BALLES. That's surprising, because I know that at leastat two of our big banks on the West Coastthose at the top level have stated that they feelconcessions ought to be made on interest rates. I wasn't aware thatthe people who show up at these meetings are taking a different view.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. by and large does notshow up at these meetings. does. In some cases wherebanks were not at these meetings, I could only report an impression.I don't try to track all these down. Bankers who have talked inrather sweeping terms are also reported to be with banks that don'twant to participate or want to raise the interest rate when thetelegrams go out. They think the terms are too narrow. I don't thinkI'm completely misreading this situation: There's a difference betweenthe guy [whose] bonus is being determined by the performance of theseloans and the interest rates on them and the executives who aresomewhat above those levels.MR. BOEHNE. Some of the regional bankers in my territoryhave said that they won't kick another dime into these but they wouldtalk about interest rate concessions. Apparently what you are sayingis that they will talk about it, but that's about as far as it goes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a lot of very tricky problems arisein interest rate concessions or roll-ups or whatever in maintainingany sense that these loans are then currently performing and[unintelligible]. That raises a whole range of other problems abouthow many reserves and so forth and it changes the whole nature of thenegotiation with foreign countries. There's a legitimate fear thatonce they began making concessions, where does it stop?MR. BOEHNE. Right. I was told by the regional bankers in myterritory that regional banks around the country were getting togetherto come up with a uniform approach to the next round when they wouldbe asked to kick in more. But I never did actually hear the result ofthat get-together. Have you heard anything about that?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, and I don't think it's verylikely, or practical either, for them to organize and talk that waybecause among the banks that aren't coming along there is a mixture.There are very few of the important regional banks that don't comealong eventually, although there may be 30 or 40 of the smaller banks.-29-3/26-27/84MR. BOEHNE. I think the next time you try to get them tocome along it's going to be a heck of a lot tougher than the lasttime.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It gets a lot tougher not just for them;it gets tougher for the bigger banks and for the European banks. Thewhole process is getting tougher. But if you want to look at theother side of it and hold this thing together a while longer, it isquite feasible, as I suggested earlier, that Mexico will come backnext year and we can forget about all those regional banks and smallerbanks. And maybe the bigger banks wouldn't have to provide anythingeither. That doesn't say there isn't a lot of refunding to be done.But I think it's easier if we can make a distinction betweenrestructuring or refunding and new money. Mexico might be gettingclose to becoming a country that in some sense has made the adjustmentand isn't totally dependent upon these greatly ginned up programs.And then people will begin saying yes, conceivably they are beginningto see the end of the process--"end" is stretching a little, but atleast an end of the process of a mass draft of new money for onecountry--and we can begin looking more hopefully at other countries.But we have to hold it together for a little while longer before thatcan happen.MR. FORRESTAL. There was some talk in my District, Mr.Chairman, about the banks getting together in connection with theBrazilian situation to resist any kind of new money going in but thatnever did materialize either. I was going to ask some--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The basic arithmetic here, of course, isstill very strong. They can sit there and talk about not getting anynew money. The fact is that they're getting more interest out of allthese countries and they're putting in new money. It may be nice tosay the choice is no new money, but the response of the [debtor]country is no interest.MR. FORRESTAL. In that connection, if the Argentineans don'tmake an accommodation with the IMF and these loans are put into anonperforming status, does that automatically trigger a technicaldefault on the part of Argentina?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it could. In some sense they're intechnical default now. They're in a position where a lot of bankscould say Argentina is in default if they wanted to take action.MR. FORRESTAL. Are the Europeans likely to do that, forexample? That's what I was thinking about.MR. ROBERTS. It just takes one, doesn't it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a mixture of opinion in Europeand a mixture of opinion in the United States. So far they've heldranks, but I think the nonperforming status will give some of themthat idea. It will be an event. We will see what happens.MR. GUFFEY. Is there any significance to the fire in yourashtray?MR. GRAMLEY. He's an arsonist!-30-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, just a point. When these loans arerenegotiated and when regional banks do express reluctance on variousgrounds, is it sometimes appropriate when that happens for presidentsto make calls and just state the Federal Reserve's position?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were trying to avoid that.MS. HORN. Yes, and so am I. Sometimes we get calls fromstaff members from various places and it's a little hard--at leastspeaking for myself--to read the seriousness of the problem andwhether it really does warrant a Fed president stepping in or whetherto tell these staff members that they really ought to try the regularchannels [through] the correspondent banks. It's a little hard toread the calls we're getting from the System to the banks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From the System?MS. HORN. From the Federal Reserve System to the banks.Sometimes I get calls from staff members either in Washington or NewYork suggesting that I call this, that, and the other bank.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Recently?MS. HORN. No, during these negotiations.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But even then, wasn't it couched interms of asking the banks what their view was on this matter andwhether they were going to go along or weren't going to go along?[Unintelligible] stating the Board's policy as we saw it but sayingthat, of course, they have to make up their own mind.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are raising the specter in my mindthat there are more such calls than I was aware of. And I hope that'snot the case.MR. PARTEE. Always a disturbing thought.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have not been encouraging such calls.MR. PARTEE. Unless we are prepared to guarantee the loans.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we did those about a year ago.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the case of Mexico I can recall thatthere were a few calls of inquiry. I'm not aware of any since then,but maybe I'm--MR. ROBERTS. Yes, Brazil.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, in the case of Brazil there werea few but not very many.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't think there were any on thisrecent Brazilian exercise. I'd be interested in knowing where thatcame from. Any other questions in this area?-31-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE. What did happen with the dollar this morning,Gretchen? You seemed to allude to a decline.MS. GREENE. It eased somewhat from Friday.MR. PARTEE. Just somewhat?MS. GREENE. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A four-pfenig drop.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to revert to the other issue: I havetold the banks when they have asked that it's their job to round upall these things. I've made some statements about general support forthe program, which they can use in public, but not in terms ofcontacting individual banks. [Let's turn to] domestic open marketoperations.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]MS. TEETERS. Peter, do you anticipate a situation like wehad in September when we had all that money just pouring into our--MR. STERNLIGHT. It looks very much as though it could bethat large or even a little larger.MS. TEETERS. Do you expect the total balance to go up intothe $30 to $40 billion area?MR. STERNLIGHT. Our figures have it up to about $40 or $42billion, something like that. I think the Board staff's projectionsare not quite that high, but not far from it.MS. TEETERS. And there's no indication on the part of theTreasury to cut back on their borrowing to compensate?MR. STERNLIGHT. They cut back a little on Treasury bills acouple of weeks ago. I've been having conversations suggesting areview of that. But I don't think we'll get very much help there.MR. RICE. Does it seem likely that these funds will staywith you as long as they did last year?MR. STERNLIGHT. [The Treasury balance] comes down again inearly May, fairly fast. I don't have a very clear time profile,Governor Rice.MR. PARTEE. There could be a debt limit problem couldn'tthere?MR. STERNLIGHT. In early May I think there could be debtlimit problem, yes.MR. PARTEE. I move it.MS. TEETERS. I second.3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there is no objection, we will approve[the recommended leeway increase] with a note in the commentary thatthis is in reaction to a very large increase in the Treasury balanceand not monetary policy. We have to ratify the transactions since thelast meeting.MS. TEETERS. We didn't ratify the foreign currency ones, didwe?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There were none.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I have a motion?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Motion.MS. TEETERS and MR. RICE. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The [next] item on my agenda says:Committee discussion of economic situation and policy implications.Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, the Eleventh District economy isgrowing, although somewhat unevenly. The weakness in the energysector has caused manufacturing to be sluggish, but most economicreports indicate that both residential and nonresidential constructionhave continued their strong growth. In the District, the S&Lsituation, which has been in the national news, is a matter ofconcern. In Texas the S&Ls had a 32 percent increase in assets in1983 and the federally insured S&Ls from Texas closed about $20billion in loans in 1983 as compared to $9 billion in 1982. Ofcourse, we had the closing of Empire Savings in Mesquite, Texas, whichis out where I had mentioned earlier the land switching that was goingon.MR. PARTEE. You never said it was Mesquite.MR. BOYKIN. Well, it's right out there next to the cowboys.It's the largest S&L closure in the history of the corporation. Mynotes say that it was caused by funding questionable real estatedevelopment loans with a deposit base that consisted of 90 percentjumbo CDs and 10 percent core deposits and that about $9-1/2 million,or roughly 3 percent, is uninsured. Office construction continuesstrong. Just to cite Dallas as an example: In January we had 15million square feet of office space under construction compared to a3-year average rate of about 8 million square feet. Vacancy rates inDallas are around 22 to 23 percent and in Houston are 26 percent.Most people we talk to seem quite concerned about the whole realestate picture, particularly that there has been so much built in themultifamily area; but a lot of that concern is now beginning to shiftto single-family construction, although the pace of activity doesn'tseem to slow down. There are anecdotal comments such as that theMesquite situation was the tip of the iceberg and that there are somereal problems in the making out there. Land prices continue to jump--and jump daily. wanted to buy a little piece of3/26-27/84land in downtown Dallas for a parking lot. The owner was asking $40 asquare foot. He offered $38 and the seller didn't take it and twoweeks later he bought it for $52. So, it's moving pretty fast.On the agriculture side--and on the call the other day somequestion was raised about agriculture--our feeling is that creditconditions at our District agricultural banks are characterized bymostly improved cash flows for District farmers who are cotton farmersand ranchers who are livestock producers; both now enjoy profitableprice levels for their products. The feed, grain, and wheat farmersare probably faced with over-production. The rate of loan repaymentseems to have quickened and farmers are requesting fewer renewals andextensions right now, although the longer-term outlook still causes usa little concern, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your comments raise a number of questionsin my mind. Let me just cite some of them and other people cancomment on them. On this last issue, the agricultural situation, yourcomments are not what I am getting from some people in the Midwest.They say the banks are liquid enough but the ability to repay after afew years is getting less. Land appraised values have declined andland price [declines] if anything are accelerating and a lot offarmers are getting increasingly stuck. On this energy situation thatyou started out with, my impression is that in recent months it hasbeen getting a little worse or going downhill instead of uphill forsome reason.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, we did get an improvement inthe rig count; it has backed off a little but it seems to be comingback slightly. It's still a difficult situation but what I see atleast is that whatever movement there is seems to be a little on thepositive side. I'd say that there is not further deterioration.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Prices of unused rigs went up a littlefrom a very low level and have begun receding again.MR. BOYKIN. Well, I would think that reflects the demand.We had a little uptick in drilling and that has slackened off a bit.I don't have any specific knowledge of the price but I know there isan abundant supply stacked up in the yards. So, if the price istrending down, people might not be able to hold those things forever.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I just don't comprehend what isgoing on down there with all this land speculation and the S&Ls andall of that. I'm confused [unintelligible] exposed.MR. BOYKIN. It's difficult for me, as I say, to get a feelfor this. The banks tell us that they don't feel exposed--that whatthey are doing is good and that it will be all right. The S&Ls, Ithink, have fully anticipated that there will be fallout from Mesquiteand that there are a number of other S&Ls--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are almost 50 S&Ls down there thathave grown by more than 100% in the last year.MR. BOYKIN. Right. And the largest increase was a thousandand some odd percent.-34-3/26-27/84MS. TEETERS. Are these brokered deposits?MR. BOYKIN. Mostly it seems to be brokered deposits, andabout half of the money is going into construction loans as opposed tojust the mortgages at the end. They are taking equity positions.They are--well, like Mesquite. They were building up the value daily,two or three transactions a day, and getting it up to the price wherethey wanted it and then packaging it and selling it out to lesssophisticated small S&Ls out in the country.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And in many cases apparently making noattempt to sell the houses.MR. PARTEE. Less sophisticated!MS. TEETERS. The most recent housing starts figures showed avery large increase in multifamilies in the Southern and Southwesternareas. And you seem to have an increase in commercial building also.MR. BOYKIN. Yes.MS. TEETERS. What is your vacancy rate?MR. BOYKIN. The vacancy rate is about 22 percent in officebuildings; I was told by a broker that the warehouse constructionseems to be doing a little better. Prices had been going for about$2.00 a square foot right before the first of the year and now thoseprices are up to $2.35 to $2.50 a square foot. I'm trying to rememberwhat the absorption rate percentage is and I really can't, but thefeeling is that the absorption is picking up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you explain this record or near-record volume of office building in a city that has a 25 percentvacancy rate?MR. BOYKIN. A lot of optimism and the fact, first of all,Mr. Chairman, that the funds are available. Take the big build-up infunds in S&Ls, for example. We know they are going to have to dosomething with that money and they are trying to shove it out as fastas they can. On the office building side, there seems to be enoughactivity to continue to encourage developers and builders.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is happening to the price on allthese existing buildings that have all these vacancies?MR. BOYKIN. Well, there have been a lot of concessions made.If you want a year's free rent, that's not too hard to get on a five-year lease. There has been some shaving of prices but I would say theprice is pretty well holding at around the $20 a square foot level butwith incentives such as paying moving costs or maybe a year's freerent or something like that. That is the way they have been doing it.I heard fairly reliably that a small insurance company went out to theLos Galenos area close to Dallas-Fort Worth and took a very long-termlease and got the first 5 years free.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think you can build a new buildingany place at these interest rates and expect to rent it at $20 asquare foot.-35-3/26-27/84MR. BOYKIN. No. We just started a hole for the first of twoof our Twin Towers. The excavation is underway. There is a bankthat's going to be the lead tenant of that. A 55 story building wasjust topped off for [unintelligible]. Mercantile Bank has announcedtheir 60 story building. The InterFirst building is a 70 storybuilding; the steel is about half way up. There continue to be newannouncements about an area we call the "crescent development." Theyjust dug the biggest hole that has ever been dug in Dallas and it's onthe north side outside the loop. It's going to have a really firstclass hotel and three office buildings of over 20 stories, anotherhotel, shops, and an underground parking garage for about 2600 cars.And that [project] is underway.MS. TEETERS. Are there vacancies in the residential area orare the sales of new houses--?MR. BOYKIN. New houses are selling. Used houses are turningover now. Three of four sold in my neighborhood that had been on themarket three or four days.MS. TEETERS. You don't have the same evidence of excesscapacity in the residential sector?MR. BOYKIN. No, but now in the multifamily area it does seemto me that we really are overbuilt. The condos built at Faulknerpoint, which the Mesquite Empire Savings & Loan was behind, consist ofover 6,000 units, which is estimated to be about a 7- to 12-yearsupply. They have over 6,000 vacant and they are selling them at arate of about 20 a month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I thought I might amplify a bit on the commentsthat I made on the phone last week about the agricultural sector. Inour area there are some parts of the District where the agriculturalproblems are getting somewhat on the serious side but there are somecontradictions that are developing on the positive side. Commodityprices have improved from what were very low levels. The opportunityfor exports seems improved, particularly to the Soviet Union and toAfrica, and certainly that picture ought to be improving rather thandeteriorating. And we expect that the participation in the 1984 grainprogram will be higher than we might have thought several weeks ago.So, in the short term, the situation seems to be better and wouldprovide for an improved situation. But having said that, there aresome serious longer-term problems. I think it is fair to say thatsome parts of the area are going through a significant transition. InIowa, for example, 50 percent of the farm land is debt free and for 35percent [more] the debt level is reasonable. Then you get down to the15 percent where the troubles really are developing. There the debtlevels are high and the debt was created as a result of purchasingland at values that were exceptionally high. The land values hadgotten out of the economic production scheme and were really prettymuch relating to inflation. As inflation has backed off, farm valueshave gone down and the debt has built up. That, as a consequence, iscausing the problems that you see [reported] so much in the press,which are not necessarily reflective of the agricultural sector as awhole. There are also a couple of timing considerations. First, thisis line renewal time for most of the agricultural banks and I think-36-3/26-27/84the banks put a pretty special focus on their credit exposures. Also,it's a time when farm auctions are typically taking place so that thewhole problem and the emotionalism that is involved with that comesback into focus. And then, frankly, it's a slow time of the year. Itis February or March before things begin to pick up and as aconsequence that gives people an opportunity to talk about it. Idon't in any way suggest that the problems aren't serious. They are.But I think they are not necessarily reflective of the conditionsthroughout our District as a whole.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you look at the aggregate figures--Idon't remember them offhand but somebody here collects data and makesan estimate--there are a lot more than 15 percent that have theseheavy debt burdens. It's a minority but it's very sizable.MR. KEEHN. Well, I'm really referring to Iowa particularly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Iowa is probably better off. Thecalculation of average farm income relative to assets is 2 percent.If a farmer has 25 percent of his farm mortgage at 13 percent, the 2percent is gone. I don't know what the correct number is, but itdoesn't take very much.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're talking about 2 percent gross,before servicing debt?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. All expenses before interest--MR. PARTEE. Your investment sector has done quite a bitbetter?MR. KEEHN. Yes, Chuck. I think it's a fair comment withregard to the industrial sector that those parts that are susceptibleto a cyclical improvement are indeed experiencing it. Many of them,particularly those that are consumer-related, are doing very well. Infact, many are right up to the top on capacity. The sectors that arehaving a problem are those that are dealing with some pretty secularproblems; they are doing better this year than they were last year butnowhere near as well as some of the other parts. But I think they arebeyond the scope of monetary policy. They have some special problemsall their own.I must say I've been very impressed with the continuedprogress on the wage side. People I talk to are still settlingcontracts in the 4 to 5 percent area but nearer 4 than 5. And theyexpect to have a pretty good year this year, although they are allvery, very apprehensive about the auto negotiations. They can do wellnow but if the auto negotiations go badly, that would create adifferent environment. On the price side, though, those sectors thatare doing well and are up toward the top of their capacity arebeginning to move through price increases with some success. Theyfeel growingly encouraged that they are going to be able to put theprice increases in and make them stick. So, particularly in thosesectors that are doing well, the price pressures are beginning togrow; and with the passage of time that could be a significant risk.Broadly, I think the answer to your question is that the industrialoutlook in the Middle West is far better than it has been.-37-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, Si said some of what I was going to say.My District, particularly the Pennsylvania part of it, has been one ofthe slowest in the whole country. Every time we have looked at it,the District as a whole has only been 10th, 11th, or 12th [among theFederal Reserve Districts]. And yet as we look over what has beenhappening, there really is a broad base to our recovery. Inmanufacturing, it looks to us as though we have been having the mostsignificant growth period since 1977-1978. Manufacturing has beenexpanding now for about a year and a quarter. We are also noticingthe same kinds of things that Si reported. We do an informal surveyamong the biggest manufacturers in our District. About a year ago,for example, only about 5 percent were reporting any kind of pricepressure. What we find now is that about 40 percent of them arereporting higher input prices. We see it particularly in thefabricated metals area and some in printing. So, it really is arecovery that is hitting our manufacturing area. We've tended to comeup last in these areas, yet it's clearly the strongest in a half dozenyears.Outside manufacturing I have just some anecdotal evidence.I've gone to a couple of shopping centers over the last severalweekends and I couldn't find a parking place. Sales volumes are veryhigh; they are running something like 20 percent over a year ago.Real estate [activity] is quite brisk. It's about average with therest of the country and that's really quite good for our areatraditionally. The banks are reporting rather substantially higherincreases in consumer loans, in particular, and to some extent inbusiness loans. On the agriculture side--Pennsylvania is a bigagriculture state, although most people tend to think of the Midwest--the big problem in recent months has been the Avian flu problem withpoultry. That has turned around. What we hear about weakness is inthe export business. Again, just to add on to what Si said,unemployment is still high in some of the industries that have morethan cyclical problems--those with secular problems. However, I didfind as I talked to a lot of people around the District, that they aremuch happier than they were, obviously, with this pretty good increaseover the last year but they almost plead "Don't end the party sosoon." They say it has been a half dozen years of pretty rough timesand it has been especially rough from about 1980. It has just been avery long dry spell and they are beginning to feel better about it.Most of them see a relationship between their own business andinterest rates. There is much more awareness of [the effect of]interest rates on their business than I have seen. They talk a lotabout the deficit. But even though business is much better, theycontinue to think it's not going to last very long because they seeinterest rates going up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you hear about wages when youtalked to them?MR. BOEHNE. The same as Si. I think the wage increasesgenerally have been fairly modest. We're seeing that in the publicsector. Philadelphia, with its new mayor, has taken a pretty hardline this year with the public area. There is concern that the auto[negotiations] might set a new pattern, but so far wage increases havenot shown any material increase. As I indicated a moment ago, there-38-3/26-27/84are some inflationary pressures on the price side, especially in thoseindustries that have had some cyclical upturn.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Tenth District hasenjoyed some of the strength that has been evident in the economyelsewhere. There are two or three areas to mention, and I'll focuslargely upon your question with respect to the agricultural sector.As you know, we do a rather extensive quarterly agricultural survey ofbank lending and the most recent one indicates that there is somestability felt among the bankers--stability in the sense that thingsare not getting worse and that they are manageable. But there's avery long period of adjustment [ahead] for the agricultural sector.In terms of specificity, they look to the projections for net farmincome in 1984 that are now running some 50 percent greater than netfarm income in 1983. Part of that is the PIK program that has comeearly in 1984 in which the sales have taken place of grain that hasbeen shipped to the producers themselves. So, some of that income hasalready taken place. They have serviced the current debt and as aresult the banks are feeling somewhat comfortable about the upcomingperiod. But the point that I think should not be lost is that thereis nothing on the horizon that they can see, absent a Russian graindeal or some other magnificent event, by which the agriculturalsituation is going to improve from this rather low stable level--inparticular in the debt service area. Farm liquidations were a verysmall percentage of farm holdings; that has gone up modestly. Therehas been some voluntary liquidation--that is, encouragement by thelender to liquidate in order to service debt--but that again hasstabilized. I think you have to understand when you're talking aboutthe agricultural community that, as Si indicated, January, Februaryand March are times that they sit around the hot stove and talk aboutproblems. It's only when the sun begins to warm things up and the sapbegins to rise that optimism comes back into that area. There hasbeen a pickup on Main Street of small ticket farm equipment sales butthe large machinery sales are still very weak. But there is someencouragement on the agricultural input side--I'm talking particularlyof [sales of] chemicals and fertilizers, which have been very brisk.In other words, the producers are anticipating large plantings thisyear and have the money to put into fertilizers and chemicals.Energy and mining are still very weak, particularly energy.Just to give you a benchmark: The last report that I have is that thenumber of oil rigs working in the Tenth District is 716; that's upfrom a low level of 574 a year ago contrasted with 1981 levels ofabout 1600. So, there is some modest exploration and production goingon but it is indeed modest. With respect to the general aviationsector, there is a good deal of optimism. They are not producing butthey think and still hope that production is going to increase in thelatter part of the year. In the commercial construction field, Denveris beginning to have an absorption rate of their overbuilt situationthat looks very favorable. Kansas City and Omaha have what might becharacterized as a commercial construction boom. In Kansas City therehave been seven major downtown office buildings announced within thelast 90 days and two or three of them have holes in the ground and areready to come out. That is in contrast to Tulsa and Oklahoma City,which essentially are overbuilt in the commercial area. We have seenno real evidence of pressures in the area of wage increases.-39-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. We are approaching capacity in a number of ourindustries. In autos, given the current mix of demand, we're atcapacity for the larger types of cars. Those steel products relatedto eventual consumer products are going at capacity. Aluminum is verymuch using its capacity. Alcoa is talking now about doing a lot ofingot importing because they are so backed up. They are at capacityrelative to the current plants and construction. Of course, all thesecompanies have plants that they closed down during the last recession.They are at this point deciding not to reopen them. Heavy trucks aregoing full out--light trucks a little less--as are [the companies thatproduce] the equipment that goes into these heavy trucks. The tireindustry is at more than capacity, working every shift their unionswill let them. Of course, we have our weak points. One is electricalmachinery. Foundries--the ones that are still open, which are veryfew--still haven't gotten their first order, so to speak. Machinetool orders are up, though that is not yet really reflected in termsof their production strengthening a great deal. The reaction to allthis strength seems to be, as I mentioned earlier, not reopening theold capacity but concentrating on more efficiency within the currentcapacity and not bringing back workers but doing a lot of overtime orsub-contracting. All of these reactions I think come from a couple ofcauses. Number one is a skepticism about the future--fear of highinterest rates and so forth. Another reason for these reactions isone that I view as very healthy. I think we are seeing some reactionto the intensity of foreign competition and people are now beginningto manage their businesses a little differently. We really hear aboutinventory control, about schemes to change the way of manufacturingfrom having huge plants and more people than they can manageefficiently to having smaller plants. They are working on set-uptimes and on the quality of the final product and so forth. We'rehearing a lot about those adjustments and the new manufacturingtechniques, if you will. And, of course, these techniques are used inservice industries as well in order to meet competitive pressures.So, while I don't believe in discontinuities and in sudden and drasticchanges in productivity and quality, I do think we really are seeingsome significant differences in this recovery that I think represent abeginning of a trend.What all this has to do with prices is less clear. Icertainly agree with a comment that was made that these people wantmore time in the recovery. Of course, these folks that I'm talkingabout particularly may have waited a long time to take part in therecovery as their industries are being affected at this stage in therecovery. They will talk about concern about future inflation butthere is less support when you say this may be the point in therecovery when we need to do something about it. They say "But give usa little more time." So the public opinion out there is that, yes,there is a problem of future inflation but don't do anything too soonabout it. Now, when we ask these people what effect this is having ontheir prices right now and what effect it will have in the future, I'mnot sure the story is completely believable. What is happening now,of course, they are honest about. We see so far some little increasein prices in these industries. There is a dissatisfaction with profitmargins and they don't expect too much cost pressure on that side inthe future. And then they say they are not going to increase prices--that they aren't going to be able to. And I think that's just a-40-3/26-27/84current pessimism. They are dissatisfied with their margins and Ithink they are just waiting for the moment. We've seen a littlenarrowing of the discounts in steel but that isn't very broad yet. Inautos we've seen some shifting between models and some restoration ofdealer margins and so forth.I might just make a comment looking to the auto contract.The one piece of information I can add to the discussion is on theindustry side. Of course, with the new union leader, the union ismaking the expected strong sounds. I have from a private source inthe industry--however, a source that I think wouldn't involve too muchposturing by the company--that, in fact, the company is ready to standfor a very long strike and that this management is making quitederogatory comments about previous managements giving the shop away,which might lend credence to the company's willingness to standstrong.Finally, in machine tools there is no price movement butthat's an industry where we don't have capacity pressures. Realestate prices have firmed and maybe increased a little. So, wehaven't really seen the price movement yet but the dissatisfactionthat is expressed by a lot of these people and the closeness tocapacity makes me think that their comments--pessimism from theirpoint of view about future price increases--may not reflect what willcome to pass and that we may get those price increases sooner ratherthan later.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sure that they are never satisfiedwith their profit margins but if you can believe the figures that wehave this morning, profit margins in corporate business are higher nowthan at any time in the last decade.MS. HORN. We have a lot of industries in the Fourth Districtthat I would think are on the bottom side of that average.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There must be quite a few of themelsewhere.MR. GUFFEY. They are all in Dallas!MR. MORRIS. It was also a pretty lousy decade for corporateprofits.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right--not much beyond the firstyear of recovery. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a question for Mr.Kichline. I've been going around New England giving speeches againstthe deficit and I argue that the problem with a deficit that doesn'tdecline as the economy expands is that at some point in 1985 we arelikely to see a capital goods boom--which is clearly showing signs ofdeveloping great momentum now and by a year from now ought to haveenough momentum so that the corporate sector will have to come intothe credit markets to take a substantial amount of the total creditflows. And at that point in time interest rates are going to have togo up enough so as to squeeze back the interest sensitive sectors ofthe economy--namely housing and automobiles--sufficiently to make roomfor the increased corporate demand for credit. Now, I look at your-41-3/26-27/84projection through '85 and I don't see any squeeze on the interestsensitive sectors. Sure, housing starts come down a bit from what wehave now but throughout '85 they are running at about the same levelas in '83. And the automobile industry is projected to show asubstantial continued rise throughout the period to a levelsubstantially above the '83 level. Paul Craig Roberts might look atthis and say "Gee, that's not too bad. What are you guys worriedabout the deficit for?" My questions is: Should I revise my speech?MR. KICHLINE. Well, maybe you should leave out '85 and letthe time horizon be a bit fuzzier. I think it's very hard in anenvironment where rates are not regulated to pinpoint the time atwhich it all will explode. But I think our forecast really has in itthose sorts of pressures building. In part, the impact of the deficitis showing up even now in our view, and it has been for some time, interms of the current level of interest rates. And it shows up in theexport sector where in a sense exports are being crowded out via theforeign exchange value of the dollar. You are right that thisforecast still has growth sustained in '85. In part, you're reallylooking at continuing fiscal stimulus pushing up incomes. We do havehousing as rather the weak sector. As you mentioned, it doesn'tcollapse but it doesn't grow. Autos we have growing. Business fixedinvestment, which we have growing quite a lot in '84, slows a bit in'85; but it certainly doesn't go downhill. I guess my concern withthe deficit is not so much the crowding out argument in a given periodof time but that we are looking at a structure that over time is notdesirable. As a part of this process, business fixed investment isgoing to be a smaller part of GNP over the longer run than itotherwise would have been and interest rates are going to be higherand the interest sensitive sectors are going to get squeezed.Pinpointing it, I think, is a problem. I might note too that in '85we do have built into this forecast a very small cut in the deficit;it's about a $20 billion dollar package. But if you envision that aspart of something that would be going on in '86 and '87, presumablyyou would have beneficial effects in '85.MR. MORRIS. But the question is: When do we reach a level oftotal demand for credit that will require a substantial contraction inhousing? That's what I would like to know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have demand for credit well above ourtarget already.MR. MORRIS. I know. That's right.MR. KICHLINE. Well, I have difficulty answering thatquestion. I really have difficulty answering the housing questionbecause I think there are some very funny things going on. Dallas maybe one part of it but the funny things are more widespread, withadjustable rate mortgages and institutions quite willing today tooffer discounts. I have a concern that as interest rates rise we mayindeed find that housing will change more than we have forecast. Inpart, as we get into '85 all these neat things such as discountedmortgages for the first year will be at an end. That first year willhave ended and, depending on rate levels, we may find lots ofpressures in '85 that we have not been able to readily define. But Isuspect the housing number, if anything, is on the high side ratherthan the low side.-42-3/26-27/84MR. MARTIN. Frank, I would join Jim in that hypothesis ofthe [likely] scenario. What is going to happen to housing will be acredit loss not an interest rate replay of the old disintermediationprocess, because the thrift institutions can pay the market rate.They can go buy the money.MR. MORRIS. The issue is that if rates go high enough, theywon't be able to find enough customers who are eligible to borrow.MR. MARTIN. Oh, yes. Look at the builders that they areworking with. The Pulte homes people have now issued $4 billion worthof builder bonds so far and it's on a stairstep going up. Thebuilders and the developers they are working with will simply put upthe points on the front and raise the price of the house. They canset the loan payment in accordance with whatever it takes to move themerchandise. But I think we will have severe credit problems, maybein '85 or '86 or whenever, and substantial thrift institution lossproblems. And that's what will cut off the housing--not theavailability of funds.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've reached this advanced stage ofeconomic development--and I'm serious about this--where you don't evenneed a buyer for the houses in order to build them. You see thatgoing on in Dallas. It's a process of self levitation.MR. MORRIS. May I suggest that Dallas is not the UnitedStates? Certainly, I don't see a lot of speculative building inhousing going on in New England.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope Dallas is the exception.MR. MORRIS. I just have a hard time reconciling myself tothis picture of another year and three quarters with no seriousproblem in either housing or automobiles. I hope it works out thatway, but it just seems to me too good to be true.MR. CORRIGAN. Let me just add a few comments on thisagricultural situation. I too am a recipient of a lot of war storiesflowing in from directors and other people with whom I come incontact. But it's very, very hard to pin down whether this is justwhat Mr. Keehn has called a "hot stove league" or something more thanthat. My conclusion is that it is more than that, but I can't becertain how much more. To give you a couple of insights into thecrosscurrents of information one gets: We too have a quarterly surveyof agricultural credit conditions. In the fourth quarter of 1982, 74percent of the survey respondents indicated that collections were muchslower than normal. In the fourth quarter of 1983, 37 percent saidcollections were slower than normal, which makes it sound like thingsare getting better. If you look at the year-end Call Report data--andwe did this just for state member banks for the December 31, 1983report--only 13 percent of the loans listed as past due 30 days ormore are agricultural loans whereas in that same population of banksabout 24 percent of the total loans were agricultural loans. Again,that doesn't sound all that bad. We then looked at 76 state memberbanks that we examined in 1983, and roughly 50 percent of those showedparticular problems with agricultural credits but the other 50 percentshowed no particular problems with agricultural credits. We talked toa dozen or so former directors and other people we know who are-43-3/26-27/84presidents of agricultural banks, and 50 percent of them said thingswere soft but not serious. The other 50 percent said it was veryserious. I got some data having to do with national agriculturallenders, mainly insurance companies. Ironically, it's almost exactlythe same story: about 50 percent of them reported improvement indelinquency rates and 50 percent reported serious deterioration. Igot hold of some data from the Farmers Home Administration coveringcase loads of 422,000 agricultural loans of which 236,000 aredelinquent, which of course is a very substantial percentage. Two-thirds of the delinquent total and two-thirds of the dollars are inemergency disaster loans of one kind or another essentially growingout of some kind of weather-related phenomenon during 1983.So, it looks as though it's a situation where it's eitherpretty good or it's very bad. In our District we tried to look at itin terms of geographic pockets, classes of farms, and particular typesof businesses, and we could find no patterns whatsoever geographicallyor by particular crops or products. We do see more of a creditproblem with Main Street businesses than we see with farms, if that ispossible. We do see that land prices on average are probably stillfalling, although at a slower rate. Somewhat consistent with the hotstove league philosophy: The glow of the PIK program has come off, andas the realization of that has sunk in it has made people feel worse.Certainly, the widespread expectation of a year ago or six months agoof generalized strengthening in agricultural prices--grains inparticular--has not materialized. So, while people thought thingswere going to get better they are not getting better. If there is acommon denominator, I think it's the one that Mr. Keehn indirectlyreferred to earlier. These problems, if they are concentrated in anyone area, do seem to be concentrated in situations where there was alot of debt taken out in the late '70s and early '80s either inconnection with acquisitions of land or substantial acquisitions ofvery, very expensive capital machinery associated with farmoperations.I have just a couple of other anecdotal comments from theDistrict. While the Ninth District is certainly not a major energyoperation, there is a belt of oil and gas activity in North Dakota andMontana which is about one fourth the size that Mr. Guffey spoke of inthe Kansas City District. But in that Williston Basin area drillingactivity is now about 80 percent back to where it was at the peaks of1980 and 1981, although it does appear that a fair amount of thatresurgence is being undertaken simply because rigs are available atsuch favorable prices. People are going out and seeing what they canfind. If they find something, they cap it and move on down the roadand stick another hole in the ground. But, certainly, the pace ofactivity has picked up very significantly from a year ago.On the office space situation, I don't pretend to understandthis at all but in Minneapolis as well there is a tremendous amount ofcommercial office construction going on. I don't have the foggiestidea who is going to fill all these buildings, particularly whenNorthwest Bank and Oxford Development start this massive project thatthey are going to build in place of the building that burned down ayear ago or so. But certainly, given the size of the Twin Cities,there is a tremendous amount of commercial construction activity goingon in the area. I continue to get some reports of delivery stretchouts, particularly in the high-tech industries. On the retail side,-44-3/26-27/84the encouraging thing that I hear from and others isthat despite the fact that sales have been very, very strong they saythey are going to stick with the very rigorous types of inventorycontrol policies they put in place over the last couple of years.In terms of the overall national business situation, I stilllook at the [unintelligible] situation as being strong to very strongeven if consumer spending does recede a bit in the second quarter, asit seems to me it must simply because the car sales and the carcapacity situation is going to produce that result. But even allowingfor that, I still think that in the next quarter or two anyway therisks are that the economy will be stronger than projected. Andunfortunately--and Frank this may help your speech--I personally thinkthe implications of that are that the following quarter may well beweaker than projected. It is interesting to note that both theunemployment rate and the capacity utilization rate in manufacturingare now at the points where we began to see the building of pricepressures in the 1976-77 recovery period. The big difference betweennow and then is that we've had some rise in interest rates earlier inthis cycle than we had then and certainly the wage situation, as hasbeen pointed out, looks better now than it did then. Unfortunately,the other side of that coin is that at least to date the productivityside is weaker this time than it was in that earlier episode. I thinkthis wage situation is very, very important. I don't know what isgoing to happen in autos but I think that's key, as is the dollar, asit pertains to domestic price level pressures. It's also unfortunatebut true that we now have a situation in which there is someanticipatory buying taking place in the expectation of either higherprices or higher interest rates or both, and I think that makes ourproblem a little more difficult. I am very troubled at the prospectin Jim's forecast of an inflation rate of 6 percent in the second halfof 1985. Once it gets into that range it's going to be very difficultto hold the inflation rate anywhere near that level. I would justconclude by saying that, at least as I view it, money and credit aregrowing pretty rapidly and velocity is growing. I'm not sure what thepolicy implications are right now because I'm not sure where policyis. Mr. Axilrod will tell us that later.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to comment on the thriftindustry and housing and very briefly on this situation with regard tocommercial property development and the syndication process, thelimited partnership process. Accepting the staff projection ofinterest rates, we have a situation in the thrift industry in whichthe losses could run between $700 million and $2-1/2 billion,depending on certain aspects of the sale of assets by theseinstitutions. As we all know, the sale of assets has been one way inwhich they have kept their profitability and avoided losses. Ofcourse, what is happening is that the interest rate increase that hasalready occurred is affecting the turnover of the 30-monthobligations, many of which are coming due now. And the weakerinstitutions may have 40 or 50 percent of their nonbrokered--I saythat carefully--funds in and around that maturity category. So, weare seeing the beginning of a conversion of 30 or 40 percent of theliabilities at a time when that conversion of assets can run perhaps10 percent of the assets. These interest rate increases, of course,are likely to continue at least in the near term. The nonoperating-45-3/26-27/84income of these institutions, which one could look at as 15 basispoints or 20 basis points against the asset, is becoming increasinglydifficult for them to accomplish. As there is more discussion of thecredit risks and the overbuilding and the question of values, it isgoing to be more difficult for them to attain that 15 or 20 basispoints. That could push them toward the upper end of that range oflosses. And here I'm talking about 1984. Before, at lower levels ofinterest rates, there was an expectation of turning over the 30-monthpaper at lower rates than face rates. Of course, the outlook for thatindustry was one of reasonable profitability for this year. That, ofcourse, tends to push these savings banks into very deep operatinglosses. It tends to produce some reliance upon the Federal Home LoanBank System. Perhaps not unduly, it tends to force even more franticefforts to attain fee income by originating loans without, let's say,complete or careful credit analysis and risk analysis.That means, of course, that the housing numbers that are inthe Greenbook could be supported with an increasing exposure of riskfor these institutions, with what that means down the road. We'vealready seen the Mortgage Bankers Association delinquency figures.The foreclosure losses continue. That is almost never talked about inthe financial press, but the rate of foreclosure is substantial as therate of bankruptcy continues to be on a very high plateau; [so], inanother segment of the private economy the foreclosure losses are verysubstantial. With regard to the comments on commercial development,of course, the new element in housing is the builder bonds. As I'veindicated, in one case that is a rather large number. The newerelement in commercial development is, of course, the limitedpartnership syndicate that the Congress has been trying to address insome of the so-called "loophole closing" proposals. Those syndicatescontinue to flourish; the limited partnership sales are substantial.Down the road that is going to mean that these heavy vacancies aregoing to cause those partnership interests to be of little or novalue, with a resulting impact on the commercial development process.My only point is that as we witness the interest rates unfolding asgiven in this scenario here, we're building up a future problem inhousing, in development companies, and in the commercial real estatesector of the economy. All those things inevitably will producelosses and close thrift institutions and commercial banks and otherkinds of enterprises down the road.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to comment brieflyabout developments in the Atlanta District and then turn to thenational picture and the projections of the staff and the implicationsas I see them for policy. The situation in the Sixth District is notentirely dissimilar from what you've heard from other Districts. Theexpansion seems to be pretty broadly based at this point. There aresome areas of the District that are still experiencing difficultiesbut everywhere I go, notwithstanding difficulties in certain areas andcertain sectors of the economy, there's a good deal of confidence anda good deal of bullishness on the part of business people generally.In a broader sense, almost all the indicators are quite good.Employment in most parts of the District is up and unemployment isdown; even in those places where we still have rather highunemployment rates, they are down from their earlier double-digitrates. That's particularly true in Alabama. The industries that are-46-3/26-27/84doing very well in our District are pulp and paper, carpet, andtextiles generally. Interestingly, phosphate and farm chemicalindustries are doing quite well, notwithstanding the weakness in theagricultural sector. And that seems to be because of anticipation ofincreased farm acreage in 1984. Phosphate mining in Florida is alsodoing very well. Consumer spending is very, very good in most partsof the District, particularly in the major cities, and that includesauto sales, which have been extremely robust. As a matter of fact,some of the General Motors and the Ford assembly plants in and aroundAtlanta are planning to recall a little over 4,000 workers.Prices, on the other hand, are moving up a bit more in mostof our cities than the national average, and that seems to beprimarily in the areas of food and beverage costs and transportation.Construction also has been very, very strong in the Atlanta Districtgenerally. In the residential area, we've seen substantial increasesin permits and in sales of existing houses. In fact in the Atlantaarea, prices are escalating tremendously. As in the Dallas area--andI've seen this personally in my own area--house prices are escalatingvery, very fast and the houses don't remain on the market more thantwo or three days. In some cases I've seen bidding wars going onwhere somebody will put a house on the market, for example, at$170,000 and before the day is over people are offering more than thecontract price. And it's not unusual for a single house to have fiveor six contracts on it within the space of 48 hours. So, that's avery unusual situation it seems to me. Multifamily building, on theother hand, seems to be moving in the other direction. Multifamilypermits are down and the explanation that I get from people in thereal estate business is that more and more first-home buyers aretaking advantage of being able to buy a house and are moving out ofthe multifamily areas. Office construction is also an anomaly in someof our cities, particularly Atlanta. They are building officebuildings or office condominiums at record rates. I, too, don't knowwhere all the people are going to come from to fill them up. So farthey are doing it, but some concern is beginning to develop in theAtlanta business community about overbuilding and the vacancy ratethat could develop later this year. The other cities in the Districtdon't seem to be experiencing that kind of overbuilding. Thefinancial services industry, particularly the S&Ls, are doing verywell and I suppose that's a reflection of the strength in the housingmarket. Mortgage commitments around the District rose 66 percent atS&Ls as of December 1983, which is the latest information I have.Commercial bank deposits are going up and loan demand is going up aswell. One of the weak sectors is tourism, and it's weak because ofunusually cold weather in Florida and reports of cold weather, whichperhaps were exaggerated. Interestingly, travel agents tell me thatsome of the weakness in tourism in south Florida and indeed around theDistrict is due to the fact that people are taking advantage of theexchange rate and going to Europe instead.The agricultural sector that other people have mentioned is asource of pretty deep concern in our District as well. It seems to beconcentrated in the Florida and Georgia areas, although some otherstates such as Mississippi and Alabama also are affected. Justlooking at the Farmers Home Administration delinquency rate, we findthat in Georgia and Florida it's running in excess of 50 percent andthat's among the highest in the nation. In Florida thosedelinquencies represent about 4 percent of the state's farmers and in-47-3/26-27/84Georgia about 10 percent of the farmers. The conventional wisdom thatI'm hearing from so-called experts in the agricultural area--and thatincludes some Congressmen who represent agricultural areas--is thatthe highly leveraged marginal operations are not going to make itthrough 1984. The other people who are better operators--usually thelarger operations even though they are heavily in debt--are probablygoing to make it. There seems to be a feeling that if they can getthrough the next 12 to 18 months, the situation will improveradically.There are two major areas of concern that I hear voiced overand over again in the District among people I talk to. First of allis inflation. They are seeing inflation demonstrated in higher pricesand in backlogs and capacity constraints in their particularindustries. They, unlike some other people's comments that I heard,wish that something could be done about this sooner than later. Theyall feel that their businesses are very good and they would like moreof the same but they are fearful of inflation down the road and theydo hope that something is done about that. The other thing that isgetting the attention of people in my District--and I hope around thecountry, Mr. Chairman--is the deficit situation. There is more andmore talk about it in all of the functions and activities that Iattend. My personal view is that the message is getting out to thepeople and, in turn, is getting back to the Congressmen. I don't knowwhat that means in terms of action this year, but I think the messagethat the people want something done is being heard by Congressionaldelegations. One concern that I have personally--this is just a hunchand I keep asking people about this--is foreclosure rates anddelinquencies on loans generally, especially in the installment area.Bankers and S&L people tell me that they're not particularly concernedand that their statistics don't indicate any particular problem. ButI look at the number of adjustable rate mortgages that are being putout in my part of the country, and I think around the country, andwith interest rates tending to back up I think we're looking at anexplosive and dangerous situation down the road as some of these ARMsbegin to move toward the time of the balloon payments.Let me turn just very quickly to the staff projection in theGreenbook. I have a slightly different view than the Greenbook inthree areas: economic growth, inflation, and unemployment. Outside ofthose areas, I'm entirely in agreement or don't have much problem!But I've changed my tune a little. At the last meeting I was sayingthat I thought the economy was going to move ahead at a faster clipthan had been predicted. But this time I don't see the economymoving, especially in the first quarter, at quite the level that theGreenbook does--namely, 8 percent. I realize that the Greenbook isprobably put together with the benefit of the Commerce flash report,and the private forecasts that I looked at didn't have that advantage.Nevertheless, it seems to me that we're not going to get the kind ofgrowth even in the first half that the Greenbook is projecting. Oneof the reasons I say that is that I think there might have been somedistortions reflected in the January and February numbers. We didhave some pretty adverse weather in November and December, which mightaccount for the rapid growth in January and February. And we had somechanges in the PIK program, and so on. The other area where I woulddiffer, again based on what I'm hearing around my District and some ofthe national figures, is that I think inflation is apt to be higher in1984 than the Greenbook indicates. Some of the indicators I looked at-48-3/26-27/84to support that view include: commodity prices, which are moving upand have been trending up for some time; the price of gold, which ismoving up; and the value of the dollar, which is coming off. We areat an 80-81 percent capacity utilization number and monetary growthhas been fairly strong. I hope I'm wrong, but it looks to me as ifinflation might be higher than the staff is predicting. And becauseof my view about the lack of robust strength in the economy ascompared to the Greenbook forecast, I would think that unemploymentwill not be as low as in the Greenbook. Summarizing all that in termsof policy implications--and I guess we can talk about this moretomorrow--it all adds up to me to one word and that is caution. Ithink we have to be very careful and very cautious as we formulatepolicy tomorrow for the next period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how much time we're going tohave tomorrow. As you know, I have to testify in the morning and Idon't know when I will get back. We may have to go to or after lunch.I'd like to get a little more done tonight, but I also am conscious oftime passing and I would ask those remaining to concentrate on pointsthat have not been made before. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. I think most points have been covered. I'llmake a very brief statement. In the Eighth Federal Reserve Districtthere's a very broad general feeling of optimism, confirmed by surveysthat we've done, meetings with our board and branch boards, andsessions I've had with large and small companies, commercialconstruction people, and business economists. I find no realexception to that general pattern, whereas maybe a fourth of thosepeople three months earlier would have had some remaining pessimism.There are rising expectations of price increases to come later thisyear on the heavier industry side. We hear talk in the chemicalindustry in particular about major price increases to come later on.On the consumer side, all the evidence we've picked up is ofcontinuing confidence in spending. [Representatives of] three verylarge nationally-based department stores indicated to me that salesslowed down a little in February but since then, in 10-day salesreports, each has indicated that sales have picked up again and thatthey think the earlier slowdown was weather-related. Housing is verystrong in our District. In all the major cities we're seeing someincreases in prices in the 7 to 10 percent range after stability forquite a while. Autos are very strong. Added capacity is beingplanned in the large-car category and in special areas. Chrysler justannounced an expected $350 million expenditure to produce more mini-vans, which is a red hot product in their line that they are producingin the St. Louis area. Business loan demand, according to bankersthat I've talked to, is beginning to pick up now in the major citiesof the District after having picked up some earlier in the outlyingareas. None of this is related to merger activity. In the wage area,the only indication of change that I've seen is at TWA and Ozark whereconcessions have been made by employees. I don't think that relatesto the general economy; it is a reflection of the pattern ofderegulation in that industry. I would certainly concur with the viewthat Governor Martin expressed about the shift of risk in the mortgagearea from the savings and loans to the borrowers. This is a risingconcern on the part of the major savings and loans in my District.Even though they're shifting a lot of the risk away from themselves,they are worried about the impact generally from rising interest rateson the variable rate loans. If there are any problems in my District,-49-3/26-27/84they seem to be a residual from the past and they would be in areas ofexcess real estate financing, coal mining, agriculture, and theforeign area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles, what do you have to say thatwill add to our sum of knowledge.MR. BALLES. I will try to make this very brief. Thebusiness statistics in the West are quite good. The aerospaceindustry, which I don't think anybody has commented on, is verystrong. Boeing is adding workers back after cutting back for twoyears in a row. Electronics demand is strong in Silicon Valley. Onecurious thing I've noted is that business statistics are better thanthe business attitudes, at least among some of our directors. Andthat requires a word of explanation. Housing and lumber, of course,are so important in the Pacific Northwest that I think some of thepessimism of the people in that industry is based on their lack offaith in the sustainability of the uptick we've had. They seeinterest rates about to rise even more and they fear that will justcut off the resumed demand that we've seen in recent months inhousing. So, they really are not holding their breath waiting for asustained uptrend in that area. On the matter of what is going on inthe mortgage area, in the West we find that almost half of themortgages made last year in California, Nevada, and Arizona, which isthe area of the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco, were based onadjustable rates. That, of course, leads right back to where the riskhas shifted. That may be the salvation of the housing industry if itkeeps up and borrowers can continue to be encouraged to go along withadjustable rate mortgages. You asked about agriculture and that'sawfully difficult to say anything about now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've heard a lot about it since then.MR. BALLES. In that case I won't add to the pessimism thathas been [related]: that there is the overhang of previous debt andthat some agricultural borrowers are having real trouble. I thinkI'll stop at that point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't know anything aboutwhat is happening in the agricultural sector but I do share JerryCorrigan's concerns about where the economy is going. I think thedangers are very great that the economy may grow faster than the staffis forecasting for this year. The two areas where that is most likelyto happen are business fixed investment and the change in inventories.The staff projection for business fixed investment essentially saysthat, after slightly faster growth than had been anticipated earlier,the growth rate continues from the second half on through all of 1985just where we thought it was a month ago. And indeed, it's a markedlylower rate than we're seeing currently. Business fixed investment wasgrowing at a 23 percent annual rate in real terms in the later half of1983 and that tools right down to 5 percent by the latter half of1985. I think we probably are going to see a major revision incapital spending plans develop over the first half of this year as aconsequence of the fact that the economy is growing so much morestrongly than had been widely anticipated. And I think we're going tosee, even in the Cleveland District, the beginnings of some desire to-50-3/26-27/84increase capacity. On the inventory side, the Board staff briefed usthis morning and showed us a chart on the ratio of inventories tosales, which is as low now as it was in early 1973. Of course, partof that is a consequence of better techniques of managing inventories.But it's also true that the number of companies reporting slowerdeliveries is back to where it was in late 1972. And my guess wouldbe that during the course of this year we'll see some efforts to buildup inventories relative to sales, so we'll see a bigger kick frominventory investment.On the price side, the thing that stands out most is thestaff forecast for prices relative to unit labor costs. There is onlya 0.2 difference there, with 5 percent projected for the fixed-weightdeflator for gross business product as opposed to 4.8 percent for unitlabor costs. That isn't even enough to take into account the effectsthat depreciation would bring. And the ratio of corporate profits toGNP declines during the course of 1984 from the peak in the firstquarter despite very active markets and relatively stable unit laborcosts. I just don't think that's the way businesses are going toprice this year. I think they're going to have the opportunity toimprove their profit margins and will do so. The big sleeper,however, in the price area is one that I've talked about before. Idon't know whether it's going to happen, but the labor forceprojection that the staff has included in its forecast is for growthof 2.4 million from the fourth quarter to the fourth quarter. Thatcompares with a 1.2 million increase during 1983. Now, last year'sincrease was very, very small. We did not see the kind of cyclicalincrease in the participation rate that we usually get. The staffforecast has one thing going for it now: namely, that in February wedid get a big increase in the labor force and an upward movement inthe participation rate. If this proves to be the beginning of atrend, then that forecast may be right. If it's a one-monthphenomenon and we were to see the continuation of the slow growth inthe labor force that we had last year, we'd be down to an unemploymentrate below 6 percent by the fourth quarter and then we'd have a bigproblem. The word that Bob Forrestal put out is "caution." Icertainly would agree with that and I may even be going toward a redlight.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I just wanted to comment on one aspect of theGreenbook projections. As we look at the very high first-quarter realgrowth and the tapering off very rapidly for the rest of the two-yearperiod, one gets the impression that perhaps not too much hashappened. But there is a distinction here between the level at whichthe economy operates and the rate of growth at which it operates. Andwe have now raised the level very substantially. If we have 8 percentinstead of, let's say, 4 percent for the [first] quarter, I think that[produces] 1 percent more GNP at an annual rate. And if the 6 percent[projected] for the second quarter were to materialize, that would beanother 1/2 percent of GNP over a 4 percent growth rate. That meansthere's $50 billion or so more GNP in the economy. The capacity dataseem to bear that out from the fourth quarter to the second quarter;in the forecast we're chewing up almost 4 percentage points out ofcapacity and we're really getting into the range where pressuresbecome strong. The same is true of the unemployment rate. We're nowmoving close to what is technically known as the equilibrium rate of-51-3/26-27/84unemployment. And at the same time we're encountering a verysubstantial speed effect in the sense that unemployment is coming downvery rapidly. So that factor adds to inflationary pressures. Itseems clear, finally, that inflation expectations have increased overthe last few months. That means that real interest rates, despite therise in nominal interest rates, may not have increased. They mayindeed have come down, if one could make so precise a calculation. Soon net the economy is operating at a higher level with greaterpressures, perhaps less interest rate constraint and, in a sense, moremomentum even though we see that the projected rates of growth fromthe summer on are now lower than they were in the previous forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, the question, of course, is whether in thefuture [those growth rates] are going to be that low. I agree withyour concerns and I agree with Lyle's. Clearly, the economy has beentoo darn strong for several months now and if it continues very muchlonger, we will have used up any slack we have and will be backed intoa period of a substantial inflationary pressure. We're at 81 percentcapacity utilization, I think Bob said. Even using the staffprojection, we get up to 85 percent in a not very long time. The onlytime that level exceeded 85 percent in recent years was around the endof 1977 and early 1978. And, of course, that was a period when highinflation conditions were developing. So, we have used a lot of ourcapacity and unless we do get this slowing growth in the economy thatthe staff has forecast, before we know it we will be into a period ofgrowing inflationary pressures. And that's the thing we haven'tfaced. Now, certainly, fiscal stimulus has been a problem with theeconomy. But I have some feeling that another problem has been thatthere is too much credit. If you look at the credit ratios, they arehigh compared with earlier cycles. For consumer credit and even forbusiness credit they are showing sharp increases and are getting up tothe upper end of previous ranges. Somebody who is well positioned inthe home building industry said to me not long ago that he hated totell me this but the difficulty in the home building industry was thatthe lenders were throwing money at the builders. They were callingthem up and saying "Come on, why don't you use my money? Why not havesome more starts?" And that wasn't in Dallas either, Bob. It's anindication, I think, of conditions that are just too accommodative--given the backlog of demand that we perhaps have developed for housesand durables and things like that and certainly given the optimism ofconsumers, which is just too strong to have that kind of moneyavailability around. So, I see the danger much more clearly than Ihave at previous Committee meetings over the last year as being thedanger of expansion over the staff projection rather than below thestaff projection. And I think the danger of that is much greater thanbefore because of having used up the unused resources that wepreviously had available.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If nobody else wants to pronounce thebenediction, we will quit for the evening.[Meeting recessed]3/26-27/84March 27, 1984--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any more or less technicalquestions for Mr. Axilrod?MR. RICE. Steve, the Bluebook says that the alternative Bproposal is consistent with the staff forecast of GNP. Does that meanthat alternative B takes into account the rise in interest rates thathas already occurred? Or does it mean that it will result in anadditional rise in interest rates over and above what has occurred?MR. AXILROD. It assumes a funds rate--well, it says 10-1/2percent, but I'd say on the order of 10-1/4 to 10-1/2 percent. We hada 10-1/4 percent funds rate for a few days. We don't have that todayand we didn't have it yesterday, so I think that really assumes afurther rise in interest rates. Today funds are--MR. RICE. You mean a further rise from today but not from--MR. AXILROD. I would say from the average of the last twoweeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we should over-estimate Mr.Kichline's ability to predict the economy and even more Mr. Axilrod'sability to project interest rates!MR. RICE. But it's helpful to know what they have in mind.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other questions?MR. MORRIS. Steve, I'm surprised at the very small estimatethat you came up with on M2 with respect to the IRA accounts. We aretalking about an awful lot of money here.MR. AXILROD. That was a small estimate of the distortingeffect on the seasonal. We might have gotten some of the seasonal butit could be more; I really don't know. But that was an estimate ofhow much we thought the seasonal might be off in some reasonable way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the estimate?MR. AXILROD. Well, a quarter to a half [percentage point],but I would take all of that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that an annual rate?MR. AXILROD. Yes. We don't think it is very large, butthat's just another way of saying we don't think we made a big errorin the seasonal.MR. MORRIS. Do we have very good data on the IRA accounts?-53-3/26-27/84MR. AXILROD. We have IRA accounts at banks; unfortunately,we don't have them outside banks. No, we don't have very good dataand that's a big problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other questions?MR. PARTEE. Do the data you have indicate that they aregoing up faster this year than last year?MR. AXILROD. Don may have [numbers on that].MR. KOHN. I don't have the numbers, Governor Partee, butthey are growing faster this year than last year. The big jump wasfrom the year before that.MR. AXILROD. Our problem was not only the IRA and Keoghaccounts but we had to make an estimate of how much the MMDA shiftsearly last year in January should be allowed for in calculating theseasonals so as not to distort the seasonals. That, as much as theIRA/Keogh accounts, was a problem to us in estimating the seasonals.We tried to make some sense of how far we could be off if we madedifferent assumptions and we came up with this rather minimal number.But that doesn't say that the IRA/Keogh accounts didn't have bigeffects in and of themselves.MR. CORRIGAN. You also have this big [unintelligible] inthese old, maturing 30-month certificates.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.MR. ROBERTS. On this large increase in reserves in Februaryto accommodate the build-up in excess reserves: I notice that you sayexcess reserves are subsiding and that pretty much takes care ofitself. But if loan demand is rising and the excess reserves go intoloans, what is the effect of that prospectively?MR. AXILROD. As a matter of fact, the excess reserves seemto be running high in this two-week period in the latter part of Marchas well. But we think the excess reserve build-up has beenaccompanied by a high funds rate, so it isn't as if people are takingexcess reserves and have gotten rid of them aggressively into marketinstruments or things like that. I don't think that the build-up ofexcess reserves is pushing loans out or pushing money out. I think itis really rather transitory.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have an estimate for reserves andthe monetary base for March handy?MR. AXILROD. Yes. Our estimates indicate a relatively low[or slightly negative growth] and assume excess reserves a littlelower than I think is going to be the case at the end of this month.For March we would have a drop in total reserves but I think it isbest to assume that reserves are about unchanged following the 19percent increase. And the monetary base is falling to only a smallincrease of 2 to 3 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you have for nonborrowed reserves?-54-3/26-27/84MR. AXILROD. Well, we have a drop there also, and it mayeven have dropped a little more than [our estimate]. We have a dropof around 7 percent, but I think a lot of that is the distortions ofthe excess and required reserves in March. It looks as if they areincreasing about the same as they increased in February--at about an 8percent annual rate. So this variation is largely the variation inexcess reserves and some variation in borrowing. It's a sort ofsustained expansion in the reserves that is providing the base for thedeposit expansion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions? Well, let me sum upwhat I think is a difficult situation in terms of arriving at ourpolicy judgment. Drawing upon what you people were saying yesterday,on the surface we certainly have a strong expansion. We haven't hadmuch change in the inflation picture. The wage picture to date--Imake no statement other than to date--looks surprisingly good. Therereally is no evidence, looking backward, of a real change there.Attitudes seem to be carrying over. Obviously, the issue is how tosustain progress, not just where we stand now. I think we have somevery large distortions in the economy that are becoming more apparent--they may not be apparent in quite the way many predicted--arisingout of the deficit. We have this enormous foreign trade deficit. Idon't know how big the housing industry is these days--maybe you know,Governor Martin--but I don't think it is much bigger than our foreigntrade deficit.MR. MARTIN. $100 billion.MR. PARTEE. It's more or less that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to illustrate the problem: We havethis decline, by whatever it has declined, and it is equivalent tolosing half or more than half of the housing industry in terms of GNP.Another way to look at it is that domestic demand has been expandingconsiderably faster than GNP.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What is the estimate of domesticdemand--at least 1 percent more than GNP?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's more than 2 percent if you takedomestic private demand. Do you have that figure handy, Mr. Zeisel?You computed it for me the other day.MR. ZEISEL. I'm sorry I just came walking back in.MR. KICHLINE. For the first quarter it is 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That figure you gave me excludesgovernment, doesn't it?MR. KICHLINE. It excludes government but it includesinventory investment and it allows for an adjustment of this PIKdistortion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it would be less if you includedgovernment?MR. KICHLINE. Right.-55-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This agricultural problem is obviouslymixed. If you don't have any debt, you haven't any problem. Butquite a few farmers have debts and the problem gets bigger. Thishousing market could be living on borrowed time. There are very funnythings going on in Texas and I suspect a few other places. One of thedisturbing things to me for the future is that I think there is areluctance to add to capacity for several reasons. As you mentionedyesterday, [manufacturers] have been through a sluggish period andthey have had a lot of instability. And interest rates bite whenyou're talking about a new factory or something. I don't know whetherto be encouraged or discouraged about the future of the country. Iwas in Winston-Salem last weekend and there's a huge new factory downthere for cigarettes. It's the only big factory of that sort thatI've seen for a while, and it is big. But all these distortions seemto be interrelated with interest rates. The economy [unintelligible]when demand moves very rapidly; I don't think that's so surprising inview of the deficit. But I also think interest rates are not in theshort run--I don't know about the long run--a very effective brake onmany sectors in this deregulated world that we live in. People goahead for a while anyway, except in some areas like new plant, withoutresponding. And I think it raises a question of how the shape of theeconomy will look in the future.I would add to Mr. Kichline's view that he gave yesterday inresponse to Mr. Morris as to what may happen. He has a goodtraditional, and I think fair, view of what one ordinarily mightexpect: low investment, low housing, and foreign trade problems. Buton top of that we have lots of vulnerability. This thrift situationcan rapidly turn negative and is turning negative. We were talkingabout their throwing money at builders and I think they are going tocontinue to throw money at builders whatever the interest rates are.They will pay whatever they have to pay and raise the interest rates,but they probably will continue to throw money at them or engage inspeculative investments. It's a sign of weakness not strength. Wehave this LDC problem. There is an interesting article in TheWashington Post this morning which is not new news but indicates thekind of psychological treatment this problem may get. We have theforeign exchange rate problem. If the dollar declines and the foreigntrade picture improves, it pushes all these pressures--bottles them upin the economy--and we will see more results there. I observed that alot of you reported that businessmen don't want us to take away thepunch bowl; they don't want us to tighten now. I think there is somereal fear about interest rates and the question is, in part, whetherthese little changes in interest rates necessarily do all that much.I don't think they do. Maybe it's just not very visible but if youscare people enough, there is a risk of a discontinuity [in theirresponse] here. They may suddenly say "Oh my gosh, we are going backto 1980 or 1982." And people could draw in their horns quickly. Isay that because when I talk to people about interest rates they don'tseem to be worried about a small increase. What they are worriedabout is that it is the first step toward a big increase that theyconsider very serious; they have that pattern in their minds. We areoperating in an atmosphere where interest rates are considered theproblem and we are considered interest rates. Whatever we say aboutthe budget, [unintelligible] doesn't reflect the budget or theeconomy. It's a very simplified view--that we can control interestrates. So, we're dealing with that kind of atmosphere and I think-56-3/26-27/84we're living to some degree with all these distortions on borrowedtime.Broadly, I guess we have three options. I don't know whethermy comments exactly conform to the statistics of Mr. Axilrod, but Ithink one can take the view that the economy is going to slow down byitself and inflation will remain under control and we don't have to domuch--we can luck out and avoid adding strains in the short run. Idon't know what you think about the reliability of that [scenario]. Ithink it is possible but how reliable it is is a question. The middleoption, in a sense, is that we can help nature along by making sure weresist any excessive money and credit growth. Under the circumstanceswe have at the moment that's a middle course but it raises thequestion of whether it's enough. Or one can take a more aggressiveand what might be considered therapeutic approach that certainly isgoing to be reflected in short-term changes in interest rates and wewill be face to face with some of these risks--the internationalnegotiations and the psychological risks that I referred to, ofcourse. If things don't go well, we are going to face those sooner orlater anyway. Those are the options that I see. We can proceed.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It seems to me that it's verydifficult to have as useful a discussion, and ultimately a decision onwhether and how much to tighten open market operations, if we don'tfactor in what the Board of Governors may do on the discount rate.Let's say we tightened along the lines of alternative B and presumablygot a fed funds rate in the neighborhood of 10-1/2 percent. If thenthe Board were to move the discount rate a half point, we might notget a full 50 basis points out of that move coming on top of thisbecause there is some expectational component. But I think we wouldget very close to that. So, we really would end up with somethingvirtually close to alternative C. It seems to me that we have thisproblem that doesn't usually arise. This time we have a combinationof circumstances where the markets are expecting a discount rate move.There are some good arguments for that. There are some argumentsagainst it, I'm aware. If we want to be in the posture of not sendinga strong signal that we're taking the initiative--that we are simplynot resisting the market's tendency to drive up interest rates--thereis an argument against a discount rate move. If we want to indicate amore forceful view, then there is an argument for it. All I'm saying,though, is that I don't see how we can know whether to talk in termsof the objective as alternative B or alternative C unless we have somesense as to whether there is going to be a discount rate change. Irealize that you would be reluctant to talk about that in a largegroup but I don't know quite how to address this question.MR. PARTEE. You're talking about the rates, not theaggregates?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm talking about rates.MR. PARTEE. I don't see how this changes the aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am certain that we are not going toarrive at a discount rate decision at this meeting. In making yourcomments you may want to make whatever observations you want from yourparticular perspective about the discount rate and how it might affectyour judgment as to what should be done on monetary policy.-57-3/26-27/84MR. GUFFEY. To join Tony, I have the same dilemma withrespect to which of the alternatives to select if indeed a discountrate action may be forthcoming. But the more important part as far asI am concerned is how the Desk would react to a discount rate increaseand whether it would use the post-1979 operating regime or the post-1982 regime. In other words, the latter approach would involveadjusting the borrowing level in some measure to moderate theincrease, if I understand [that regime]. If we go with the post-1979regime then we're going to get a one-for-one result--a half pointdiscount rate increase produces a half point rise in the federal fundsrate. If we use the post-1982 practice, we moderate it by adjustingthe borrowing level. I think Steve appropriately raised this issue ofwhether it will be incorporated in some measure in the directive. Butsome expression from the Desk or the Chairman as to how they wouldreact to a discount rate increase is important to deciding whether togo with alternative A, B, or C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not so sure it is so importantif one looks at it in terms of the monetary growth, which is theinitial focus here. But I will accept any comments anyone wants tomake here as to how one manages one's affairs in the interim.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But a considerable number of peopleon this Committee have an interest in interest rates not just in themonetary growth. And I cannot see that this isn't an extremelyrelevant factor. Now, we can always give two votes, I suppose: oneon one assumption and one on the other assumption.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let us proceed.MR. GUFFEY. If I look at "B," for example, it may beattractive to me at least in terms of a 10-1/4 percent or maybe 10-1/2percent funds rate. But if we get a discount rate increase on top ofthat and use the post-1979 procedures, that would get it up to 11percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the first instance, I will repeat: Ifyou are talking about "B," I don't see an interest rate there and Idon't see a borrowing assumption there. So, I think we can do acertain amount of talking. And I would suggest that we proceed. Mr.Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I agree with those yesterday whoindicated that they think the economy is currently very strong andthat we will be lucky if we hold inflation down to the level that theGreenbook is forecasting. Accordingly, it seems to me that our mainobjective ought to be to deal with the aggregates. I would focus, ofcourse, mainly on M1 and try to get that to the midpoint of our 4 to 8percent range and hold it there in order to reduce the risk thatinflation would really be a problem in 1985. I like the M1 path of"C" because that would get M1 to the midpoint by midyear. But theBluebook associates that with a federal funds rate of 11 percent ormore and I would feel a little more comfortable--and here I amassuming no change in the discount rate--if we let the federal fundsrate move up to the neighborhood of 10-1/2 percent and hold it thereuntil we have some additional information on the behavior of theaggregates. I like the "B" specifications for the federal funds rateand the borrowing. I have to say, though, that I have no confidence-58-3/26-27/84in my ability to tell you what kind of growth in the aggregates we'regoing to get under current procedures if we push the federal fundsrate to that level or indeed to any other level. I just don't thinkthat there is really any way for us to know under our currentoperating procedures. But we've now had 2 months of experience,roughly, under contemporaneous reserve accounting and I was happy tohear Steve suggest that he thought there might be some merit inlooking at the idea of introducing some automaticity into that. Iwould strongly endorse that and would express the hope that somewherealong the way we get as close as we can to something approaching totalreserves. If we do get to that point, we ought to think about thediscount rate as a penalty rate at all times. I think that kind ofprocedure would greatly enhance our chances of controlling theaggregates and inflation and help us maintain this hard-woncredibility that we have finally gotten.MR. PARTEE. Do you mean a penalty rate above the funds rate?MR. BLACK. Yes. That's right--in order to control totalreserves more closely.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I would support alternative B. Idon't have the confidence in the behavior of M1 that Steve suggests hehas--that, after not having served as a very useful target in '82 and'83, it is somehow going to revert to its old historic norm in '84.But I think the rate of growth of debt is quite clearly excessive.That growth plus the extraordinarily strong economic numbers that havecome in tell me that we have to move now to moderate the rate ofadvance in the economy. I think moving to "C" and having a funds ratepossibly as high as 12-1/2 percent is a little overkill. It seems tome that we need more feedback from the effect of interest rates thanwould be implied in alternative C, and the idea of returning to theold automaticity sends a chill up my spine. I certainly would like torestrain the funds rate range to no higher than the "B" level.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Several people commented yesterday to the effectthat the potential for inflation accelerating down the road is nowincreasing, unfortunately. Certainly, the work that we've done in ourBank strongly supports the same conclusion: that inflation begins toaccelerate as we approach the unemployment range of 6 to 7 percent orthe operating capacity range of 80 to 83 percent. And I fear that maybe down the road. So, for that reason I also would come out insupport of alternative B and would suggest a borrowing assumption--since it isn't listed in the Bluebook table though it is listed in thetext of the Bluebook--of about a billion dollars. That would seemreasonable to me. I think we should not shrink from letting the fundsrate creep up to 10-1/2 percent in the near future for starters, and Iwould hope that it wouldn't have to go much above that. But I thinkwe are going to have to do something more than we've done recently toslow down the generally rapid thrust of all these aggregates,especially M1. I was glad to hear Steve's remarks--and perhaps I'mreading more into them than he meant--but it almost sounded, Steve, asif you're ready to take M1 off probation, which I would welcome.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.-59-3/26-27/84MR. CORRIGAN. This is a real predicament, to put it mildly.I guess I would come out supporting alternative B, with the borrowingnumber and so on that go with it in the Bluebook, even though I mustconfess that I like the aggregate profile in "C" better than that in"B." But at this point "C" scares me a little in that it couldactually make things worse in the short run. That is what I see asthe great dilemma. If we went with "B" and that meant that thefederal federal funds rate had to get up to 10-1/2 percent or so, likeJohn, I would say "So be it." But in the context of "B," I wouldfavor the directive variant 2 that Steve has in the Bluebook.Personally, I would favor an asymmetrical directive that would saythat we would strongly resist money and credit growth above thespecifications of "B" and be tolerant of shortfalls in the growth ofmoney and credit below "B."MR. PARTEE. Did you say "strongly resist"?MR. CORRIGAN. I think I said "strongly." I'm not sure whatthat means, though, Chuck. I won't try and define that. I am verytroubled by this credit growth, in particular. Those numbers arereally very, very strong. I certainly would favor an asymmetricaldirective, one that would--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On those credit growth numbers, I don'tknow if the number was touched upon yesterday but that shouldn'tchange the general comment: February growth was swelled by thesemergers and is accompanied by a decrease in equity, which isn't a veryhealthy thing. The equity is not in the number whereas the debt is,and that makes a difference of 2 percentage points or so for onemonth, if I remember correctly. It's still strong, however you lookat it. But it doesn't show an acceleration; it just shows strength.MR. CORRIGAN. I don't know the right adjustment for themergers, but if you look at bank credit or total credit--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's strong, no question. There's justthat extra bulge.MR. CORRIGAN. And it's partly for that reason. Also, whenwe set these targets for 1984 we seemed to say that if velocity wasgrowing, the Committee was thinking in terms of M1 in particular beingabout at the middle of the range. So, I certainly would not resistany shortfall in the growth of money and credit during the secondquarter relative to the specifications of alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, when [we face] an economy [that] isexpanding as rapidly as it is and the outlook is that it probably willslow down because of its own internal dynamics and, on the other hand,the economy may continue to expand rapidly and slow only a little, Ithink it's a good time to rely on what we consider to be acceptablerates of growth in the money supply. I would do that and let thedynamics of the economy--the rate of expansion--determine pretty muchwhat interest rates will be. In other words, if we set the course ofgrowth for money at rates of expansion within target ranges that webelieve to be appropriate, then we should stick with that. And ifmoney and credit demands in the economy intensify and force interest-60-3/26-27/84rates up, then we should accept that. On the other hand, if the[growth in the] economy moderates as we hope and expect, that leavesscope for interest rates either to stay at current levels or perhapseven fall somewhat. I think alternative B is the alternative that ismost consistent with that way of looking at things. So, I wouldaccept the rates of growth for the aggregates set in alternative B andwould accept the federal funds rate fallout from that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I agreed with Emmett all the way up to where hesaid that alternative B was his choice. I start with the view thatthe staff forecast is not an unreasonable one but that if it is wrongit's likely to be that growth will tend to exceed the 5.3 percent ratethe staff has forecast for the fourth quarter to the fourth quarterand that we will have somewhat more price pressures. I would be happywith the kind of growth the staff was forecasting a month or two ago--4 to 4-1/2 percent or somewhere in that neighborhood. But 5 to 5-1/2percent and possibly more in the second year of a recovery when we'removing rapidly toward much higher rates of resource utilization forboth capacity and labor is something that I find disturbing. Now, "B"is essentially the alternative that is consistent with the staffforecast. And that means, I presume, that in the second half of theyear if we stayed with "B" and extended it with the same interestrates that we are talking about as consistent with "B," we would findthat money growth would slow with the slowdown in the pace of theeconomic expansion that is forecast. And this is a policy that Iwould call leaning with the wind. It's providing enough money in thefirst half to keep interest rates from going up too much and thenletting the money growth come down a little as the economy begins toslow down of its own natural processes. If we are in the second yearof a recovery and are willing to supply the kinds of increases in theMs that are involved in "B" and to permit credit to grow by more than11 percent, when are we going to get back to a policy that is designedto bring inflation down over a long period? So, I just don't think"B" is the right alternative. I share your worries and concerns aboutthe economy, but I think we've got to go further than that. Now, "C"is a bit of a shock perhaps, but I think we ought to move in thatdirection; something between "B" and "C" is where I would come out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question inspired by yourcomments. It really wasn't developed yesterday, and I will direct itto Mr. Kichline. We face various probability distributions of theoutlook. I saw in the paper this morning that somebody is projecting2 percent growth in the second quarter. I guess a lot of people arestill projecting 4 or 5 percent. Can you explain to me theprobabilities and the kind of profile of that kind of slowdown?MR. KICHLINE. I saw the 2 percent number but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't have to explain the 2 percentfigure necessarily, but what are the chances of that and what is theevolution of events that would produce it? In your view how probableis it that we will see what you have projected? Did you project 6percent or so?MR. KICHLINE. We have 6 percent for Q2. Are you talkingabout the second quarter?-61-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Suppose it were in the neighborhoodof 4-1/2 percent. How likely or how unusual would that be and whatwould have to happen to get that?MR. KICHLINE. Well, I don't view that as inconceivable atall. We struggled with this whole issue. There are some technicalreasons that the number could readily come out below 6 percent andthere are some rather substantive reasons that it could come out below6 percent. My personal view is that 6 percent is a good number. Ifit's wrong--and I'm assuming that interest rates don't decline in thisenvironment but perhaps are where they are now or rise a bit--I thinkthe odds favor a smaller number than 6 percent. One example is in theauto area where we have production levels that we think are sensible.But GM is closing several plants. At the moment the way the CommerceDepartment is going to measure the numbers, they are not inclined tochange the seasonals; and if they don't do that, we're going to findauto production declining substantially. That's a technical reasonbut it shows up in the numbers. There are a number of cases wheresome of the retail sales may well have come early in the year due toweather effects and we may be facing a situation where the economy isnot that strong. So, I feel very comfortable with the 6 percentnumber; but if I were to bet that it's not 6 percent for the secondquarter alone, I would bet on a little lower number.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The major vulnerability, if that is theright word, is that retail sales may develop less buoyantly than youhave forecast?MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think housing is the other area.Those housing numbers may well be in the process of change as well.We have seen a half point increase in the VA rate with the general,even mild, rise in interest rates. It seems to me that some of theattitudes in the housing industry may change and take a little of theedge off what was really an extraordinary increase in residentialexpenditures in the first quarter. I do feel comfortable looking fora very strong number for the full year, but your question was reallyon Q2 and my assessment of what the odds would be.MR. PARTEE. If retail sales fell below your projection inthe second quarter--I'm talking right ahead--wouldn't the result bejust a larger increase in inventories? It would seem to me,especially with the inventory/sales ratio so low, that it wouldn'taffect production.MR. KICHLINE. Perhaps some, but we do have inventoryincreases in this forecast.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MS. TEETERS. In answer to your question: In the second yearof the recovery from the mid-1970s recession, the quarterly patternwas a boom and bust pattern, essentially. It averaged out to a goodyear. I haven't looked to see whether they have revised thatparticular pattern out, but there was a good quarter followed by a badquarter followed by a good quarter and it was [primarily] in theautomobile sector of the economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.-62-3/26-27/84MR. MARTIN. I would like to join those who indicatedyesterday that there are number of signposts leading us to somethinglike an 85 percent capacity figure as in 1978 and 6 percentunemployment--putting us at or even below the natural rate ofunemployment. But I think there may be some merit in qualifying thosetrends. In talking about 80 or 85 percent capacity in this secondyear of recovery I think probably all of us are keeping in mind thatthe importance of imports both to the business sector and to theconsumer sector is different this time. Capacity of 81 or 82 percentin the United States doesn't mean 81 or 82 percent capacity in Germanyor the United Kingdom or Japan or for the steel producers in Brazil orfor the exporters to the United States in Mexico and so forth. Interms of our stress on industrial production, I think it isappropriate. These are rather spectacular increases but the contextis that manufacturing--I'm varying my element here a bit--accounts forsomething like 25 percent of the labor force. In the short run, itisn't so much a matter of industrial production as it is perhapsproduction of value in services and employment in the servicesindustry. I recognize that that has shown a strong increase also, butI don't think we are talking about 81 percent of capacity of officesor of computers or telephones or the other tools in the services area.So, I think it needs to be qualified a little.Secondly, the vulnerability of some sectors has beenmentioned. I have some difficulties going from the staff forecast tothe alternatives on page 6. My difficulties are--let me characterizeit unfairly--the gaps between the rates of growth in alternatives A,B, and C. I have a little difficulty moving from a 6-1/2 percentgrowth in M1 to an 8 percent growth. That's a rather heroic jump tome. My druthers are for an "A prime" where we look at the 7 percentthat we've just been told is the [projected] rate for M1 in March. Wemight wind up at 7-1/4 percent or somewhere in between [the 6-1/2 and8 percent rates of Alternatives B and A]. I don't have any marvelouseconometric approach here to give you. I'm just going in the middle[of the Bluebook ranges]--for the M2 figures and the M3 figures and afederal funds rate that perhaps would stop at 11 percent and not at11-1/2 percent. I'm impressed by the hints of the lagged effect ofthe interest rate increases we've already had. One mentionedyesterday was of 125 basis points on CDs and 100 points in thismaturity and 80 points in that maturity. We haven't seen the effectsof the lag response to those numbers. So, I would vote for an "Aprime," if you will, with borrowings around $800 million, not abillion, and a 10-1/4 to 10-3/4 or even 11 percent range on fed funds.I agree with Governor Rice that we ought to be a bit flexible withregard to fed funds. The market is moving and we should to somedegree validate the moving. But I think too much of a slowing nowmight indeed be a shock, considering the vulnerabilities and thepotential softness that we face, as noted by the Chairman in hisusual, very good summary statement. So, I vote for an "A prime."MR. PARTEE. "A minus."MR. MARTIN. "A minus." Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Well, I would like to point out one thing thatis remarkably different in this expansion: We don't have any pressure-63-3/26-27/84on oil prices. During the 1970s we always had upward pressure on oilprices and the threat of very large increases in prices, and in mymind that takes a great deal of the inflationary pressures out of thesituation. As regards the aggregates versus interest rates: Havingsat here, I don't believe in the aggregates except in a very broadsense as an indicator that is as good as some of the others that arearound. But to run monetary policy with highly volatile interestrates in order to obtain a rate of growth in the money supply which wedon't really control directly seems to me really bad. So, I come tothe conclusion that what is important is the interest rate. Thatdoesn't mean that it's an interest rate on fed funds which we say is10 to 10-1/2 percent and it comes in at 10-1/4 percent. I think somevariation in that interest rate is good. I think we also can followthe market with it. I have a great deal of sympathy for Tony's andRoger's point of view that what we decide today is not independent ofthe discount rate. I don't want to get [unintelligible] because Ihave to vote on both of those decisions. I want to come out with apolicy that somehow puts those two together. If we vote as aCommittee to go for alternative B and then as a Board to raise thediscount rate, we're going to end up with 11 percent on the fed fundsrate. On the other hand, if the Board decides to raise the discountrate, then we get trapped. If we raise the fed funds rate to 10-1/2percent, the staff may come back and say the fed funds rate is 10-1/2percent and as a result the borrowings are going to be a billion andhalf dollars because [banks] are going to utilize the discount[window]; we may then have to raise the discount rate to keep theborrowings at a certain point. There is a certain amount ofcircularity going on here. We have raised interest rates already; the[funds rate] average of the last two weeks is 10.36 percent. I thinkit was probably the proper move. I would go with a fed funds rate ofabout 10-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I object a little. You say we raised--MS. TEETERS. Well, we didn't resist it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a little different.MS. TEETERS. I am assuming that we are going to raise thediscount rate to 10 percent if we decide on alternative B.MR. PARTEE. Raise the discount rate to 10 percent?MS. TEETERS. It's at 9-1/2 percent isn't it?SPEAKER(?). 8-1/2 percent.MS. TEETERS. Raise it to 9 percent.MR. PARTEE. All right.MS. TEETERS. If we raise the discount rate by a halfpercentage point, then it seems to me that the specifications shouldbe the federal funds rate at 10-1/2 percent and the borrowings at $800million. If we raise the discount rate, we want to offset the impactof that to some extent because if we don't we're going to get 11percent on the fed funds rate. If we don't raise the discount rate,then it seems to me that we can go with "B" and have borrowings of $1-64-3/26-27/84billion and have the fed funds rate fluctuating in the neighborhood of10-1/2 percent. But I don't think one can disconnect those twodecisions at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I think we are in a critical phase.There is some danger of the economy getting away from us on the upside in the mid-passage. If this is a long expansion, this is themiddle of it and the economy is accelerating when it ought to bemoderating. I think the market sees that and expects some kind ofaction. And unless we do something, we're going to lag behind ratherthan be with it. I'm not arguing that we ought to lead the parade butwe shouldn't be hanging back. Moreover, if we do less now, we have toanticipate the possibility that this economy will continue very strongand we may have to do more later on. So, we would be saving ourselvessome agony later if we take action now. I realize all this isn'ttargeting on the aggregates; it's targeting on the economy. I dothink the aggregates should be our focal point. I would not want togo back to automaticity of M1. The idea of having to chase after someblip, as we did at one time, is just too alarming. But then one hasto be a little firmer on the other means by which we steer. We'vealready allowed some tightening and if we now move up a second step, Idon't think the second step needs to be a very big one. We would betaking two steps in succession. We could at least afford for a whileto see if this doesn't work. Like Lyle, I feel that's somewherebetween B and C. I would say M1 at 6 percent, M2 at 7-1/2 percent, M3at 8 percent, and the funds rate range at 8 to 12 percent. I don'twant to discuss the discount rate but it's like the word"hippopotamus" in that once it is dropped into your mind it's veryhard not to think of it. So, I do make my borrowing assumption withsome thought about that; if we go to $1 billion on the borrowing, thatprobably would produce the right effect overall.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can go to lunch.[Lunch break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we are reassembled, we ought toproceed. What I would like to do is complete this general go-around.Then I think it might be appropriate to go into a more limited sessionof the kind we have had before. After we finish the comments bypeople generally, I would appreciate the staff leaving and we will gointo that kind of session. We will proceed with Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. For many of the reasons that have been stated, Iwould like to see the monetary aggregates closer to the middle of theranges. And I'd like to see that happen sooner than alternative Bwould bring it about, in part because I do have real concerns aboutthe strength of the economy. But I also think there are significantrisks in the future on the down side and that moves me more toward"B." While the other reason moves me away from "B" toward "C," thatmoves me back toward "B." I must say I like the Chairman's words onhis second option "help nature along." In my view a "B-" path doesthat. By a "B-" path I'm talking about a borrowing assumption ofabout $1.2 billion but I'd not quibble on decimal points there. Andthen just one comment on Henry's hippopotamus: When I say "B-" I amassuming no change in the discount rate; I'm assuming that we'd be-65-3/26-27/84moving with open market operations rather than with the discount rate.So, I would be for a "B-" path.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that imply, as a matter of curiosity,that you think that's better than changing the discount rate?MS. HORN. Yes, it does.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Your Bank] having proposed one.MS. HORN. It does. I feel, as someone who doesn't take partin that decision, that there are several reasons why one might want tochange the discount rate. It could be done to make a statement ordrive home a point or because of real difficulties at the window withtoo much of a gap between the fed funds rate and the discount rate. Iwould not be in favor of changing it to make a strong statement atthis time. The political situation is such that I'd like to see themove made on the open market side, presuming that the gap doesn'tbecome too big between the fed funds and discount rates and that maybewe could just live with leaning on the open market side.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. May I make a comment at this time?There's a danger in a discount rate rise in the sense that thepolitical critics in the developing countries in Latin America may beable to get somewhat more ammunition from the Federal Reserve activelyraising interest rates than from a posture of it being the market[raising rates]. But I think that's very marginal. From a purelydomestic point of view, I would say that it would be better to raisethe discount rate--if you're talking about alternatives. I'm givingmy personal view in response to your hypothetical question to Karen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I said yesterday that I thoughtthe risk to the economy was on the down side and I expressed somedisagreement with the staff's forecast for growth for the first andsecond quarters. Nevertheless, it seems to me that we definitely arelooking at a pretty strong year, and associated with that are theinflation dangers and the inflationary expectations that many of ustalked about yesterday. For that reason, I think we need to have somemovement even to validate what the market has been doing, but I don'tthink it ought to be very much at this time. I don't think we oughtto be overreacting to a few months' economic figures. So, mypreference would be something between alternative B and alternative A,and I'd call it "B+" or "A-." It seems to me that the specificationsfor that would be an M1 figure of around 7 percent with an associatedfederal funds rate of [around 10] percent and a borrowing number of$800 million. I think that kind of movement would give us enoughrestraint in the economy, along with what has happened in the shortterm, until we get additional data or some other indications of whatis actually going to happen in the economy. At the same time I'd keepthe monetary aggregates about where they are; they should be withinour targets but moving a little more toward the center of the range.Just a quick comment on the discount rate: I really don't get veryhung up on that, and in this particular meeting it seems to me thatthe Committee ought to be making its judgment based on the aggregatesand so on. I'd leave the decision on the discount rate to the Board.In other words, if you think that enough has been done, you don't move-66-3/26-27/84the discount rate. But if you don't think enough has been done, thenyou can do something with the discount rate. So, I'm not particularlyconcerned about that relationship.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. I agree that the economy is quite strong at themoment, although I wouldn't be surprised to see some moderation in itsgrowth by midyear. And I think that will be a function of thesecapacity constraints that have been mentioned, a slowdown in some ofthese high growth rates that are predicted on seasonals like housing,and the lagged effect [on economic activity] of the reduced moneygrowth the last half of last year. On the other hand--and I think weshould deal with these lags--the lagged effect of the very largegrowth in money in late '82 and the first half of '83 should beshowing up in higher prices by later this year, which fits into ourother discussion about the economy. So, it's important not toaggravate this higher inflation that I expect by raising the growth ofthe aggregates beyond the trend line. Therefore, I think our originalobjective of staying in the center of the 4 to 8 percent range, orabout 6 percent, is an appropriate policy at this time. I don't seewhy we should be concerned about the natural consequences of increasedcredit demand relating to a good and adequate supply of money. It'snormal that if activity is strong, interest rates will rise. Andthat's not something that is likely to kill the economy; it's simplyan evidence of the strength of the economy. I would prefer to see usoperate on alternative B, with perhaps a small minus on that, in orderto accomplish those objectives.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I basically agree with GovernorGramley's description of the economy and what he thinks is likely tohappen. I agree that if the staff forecast is wrong, it's probably onthe conservative side. It seems to me that the increase in interestrates that has occurred recently is really a reflection of economicstrength rather than any policy actions. I remain quite concernedabout the long-run implications for inflation; I sense thatinflationary expectations are building. I think timing in terms of apolicy move is very critical. Intuitively, I would go to alternativeC. But I also agree that it would be quite a shock at this time andwould probably be a bit strong, so I would come out between "B" and"C." Mention has been made of the discount rate, so I'll go ahead andput in my two cents' worth. Frankly, I think there should be adiscount rate change. I could be persuaded to accept alternative B ifthere were some feeling that there would be a discount rate change,but I'd leave the alternative B specifications as specified, whicheffectively--as you said, Nancy--would take the fed funds rateprobably to 11 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think the risks in the economy have shiftedtoward too much growth. But that long list of vulnerabilities--whichyou started with, Mr. Chairman, and others have added to--is animpressive list as well. It is the time in the cycle, I think, forsome restraint. How I would do it at this point is to accept thegreater restraint that has become apparent in recent weeks but keep an-67-3/26-27/84open mind about whether additional restraint is needed in the comingweeks, depending on how economic activity comes in. I don't think Iwould load the dice or load the directive to tilt it more toward overt[restraint]. I would accept what we've done but not much more. Itseems to me that a move toward alternative C really would be too muchtoo soon. On the question of automaticity and additional reliance onM1, I'm not in favor of that. It seems to me that the crosscurrentsthat we're dealing with are just too complex to return to someautomaticity or to rely on a rule. Whether we like it or not, I thinkwe're just stuck with using a lot of judgment. On the discount rate,I'm lukewarm at best on raising the discount rate. One argument, if Iwere making one, would be that as we go through a cycle the longer wewait and don't move the discount rate the more we can't move it lateron. So, there is some argument for doing it, if only to keep theoption open in the future. If the Board in its wisdom should decideto raise the discount rate, I would be in the camp that says theborrowing figure ought to be reduced so as to offset pressure on thefunds rate. And since I only have one vote and not two as Nancy does,in order to get a little better coordination here and a little firmergrip on what we're voting for and its implications, I would feel morecomfortable with an 11 percent ceiling on the funds rate. That wouldseem to me to keep it more in the spirit of alternative B, given theuncertainty as to what the Board might do with the discount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. For all the reasons that have been stated, Icertainly think it's an appropriate time to be taking some action.Inflationary pressures are clearly building, and I think it would bevery, very unfortunate to see these pressures and not do somethingabout them. So, it seems to me that the timing is appropriate despitethe risks--and there are many, and they are serious. I think we'd bebetter off taking some action now rather than waiting and perhapshaving to react a bit more vigorously. I certainly think that weshould be aiming toward alternative C over a period of time but, likeothers, I would find that a pretty abrupt step to be taking today. AsI was thinking about this earlier, I frankly wrote down the numbersthat Henry Wallich has suggested as a course between "B" and "C," withM1 at about 6 percent, M2 something under 8 percent, M3 under 8-1/2percent, borrowing about $1 billion or a little over and the fed fundsrate between 8 and 12 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. As I said yesterday, I think that there is now adanger of an overheating of the economy in the foreseeable future.And that, of course, will materialize rather quickly if the staffprojection of a moderation in economic growth does not come about. Itmay well come about, but it's a risky business. I also am impressedby the extent to which debt expansion has played a role in this morerapid growth in activity. When we had to use a variant of Frank'sfavorite number--private domestic nonfinancial debt--at the meeting ofthis Committee on January 26 we were estimating for the fourth quarterthat it would increase at a 9.2 percent annual rate. The quarter wasalready over by 26 days. The revised estimate that we have this timeis 10.9 percent--an increase of 1.7 percentage points for the fourthquarter. For the first quarter, the estimate we were looking at lasttime was 8.4 percent. Now we are looking at 11.1 percent--an increase-68-3/26-27/84of 2.7 percentage points from the [previous estimate], some of whichis due to these oil company takeovers but not more than a point, Ithink. Clearly, it seems to me, there is an excessive rate ofexpansion in domestic debt that can't be attributed in a first effectsense at least to the deficit but to private borrowing. I have thesense--and I only look at the Washington papers and maybe to someextent New York--of a tremendous amount of momentum in the drive toextend consumer credit to the public on the part of the banks and ofthe drive to put out mortgage credit. There are radio ads and allkinds of ads--a lot of them deceptive--about the terms and conditionsof borrowing, and people are responding to those ads. Businesses aretoo. They have variable rate loans and whether people know what thatmeans I have no idea. But there has been too much debt expansion, Ithink.I wouldn't be as aggressive as Lyle in saying that it's timenot only to pull the punch bowl a little distance away but to turn itpartly over because I'm not that certain of the future. And I dothink there are some structural weaknesses of the kind that theChairman mentioned. I'm worried about the thrifts. The thrifts aregoing into a deficit situation very shortly now with this level ofrates. And the higher the rates, the greater the deficit. It mayturn out, as I told some of them, that 1980-81 was just a dressrehearsal to what is going to happen to them in future, in which casewe have a whole industry that will be very, very shaky in the economy.I'm worried about housing. Those are housing starts, not housingsales, and it's not customary for builders to line up their buyersbefore they start a house. I'm worried about the change in psychologyin the consumer market that would turn people off housing so that thehousing inventories would be sitting on the market as unsalable itemsthe way they are in Dallas. And I'm worried about the LDCs who Ithink will react quite adversely to a major increase in interest ratesin the United States economy and will be very, very sorely impacted.So, I just don't have the courage to move as aggressively as anaggressive fellow like Lyle Gramley would at this stage. Therefore, Icome down to alternative B as not being unreasonable. If we take thatin terms of the aggregates, that's not a modest ambition for thesecond quarter. The reason that M1 is as low as it is in alternativeB for the second quarter is that there's one relatively low month, andthat may or may not materialize. It's not a slow rate of expansion asyou look over the quarter as a whole; it's going to be a rather hardthing to accomplish. I'm particularly impressed by Steve's comment,which I happen to believe, that after a quarter where velocityincreases sharply it's more likely that in the next quarter velocitywon't increase so sharply because the money supply increases a lotmore than it did before. I think the danger is going to be thatwhatever of these alternatives we set, money is going to run higher.That's why I questioned Jerry on "strongly resist" because to resiststrongly, if we really mean that, could mean very high interest ratesby the end of the second quarter. I think we need to lean and leanpretty hard and look at the aggregates more seriously than we havebefore, but I don't want to lean all that hard.In sum, I would buy alternative B; I certainly wouldn't buyanything tighter than alternative B for the period to come.Considering what I think may happen, 11 percent on the funds rateseems to me too much of a near-term constraint that will require atelephone call and I would use the full funds rate range. On-69-3/26-27/84borrowings, $1 billion seems okay to me; $1.2 billion seems awfullyhigh. We're starting to move up toward the levels of borrowing thatare associated with fairly tight money periods as we get well above $1billion. And, what's that rate, Henry? I don't know what to do aboutthe hippopotamus rate!MR. WALLICH. 50 basis points for $200 million on borrowing.MR. PARTEE. That's not a decision that can be made here orthat can be made readily. There are lots of strategy questionsinvolved in [the discount rate decision], so we shouldn't really talkabout it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are a couple of outliers or peoplenot heard from yet, anyway.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, in order not to be repetitious,my bottom line is alternative B. I would strongly oppose recastingthe directive in the direction of automaticity. And I would assumethat the Board of Governors in its wisdom, if it did decide on adiscount rate hike, would lower the borrowing assumption somewhat. Ihave no problems with alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I would select a "B+", which would be somethingwith the following specifications: 7 percent growth for M1; 8-1/2percent for both M2 and M3; and a borrowing level of about $900million. And if there were a discount rate increase, I would suggesta drop in the borrowing level to about $700 million to accommodatesome of that upward pressure on the funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can go into [an executive]session now. I have some wording that Steve or Mr. Bernard mightdistribute. This is no great attempt to be radically different but itseemed a little more coherent to me than some of the others.It accepts the notion of putting the aggregates first. That may beducking a bit, but it reflects the comments made by a number of peoplethat this is probably a time when we don't want to be too preciseabout knowing where we want interest rates, within limits. I don'twant to prejudge where the limits are put. I'd start off with thatfoot rather than the other. It's fairly symmetrical. I put in amention that we would want to take some account of the rate of creditgrowth, which I think is of concern. A number of people havementioned it. So far as the numerology and assumptions are concerned,clearly the center of gravity and indeed the majority is toward "B"whether one takes the limited group or a wider group. But there arefeelings on both sides of that in varying degrees. I rather sharemany of the feelings that Governor Partee just expressed, includingthe possibility that if the economy is as strong or stronger than Mr.Kichline has suggested, there may be considerable difficulty whetherwe take "A," "B," or "C." We could run into a deviation in the realaggregates from the assumed aggregates that will overshadow any fine-tuning of whatever precise numbers we put down. And presumably wewould have to respond to it if the economy were all that strong andthe aggregates were all that high. But, based on past patterns, wecould get a high month or two. I have no projection of that sort butI just know that that could happen. Even if the economy goes toward-70-3/26-27/84the lower side of Mr. Kichline's projection, which I think is lesslikely, I still think it's possible that we could have a rather highmoney figure--or rather that we're much more likely to be faced withthat contingency than the opposite. But that remains for the future.As I say, I suspect that to a degree that will overshadow any halfpoint or one point differences in the numbers we put down here.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, one comment: There might be some[complication] in April. It looks as if there might be a seasonableadjustment problem on M1; that came in so weak last year and that wasmore than made up--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have a seasonal adjustment[problem] in M1 every month. I don't think you have to worry aboutApril. I trust that number about as much as--I was going to say mygrandmother, but I would trust her if she were alive.MR. BLACK. That's precisely my point. I think we're goingto see a number we really can't trust in April--maybe even more sothan in most months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't trust them much in any month.MS. TEETERS. If you don't trust M1, why are you putting itup front?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're not only putting it up frontbut also we have gone back to a monetary aggregates directive.MR. RICE. It's not just M1; it's M2 and M3 as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no particular feeling about whereM1 is put in this list. We can put it the way it was before. I putit there because I think that's basically what we are concerned about.I'm talking about not trusting it in narrow one percents. I trust itif it shows a big increase or a big decrease. And it gives us thebest excuse in a real sense and in an excuse sense. But I think inthis particular situation if these aggregates continue to run high, weshould in substance react to them. I just don't think my judgment isso fine as to know what we should do when it gets down to the + or -one percent area [of differences in growth rates].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the bigger problem is the realeconomy; that's what we're concerned about. It's not so much wherethe monetary aggregates stand that we are all concerned about in theend. I think you're leading us right back in the direction ofautomaticity in this directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not talking about automaticity in thesense that I take it Mr. Black was talking about.MR. PARTEE. This is really reserve restraint. It isn't analgorithm of the amount of overage.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I understand. You know, themarket tends to over-interpret, and I think the changes in the wordingof the directive are reinforced by putting M1 in front. Okay, we putM1 further back. But I think this will tend to awaken expectations-71-3/26-27/84that we may once again be on that roller coaster. Nobody is going tobelieve necessarily that this is the last ride, particularly if theeconomic data continue relatively strong. And then there would beexpectations of [rates] going to very high levels. I just think it'sdisturbing to move back in that direction. I realize we haven't movedback 100 percent in terms of the way the short run feeds back with thenonborrowed reserve paths.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is the old directive?MR. MARTIN. The old directive also put the aggregates upfront.MS. TEETERS. No, it didn't. It's the same as variant II onpage 13.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a little technical problem, butit's a very great problem, in starting out with reserve pressures,which is partly what convinced me [to start with the aggregates]. Idon't know how we'd describe the current degree of reserve pressures.It's a meaningless concept. Well, the concept isn't meaningless butif you look at borrowings or if you look at net borrowed reserves orfree reserves, you're going to get entirely different answers for themonth of March. You get borrowings up to what--$1 billion?--with netborrowed reserves probably a minus. What does maintaining theexisting degree of reserve pressure or increasing it or decreasing itmean in that circumstance?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what does it mean then to haveyour second sentence?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's precisely why I put the secondsentence in brackets. Maybe we can drop the whole thing.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, I mean the third sentence whereyou have "greater reserve restraint." What does that mean then?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Greater from wherever we start; we don'thave to describe where we start. The problem exists. But at leastone avoids it in the directive by dropping the second sentence.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't think that is a strongenough reason to convey such a strong [unintelligible] impression,which is what I think will be conveyed by recasting it.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, because of this problem of not knowinghow to interpret borrowing numbers, I'd like to hear--when we get tothe point of getting down to specifics--what we're going to mean withthis directive or any other in terms of how far we're willing to letinterest rates go up. I would not be shocked to contemplate a federalfunds rate of 11 percent. I take it that others would be. But if theidea is to run a monetary policy which in effect says that what we'vedone so far is let the federal funds rate and associated rates ofinterest go up in recent weeks and we will just hold them there, I'mnot going to be happy with that. I just don't think that's the way weought to go. But I'd like to have a translation.-72-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm just looking over what peoplesaid here. I don't think anybody, except maybe Governor Teeters, hassaid that they wanted a lower upper limit--for whatever that means,since we waive it when the rate gets there--than 11 percent. I don'tknow about Governor Teeters. Nobody else who spoke to that pointdirectly--and there were some who did not--[said less than 11percent].MR. BOEHNE. I spoke to it.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I didn't want to--MS. TEETERS. I don't think I spoke to it, but I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have you marked down as saying an 11percent ceiling.MR. BOEHNE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I just said. Nobody was belowan 11 percent ceiling.MR. BOEHNE. Oh, below. Okay.MS. TEETERS. I didn't speak to it, but I would accept an 11percent ceiling.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is disagreement above that point,but nobody said less than 11 percent. Well, if it's nothing, we canget to the wording of the directive. Maybe we have the cart beforethe horse and people are going to want different emphases, which aregoing to have to be blended in the directive. That's the fact oflife. But in terms of the specifications, I'll take them up backwardsstarting with the funds rate. Apparently we have established thatnobody wants to put the upper limit below 11 percent. Some peoplewant to put it above that. Well, the limit is irrelevant, I guess.What we had before was 6 to 10 percent. If we keep the 4 point range,7 to 11 percent would be the minimum that anybody is talking about.And a lot of people are talking about [a higher range], but I don'tknow if those are outliers. Is that generally acceptable or not?MS. TEETERS. Keep the 4 points.MR. PARTEE. I think it ought to be higher.MR. GRAMLEY. I do too.MR. ROBERTS. So do I.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, quite a few people have expressedthe opinion that it ought to be higher and the question is whether--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't feel strongly whether it's 7to 11 percent or 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent. I'm always bothered by 1/2points.MR. BOYKIN. 8 to 12 percent.-73-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The markets may overread what thatnew ceiling is going to mean.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I myself would think 8 to 12 percent istoo high in the directive. We may be under pressure to release thisdirective early. You might have that in mind. I don't intend to doso, but--.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What do you mean? What kind ofpressure?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Congressional pressure. I intend toresist that but I can't guarantee it. My own feeling is that puttingdown 8 to 12 percent and having this come out will be interpreted as amuch stronger step than we would want it interpreted. Knowing that ifwe use something less and get to that point and think the situationjustifies going higher, our record has been 100 percent, I'd say thatwe've never felt constrained when it came to that point.MR. BOEHNE. What is the guide? What is the needle on thecompass here? I think Lyle has put his finger on a good point. Idon't think anybody--well, some people may--would put a lot of faithin M1 or M2 for any given month if we don't know what reserverestraint or ease means.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we can define what it means for us,but it's a little hard to describe to the market simply [in terms] ofputting out the directive.MR. BOEHNE. What is the meaning of this? It seems to methat we have more or less been using the real economy with some senseof what reserve restraint means. That's pretty messy, but from mypoint of view at least I have some sense of what it means and whatcauses changes. But I don't really know what using M1, M2, and M3means. Is it a different ball game than we've been playing over thelast few months?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what ball game you thinkwe've been playing in the last few months, but I don't see muchdifference here, frankly. It says we're going to set a restraintlevel and we're going to stick to it depending upon how theseaggregates go, but we are going to look at what is going on in theeconomy before we change it. I think that's what we've been saying.MR. MORRIS. Except that you have promoted M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a separate decision.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there is a difference betweenstarting off the way the Chairman has been talking about on the degreeof reserve restraint and then saying the Committee believes these tobe consistent with intermeeting monetary targets of X and Y orwhatever, and putting it this way. The substance of what we do maynot be different, but I think it will be the impression in the marketsthat we are returning toward much more emphasis on the monetaryaggregates, and more volatility in interest rates then becomes apossibility. And I don't think that's a helpful thing at this time.-74-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're back at the wording of thedirective. Let me see whether we can sort this out.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, in substance I said I couldlive with either 7 or 11--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand. I'm just trying to sortthis out. Let me try 8 to 12 percent. I sense that there's a lot ofresistance to that. Is that true?MR. MARTIN. I would not go along with 8 to 12.MS. TEETERS. I would not go along with 8 to 12.MR. BOEHNE. I wouldn't either.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON & MS. TEETERS. Do you want a show ofhands?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we need a show of hands. Ithink as a practical matter we are between 7 to 11 percent and 7-1/2to 11-1/2 percent.MR. CORRIGAN. The way this directive is written, Mr.Chairman--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's resolve the numbers.MR. PARTEE. I think [we should use] 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.Somehow 12 percent does sound awfully rich--doesn't it?--although itmay not be. It's just a culture shock.MR. BOEHNE. It's called rate shock!MR. MARTIN. We were at 9-1/2 percent a long time. There isa little arithmetic one can do vis-a-vis 11-1/2 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. I would go back to the comment the Chairmanmade earlier. We are living in a world in which interest rates havebecome the cutting edge of monetary policy.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. GRAMLEY. In a world of deregulation, they have to move alot more. I know that causes potential damage here, there andelsewhere in terms of the LDCs, the thrifts, and so on. But the pointis that if we want to get any restraint on the economy we have to letinterest rates go up. And in this kind of world we have to let themgo up more than we used to. If we sit here and let these interestrates creep up by 1/4 percentage point per FOMC meeting, we are nevergoing to get the job done.MR. PARTEE. A rate of 11-1/2 percent, though, Lyle, is areasonable amount above where we are at about 10-1/4 percent. And asthe Chairman points out, we never have let that stop us if in factsomething were going on that called for more restraint.-75-3/26-27/84MR. BOEHNE. I don't think we're letting it go up 1/4 of apoint. Three weeks ago the funds rate was around 9-3/4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It wasn't very long ago that it was 9-1/4percent.MR. BOEHNE. It's not as if we're just moving along here at1/4 point [per FOMC meeting].MR. GRAMLEY. My point, Ed, was that the rate has been closeto 10-1/2 percent in recent days and if we have a ceiling of 11percent, that tends to leave no room to operate unless we say theceiling doesn't have any meaning. And if it doesn't have any meaning,then I don't know why we'd want to put that kind of ceiling on it. Itjust leaves almost no room to maneuver at all starting from where weare now, if we have a federal funds range with an upper limit of 11percent. If it's going to mean anything at all, then it's very, veryrestraining in terms of the amount of interest rate movement we willcontemplate. If it doesn't have any meaning, then it's just purelyfor publicity purposes, so then let's decide among ourselves what wereally think it ought to be and keep that a secret.MR. BOEHNE. I wouldn't consider 50 to 75 basis points ameaningless move.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think Lyle is right that weprobably need a little more movement and, therefore, even though Icould live with either I would have a slight preference for 7-1/2 to11-1/2 percent myself.MR. GRAMLEY. I could live with that.MR. CORRIGAN. I'd join that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll go on to the next numbers. Assumingwe are somewhere in the neighborhood of "B," does anyone have a morefelicitous series of numbers than "B" pure and simple? And one thatthey also think will command wide support?MR. GRAMLEY. I was going to offer a series of numbers, butnow with that stipulation--.MR. PARTEE. I think they look pretty good.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we don't take them too seriously,I think they're fine.MR. PARTEE. If we could actually come out there, I'd bepretty happy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there people who can't live with "B"as put down in the Bluebook?MR. BOYKIN. I would prefer 6, 7-1/2, and 8 percent, Mr.Chairman.MR. GRAMLEY. I would go with Bob.-76-3/26-27/84MS. HORN. I'll go with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those in combination are awfully lownumbers.MS. HORN. Lead off with 7-1/2 and 8 percent, not 6 percent.MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of the numbers, could I ask myquestion now? Do you interpret the third sentence as a symmetrical orasymmetrical sentence?MR. PARTEE. It's symmetrical.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I interpret it as a symmetrical sentence.The reality I don't consider very symmetrical, but I consider thatsentence symmetrical.MR. BLACK & MS. HORN. Somewhat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess it's slightly asymmetricalas written.MR. MARTIN. Somewhat.MR. CORRIGAN. This is the area where I have the greatestworry. Whether we use Mr. Boykin's numbers or those in alternative Bdoesn't matter all that much to me because I don't have the sameproblems with the numbers that everybody else has. But I must saythat I would really get scared if the outcome for money and creditgrowth in the second quarter were in any material way above thealternative B numbers. In other words, I really think of those "B"numbers as a ceiling. And if we got too far beyond them, I think we'dhave a very, very difficult problem on our hands--more difficult thanthe problem we have on our hands today.MS. TEETERS. What sort of velocity assumption are youmaking, Jerry? That's vital here to what you think the GNP is goingto be.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, as I've said many times, Nancy, I thinkthe economy is likely to be stronger rather than weaker in the verynear term. Unfortunately, I also think if that's true, that thelonger-run implication is that the economy is going to be softerbecause we're going to get more interest rate pressure coming from thedemand side of the economy. So, by implication I am suggesting that Ithink the velocity factor in the second quarter could be larger thanwhat is implicitly built in here.MS. TEETERS. But if you rigidly take these numbers, youbegin to get all sorts of volatility in interest rates. It's notworth the price.MR. CORRIGAN. I don't want to do that, Governor Teeters.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. When you say you want asymmetricalwording, what you are really saying is that you want a strongerinterest rate response if there is continuing excessive strength inthe economy and the monetary aggregates.-77-3/26-27/84MR. CORRIGAN. That's correct.MR. BOYKIN. In just a presentational sense, Jerry, if youaccepted the numbers that I'm suggesting, the asymmetry is lessimportant. You could get it more the way it is worded if you justreduced the numbers.MR. CORRIGAN. Again, I'm such an agnostic about thesenumbers that I don't get visibly moved by 1/2 point differences in thenumbers. The question that I'm concerned about, regardless of whetherwe use your numbers or the "B" numbers, is: What happens if we getinto the quarter and we're running ahead of them?MR. BOYKIN. Oh, you're talking substance now!MR. CORRIGAN. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me that the gut issue here is howmuch you load the dice in terms of higher rates. When you startmoving the numbers toward "C" and when you have an asymmetricalpresentation and an 11-1/2 percent funds rate limit, you might as wellvote for moving the funds rate up to 11 percent.MR. PARTEE. It wouldn't load it, though, toward a higherrate. I understood Jerry to say he was more concerned about gettingindications of a significant overshoot of these targets than he isabout a significant undershoot. And I think I agree with him on that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but even if you're moreconcerned as I think we all are--that's where the risks are--why doesthat argue necessarily for an asymmetrical articulation in thedirective?MR. PARTEE. We've often used it before. I don't know why wewould throw it out now.MR. GRAMLEY. There's good reason for asymmetry if the risksare stacked on the side of stronger growth and more inflation. Thatway we don't expose ourselves to a circumstance in which, even thoughthe economy is going along fairly strongly, we for some reason have adownward shift in money demand and overreact and let too much easetake place. An asymmetrical arrangement makes very good sense underpresent circumstances.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would agree with you if we weresimply going to react mechanically to an easing of money growth. ButI'm interpreting that there's not going to be a substantive change inour policy [approach]--that we're still going to be looking at moneyin the context of the business expansion and inflationary pressures.But I would agree: If we were going to be reacting more to moneygrowth in the future, then we have to word it asymmetrically for thereasons that you just indicated, Lyle.MR. BOEHNE. I think there is a subtle difference in how wephrase this. We can be quicker on the trigger on the up side or wecan be slower on the trigger on the down side. Where I come out isthat I can't imagine a situation in the next month where one wouldwant to lower rates. Well, I guess I could imagine it. But at the-78-3/26-27/84same time, I don't want to build in some automatic forces that aregoing to push rates up.MR. PARTEE. I agree with that.MR. CORRIGAN. I don't want the automaticity either. But Idon't want to be sitting here in June looking at a second quarter inwhich money, the economy, and everything else are stronger than wethink they are going to be--stronger than we know they should be.MR. PARTEE. You may well have to do that. We can't really--MR. CORRIGAN. I think we can try to minimize the risk of it.We would really be in the soup then.MR. PARTEE. If that were the case, then I think we shouldhave moved. But you could have a stronger money quarter, a strongerGNP quarter, and everything, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's get back to these numbers. Iwould feel a bit reluctant, to say the least, to lower the M2 and M3numbers any further. We have said all along that we expected to be inthe top part of those ranges. I think on M1 we can horse aroundbetween 6-1/2 and 6 percent, but it makes little difference. I thinkit will make no practical difference in the way we operate, but thisgets to be a visual point.MR. BOEHNE. What if for M1 we said something like "around 6to 7 percent"? That [includes] the 6 and the 6-1/2 but it doesn'tmake it sound quite as precise as 6-1/2 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. Do we mean 6-1/2 percent by that? Would weaccept up to 7 percent before we would react? Then what do we dowith--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That doesn't worry me terribly, but Idon't know whether other people like it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I wouldn't.MS. TEETERS. Just as a point of information: Have we everhit a target?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We came pretty close this time.MS. TEETERS. Have we ever hit a target on a short-termbasis?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Within 1/2 of a percent?MR. AXILROD. On M1 do you mean?MS. TEETERS. Yes.MR. AXILROD. Well, it's about 8 percent over the 3 months asagainst [a projection of about] 7 percent.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, the fourth quarter M3 has been---79-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there probably is a majorityfor these numbers. Maybe you ought to get an informal showing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was going to suggest that. It seemsvery close to that. Let's assume that for the moment.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, maybe I answered Governor Teeterswrong. We are within the long-run cone. The weekly figures we'regoing to publish will be below the weekly figure consistent with the[target]. If the number that we're not publishing--the one we have atentative estimate for at the end of March--holds up, it will be abovethe long-run cone. But month-to-month, on average it's just below.MR. MARTIN. The 7 percent that you're estimating would takeus above?MR. AXILROD. No, it's all right on the month; the end of themonth is ticking up, if that number holds up. It's just another wayof saying that it's very near the top.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me move to the borrowing level where Ithink there is, in fact, a bigger range of opinion. I suspect thatreflects in part that we don't know whether where we are is because ofcontemporaneous reserve requirements or other expectational factors.We have a classic case in this two-week period of the way one wouldthink things might happen frequently with a two-week reserveadjustment period. Everybody thought that perhaps [markets] weregetting tighter earlier in the period and they borrowed a lot. Theybuilt up excess reserves and now they end up the period with bigexcess reserves and the market is getting easy. In previous weeks, Iguess the opposite happened. This used to happen with the weeklyreserve pattern and now it can happen with considerably more amplitudebecause [banks] have a two-week period before they get caught upshort. So, those who would like to calibrate the federal funds ratein their thinking down to a gnat's eyelash have a bit of a problem. Idon't know what this means for the level of borrowings this week andfor the federal funds rate, particularly during a period when it mightbe higher [initially] and then turn out to be lower at the end or viceversa, depending upon the pattern during the period.MR. MORRIS. Isn't what we're seeking a borrowing level thatwill be compatible with a 10-1/2 percent funds rate?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure. Let's assume that'sthe case just to get an analytic [framework].MR. GRAMLEY. Could we just expand the range of estimation?What is the borrowing level for 11 percent, too, so I know whereanother option might be.MR. PARTEE. These are educated guesses of the staff?MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I'm about to ask. I'm notsure I have a great deal of faith in them.3/26-27/84MR. AXILROD. We think a billion and a half will get a fundsrate close to 11 percent, with all the uncertainty.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without any change in the discount rate?MR. AXILROD. Without a change in the discount rate. In theBluebook, we said borrowings of $1 billion or a little more get afunds rate of 10-1/2 percent. If you look at the experience in thelast couple of days, with the funds rate dropping off fairlysubstantially, that will change market attitudes a little and I wouldbe inclined to say--Peter may disagree--that it might take a littleover $1 billion to get 10-1/2 percent. And if you used $1 billion inborrowings, I would feel safe in thinking of a wider range in thefunds rate--10-1/8 to 10-1/2 percent or something like that.MR. STERNLIGHT. I agree with a little over $1 billion--say,$1.1 billion--for 10-1/2 percent. I think borrowings of $1-1/2billion would produce more than 11 percent [on the funds rate].MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's what we said: 11 percent or over.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would take just the opposite pointof view. The federal funds rate, with a billion dollars of excessreserves--though not during the early part of the period and I don'tknow what it will average--averaged well over 10 percent. And we willhave a billion dollars or slightly more borrowings and we happen tohave a billion dollars worth of excess reserves. If we have $650million of excess reserves, I don't know what we will get.MS. TEETERS. What role do we see excess reserves playing?Are they precautionary? Or are they an accident because of CRR?MR. AXILROD. In this two-week period I think the marketcreated them on its own, not knowing they were doing it in effect.That is, they borrowed. We were somewhat behind the NBR path much ofthe time. Now we're actually slightly over it and the market borrowedand generated excess reserves in addition to the nonborrowed reserves;and now if they end up with excess reserves they don't want, thosereserves have to come out. Before, the level of excess reserves ofaround $600 to $650 million was probably fairly close to what theywanted, given the prevailing market conditions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. During the introductory period of CRR--wecan go back before that because we had a little change in reserverequirements there--the average level of excess reserves was around$400 million.MR. AXILROD. I think it was a little higher than that.MR. STERNLIGHT. It was $600 million in January and $500million in November and December.MR. MORRIS. So we could see a low funds rate tomorrow?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I think it will be lower.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But won't they be influenced by thecarryover? If they see that they have run very large excess reserves,-81-3/26-27/84won't they be inclined to avoid such high excess reserves thefollowing period because of the carryover?MR. AXILROD. That's the idea, but we haven't seen mucheffect.MR. STERNLIGHT. We don't have experience with that.MS. TEETERS. Well, excess reserves ever since October of1979 have been trending upward and I interpret that as securityagainst erratic Federal Reserve behavior.MR. AXILROD. No. It seem to have more to do, GovernorTeeters, with the fact that country banks now don't have with us therequired reserves that they need to hold. They leave their reservebalances in there for a while for whatever reason. Some even holdexcess clearing balances, which get into our excess. All that is alittle irrational, but we can account for $50 to $100 million dollarsof those sorts of things.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Weren't they also influenced bywidespread expectations that rates would rise or the possibility of adiscount rate rise?MR. STERNLIGHT. That probably induced some of the borrowing.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And I think that influenced the levelof excess reserves. I don't think we should assume, Paul, that it'sgoing to continue at these levels.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't assume that it is going tocontinue at these levels; I don't know all the reasons thatcontributed to it but I certainly would not assume that it willcontinue.MR. AXILROD. I should be clear, Mr. Chairman, when we said abillion dollars or more borrowing gets you a 10-1/2 percent funds ratethat we were, of course, assuming excess reserves on the order of $550to $600 million. That was the assumption within that. We wereassuming net borrowed reserves of $400 to $500 million.MR. GUFFEY. And that's consistent with the last two-weekperiod?MR. AXILROD. Yes. Actually, I'm assuming it could even belower.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would guess that as well as people canunderstand this--and I don't think any of us can be very sure--thatwhat many people are talking about as a center point is a billiondollar level of borrowing with that much lower excess reserveassumption. I'll say $500 million just to put a round number down,which [unintelligible] for this past week in a total reserve positionsense is tighter than anything we have had by a considerable margin.Let me take out the adjective: tighter than what we've had. You caninterpret the adjective yourself. I assume that's more or less whatpeople are talking about but I don't have any great judgment as towhether that means a 10-1/4 percent funds rate or 10-1/2 percent or-82-3/26-27/8410-3/4 percent. To some degree I care, but if it meant a greatlyeasier federal funds rate, I don't think it is consistent with thesubstance of what we're talking about and it would be inappropriate.MR. AXILROD. As a technical point, I should mention thatquarter-end and mid-April we could get some fairly high rates relativeto even this average. That's just in passing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just try this: With all theuncertainties associated with it and subject to the risk that we mayfind out we're crazy but within limits, we're talking a billiondollars worth of borrowing and assuming something like $500 million inexcess reserves, which is less than we've had at any time sincecontemporaneous reserves. That number may be too low.[Unintelligible] Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. It is less than we've had in quite a while.That's a shade below the October-to-December average.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say $1 billion of borrowing, and$600 million of excess reserves and see how that goes.MR. MARTIN. Isn't the federal funds rate under 11 percentthen? You quoted 10-3/4 and 10-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I assume. But it's nothing morethan an assumption. I'll accept the notion just hypothetically thatif one had to guess, it means a federal funds rate in the 10-1/4 to10-1/2 percent area.MR. MORRIS. And this would be revised to reflect anydiscount rate changes?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll get to that question. Let's assumejust for purposes of discussion that it's in the absence of that.Well, let me get to that. I'll just raise a question: If thediscount rate went to 9 percent, is that assumption still good?MR. GUFFEY. Not if you've mentioned borrowing at $1 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Different people may have differentopinions about things.MR. WALLICH. Only on the condition it seems to me that onebillion dollars borrowing is right. For that reason I like yourparagraph.MR. PARTEE. You were asking a technical question, weren'tyou? I don't know. The funds rate has gone up a bit relative to thediscount rate. Technically, there would be room for it to move a halfpoint and not have a much different funds rate, I should think. Butof course, there is the expectational [element]. We have an 8-1/2percent discount rate as against a 10-1/4 to 10-1/2 percent fundsrate. I would submit that a 9 percent discount rate would not--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's not going to change the fedfunds rate?-83-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE. It would not have to, except the expectational--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think it will. Peter?MR. PARTEE. Let's get some views.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that the funds rate did have some ofthat expectational element. But I still think that much of thediscount rate would be translated into a higher funds rate unless youdid something to borrowing.MR. PARTEE. Do you agree with that, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Given the gap we now have [between the tworates], I would think it might have less effect than maybe Peter isinclined to believe, but we will find out if the change occurs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the answer is: We don't know howmuch of that expectational influence is in the funds rate already.MR. AXILROD. I think it got to 10-1/2 percent on theexpectation of a 9 percent discount rate. So it may be that you willhave 10-1/4 percent and it will move a little.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't quantify this but I think it isfair to say that at the minimum everybody around this table is nottalking about giving the market some false sense of easing at thisstage and that, whatever this [borrowing] number is, it ought to workout that way. Maybe there will need to be a little flexibility toassure that result.MR. MARTIN. I think you're right, Chairman. But isn't theresome difference of view here as to how much tighter or lessaccommodative [we should be]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I made the minimum statement that I don'tthink anybody wants to misspecify here in the sense that it gives themarket some notion that, in the newspaper parlance, there is an easingof policy.MR. WALLICH. That would be contrary to expectations and veryconfusing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say that whatever [borrowing]number we arrive at here, I think we need some flexibility to managethings so that at the minimum that impression is not created.MS. TEETERS. On the other hand, with some exceptions, Idon't think there's strong sentiment to ratchet the rate rapidly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is an entirely different question. Idon't want to disagree. But could I at least assume by my very modeststatement that if by some development the borrowing turned out to bequite consistent with a 9-3/4 percent federal funds rate, that wehaven't got enough borrowing?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think the market is expecting more thanthis.-84-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, that's the other question--how muchto go beyond.MR. GRAMLEY. I think we're in very serious danger of losingcredibility as an agency that is trying to hold down inflation. Itseems to me that the numbers have been coming in very strong on thereal economy. We have been looking at money and credit numbers thatare very large in any kind of historical perspective. We are doing soin the second year of a recovery when expectations have been greatlyexceeded. We are doing so in the context of a fiscal policy that isthe most stimulative we've ever seen. I just don't know how we cantalk about making sure we don't ease. The situation calls for morethan that. It calls for more, in my judgment, than just confirmingfor the market the fact that interest rates have gone up in recentweeks.MR. MORRIS. Also, Mr. Chairman, with a 2 percentage pointspread between the discount rate and the funds rate, I think adiscount rate increase of only a half point would be interpreted bythe market as acting a little tentatively.MR. PARTEE. How about a quarter point?MR. MORRIS. I'm talking about 1 point. We have a 2 pointspread.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think so. A half point iswhat the market is going to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will tell you: In this particular city ahalf point will be an explosion. It will carry a certain message.MR. MARTIN. And in some foreign capitals.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In fact, a quarter point move wouldcarry an interesting message. If we went back to quarter point moves,it would be interpreted as meaning that we're not going to have a lotof volatility in the next year--that basically we are thinking interms of more cautious moves and that that will be the likely patternover the next year. I don't think we want that interpretation either,for the reasons that Lyle has pressed so strongly. I think a halfpoint is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I have established a bare minimumon the substantive objective for the borrowing, but the question iswhether we start with this. We certainly [can] raise it. This maywell be consistent with a tightening. It is the strongest netborrowed reserve position we will have had.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And you do have the flexibilityyou're going to need in case we are wrong on the borrowing and forsome reason the fed funds rate that falls out of the borrowingassumption is on the down side. I think that's pretty clear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right. And [the Board] obviouslyhas the flexibility to raise the discount rate.-85-3/26-27/84MR. WALLICH. Some tightening I think has to come or [thefunds rate will] fall below expectations. It doesn't have to be avery large one, and I could see that there would be another step sometime in the future. But I don't think we can just stabilize thingsbecause the rates have gone up somewhat.MR. MARTIN. I don't think anybody is arguing that we shoulddo that, Henry. And that may be the bare minimum. I remind the groupthat the staff forecast is still geared around a statement that therisk of error is on the down side not on the up side, and there isconsiderable merit in my view in that position. So, we do needflexibility in both directions. I haven't any problem with adirective--either draft of the statement--that emphasizes thetightening side and not the more accommodative side, but I think bothsides need to be in there.MR. PARTEE. I would agree with Pres. I think this istending to go too far. Who is it that we are trying to satisfy? Thegnomes of Zurich? There are a lot of people who don't want to see atightening. As a matter of fact if you went out and took a poll, youwould find that a vast majority of the American public would beopposed to a tightening.MR. WALLICH. But they expect it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck, I was telling Paul that myboard of directors had indicated already that we should not tighten --not raise the discount rate--in their view until we actually seeincreased inflation. They argue that at this point it's too early totake away the punch bowl. They want us to wait until we actually seeit; I say we may be too late then.MR. PARTEE. We heard a lot of expressions like that as wewent around the table.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just suggest that there is going tobe no formulation that is going to take care of all the contingenciesthat I see in the next two weeks much less in the period until we meetagain in 8 weeks. In the interest of testing: The minimum sense thatI have is that we don't want to convey any chance of easing. We startoff with $1 billion on the borrowing assumption and something like$600 million more or less as the excess reserve number. That couldbring some tightening in and of itself but I'm sure it doesn't bringany easing. We have the discount rate issue. I don't know what [theBoard is] going to do but it is clearly an option and we don't makeany automatic decision here that we will reduce the borrowing simplybecause we raise the discount rate. If things come in such that wewant to reassess this in the next couple of weeks, we can.MR. BALLES. I think that makes eminent sense, Mr. Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Presumably, there is some sense of anupward limit. If the Board raised the discount rate and we found outby not reducing the borrowing assumption that fed funds were tradingin the neighborhood of 11 percent--.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd be a little concerned.-86-3/26-27/84MR. BOYKIN. Technically, Mr. Chairman, can the borrowingassumption be changed other than by the Committee?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We change it all the time.MR. BOYKIN. All the time?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I say we change it all the time. We don'tfiddle around with it from week to week, but we get a sense of whatthe directive says. This time we would change it if the money supplywere coming in stronger and business remained strong or whatever.MR. BOYKIN. My point is that those of us who don't vote onthe discount rate would have nothing to say about what was done withthe borrowing assumption.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless there were a consultation. Ifsomething drastic happened, presumably there would be.MR. BOEHNE. I think what you're saying is that you are goingto look through the borrowings to the funds rate--not that you wouldbe fixing the funds rate, but that with all this uncertainty one isnot oblivious to what happens to it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not oblivious, that's right. If I had asense that we were getting a lot more tightness out of this than Ijudge we were really looking for, we would redo it. That I can assureyou. You may certainly take it for granted that if there were alittle easing out of it, we would adjust it.MR. GUFFEY. And that's starting from the benchmark ofaccepting "B" with borrowing of a billion dollars and $600 million inexcess reserves and someplace between 10-1/4 and 10-1/2 percent on thefunds rate, as indicated in the Bluebook?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, excepting your last statement. Iwould accept the others.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It could easily be between 10-1/4 and10-3/4 percent.MR. GUFFEY. No, I'm talking about [the funds rate] without adiscount rate [increase].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No. Without a discount rateincrease.MR. GUFFEY. If you accept the commentary in the Bluebook,it's 10-1/4 percent with $1 billion borrowing and some possibilityof--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not going to accept a federal fundstarget that narrow.MR. GUFFEY. Well, no. I'm just trying to get a benchmark,though.-87-3/26-27/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we are told is the most likelyoutcome. If we get less than that, I think the discussion sayssomething is the matter. If we have a sense of easing, somethingought to be tightened up; if we get a little above that, I'm not sureI would have that sense.MR. GUFFEY. I agree on the easing, but I guess I'm concernedabout approaching that 11 percent rate--whether with $1 billionborrowing without a discount rate increase or some other level with adiscount rate increase. That 11 percent triggers some real concern.MS. TEETERS. Let me see if I can restate it, Roger. The "B"specification with the $600 million excess reserves, in my mind, has afederal funds rate that fluctuates between 10 and 11 percent. And ifit were persistently at 11 percent, you would adjust to bring it down.If it were persistently at 10 percent or below, you would adjust tobring it up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would modify that. If I assess thisdiscussion correctly, I would wait for it to be [persistent]. I'm nottalking about [the funds rate on] a particular day but some judgmentabout the whole atmosphere. It wouldn't be below 10 percent and Idon't think it would be down to 10 percent.MS. TEETERS. But I don't want to see it go above 11 percentand stay there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not talking about getting upabove 11 percent either.MR. MARTIN. I join Roger if Roger is still where Roger wasafter this discussion--no offense, Roger. To have 11 percent afterthe number of weeks we were at 9-1/4 to 9-1/2 percent and to have ithold any length of time at all I think would be an undue [increase].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the very short run if nothing elsehappens, I'm talking about misspecifying on the low side. I wouldinterpret that in the very short run as misspecification on the highside.MR. WALLICH. You said, Mr. Chairman, that in the case of adiscount rate increase [there would be] no automatic change inborrowing.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Depending on where the fed funds rateis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Obviously, it's consistent with whatwas just said. If things were very tight, we would take that intoaccount in changing the discount rate. We may want to change thediscount rate but we might not want to do it without some offsettingadjustment, and we could consider that at the time if it appearednecessary. But I don't think there's any presumption that that'sgoing to appear necessary. If it seemed to be a little too easy, inthe wisdom of the Board we can raise the discount rate and that wouldbe one factor bearing upon that decision. Let's come back to thatfunds rate question we left dangling--this 1/2 percentage pointquestion. My own preference, knowing that this presumably isn't going-88-3/26-27/84to be published for a month or more, is to raise the funds rate rangea full percentage point to [7 to] 11 percent in the comfort that if wewanted to go higher, we would. But I'm not sure I want the largerheadline implied unnecessarily, on the order of [another] 1/2percentage point on the range [by going to 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent].I might well want to go there, but I can go there without the extraheadline of saying we had that [in the directive but didn't implementit.] It's like that very asymmetrical directive that we had workedout all right in December. Nothing happened; it never was triggered.But it became a fact of life that the directive was written that way.If, contrary to expectations, the economy began levelling off and wenever got to the 11-1/2 percent, I'd just as soon not have it in therecord.MR. GUFFEY. I would agree that 7 to 11 percent makes moresense. It has never constrained us in the past.MR. PARTEE. Are we back to talking about the funds rate? Ithought we had decided that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we left [open] this 1/2 percentagepoint.MR. BOEHNE. Things have a way of coming back to the front.MR. MARTIN. And for those who feel there isn't room foraction, there is some some distance between 11 percent and 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a preference. It's not anoverwhelming one, but it is very relevant. My preference is purelyhow it plays in the press. If we exceed the 11 percent before thenext meeting, it won't make any difference. We will have exceeded itby the time [the directive is published].MS. TEETERS. You are proposing alternative B with the fedfunds rate range of 7 to 11 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I could probably live with M1 at6 percent as a round number. But that's visual, too; it's not goingto affect operations.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. As I said earlier, I can live witheither 7 to 11 percent or 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent. I don't feel thatstrongly about it. And I think you have a majority for the numbers onthe three Ms as they are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can live with any of them, but I amexpressing this vague cosmetic preference.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And we have $1 billion on borrowing?MR. PARTEE. I'd be inclined to vote against this 7 to 11percent. I just don't think there's enough room from where we are.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, what you're trying to do is to hold thefunds rate in the 10-1/4 to 10-3/4 percent range.-89-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE. Well, I understood all that conversation to beonly the initial word.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.MR. PARTEE. And the question is: What do we do if theaggregates come in stronger? I think we have to have some room tomove the rates and ought to have enough room to move the funds rate upabove 11--in the 11-1/4 to 11-1/2 percent range.MR. CORRIGAN. I don't care about the numbers, but I surelycare about having a clear understanding--whether it's in the directiveor not--of a willingness to move in that direction if we have to move.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But arguing the other side, if wehave a range of 7 to 11 percent and the funds rate persistently for aweek or longer goes above the 11 percent, then we'll have aconsultation. So, I don't know that we're really blocking any action,Jerry, if we use 7 to 11 percent. Do you think there would be asignificant public relations impact of having 11-1/2 percent as theupper bound when it comes out?MR. PARTEE. It depends on what the rates are.MR. RICE. Only if we don't have to go that far.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Significant, I don't know.MR. CORRIGAN. The only problem I see, Tony, with stayingwith the 7 to 11 percent is that if we run into the [situation] wherewe have to move and operate above 11 percent persistently, then we'releft with the decision of having to change it.MR. BOEHNE. Well, the last time the range was 6 to 10percent and that didn't in any way interfere with going over the 10percent.MR. CORRIGAN. No, but we suspended it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In some sense, the only difference itmakes is if we don't get up there.MR. BOEHNE. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because when we get up there I assumewe're going to exceed it.MS. TEETERS. There has never been any press comment when wehave exceeded the ceilings, at least as I [recall].MR. ROBERTS. No, there was this last time.MR. CORRIGAN. You may see some on Friday.MR. BOEHNE. Yes.-90-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, They are going to see that wesuspended the ceiling a week before. I had not noticed the marketpaying a lot of attention to these changes in the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only thing I am reacting to is thatwhen they get the directive the press will say "Federal Reservetightens because they raised the federal funds rate range. And thissays they would tighten a little more." The only contingency I'mguarding against is that we never get there and some article says,"Oh, they were all prepared to go up; what they wanted to go to was11-1/2 percent"--or whatever interpretation they put on it. Theydon't know whether that's--MR. FORRESTAL. There is the risk of the press reacting tothat 11-1/2 percent if we don't get to it. If we have 7 to 11percent, we still have the freedom within two weeks to have aconsultation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's why my preference is not all thatstrong.MR. FORRESTAL. To me, 7 to 11 percent really makes a lot ofsense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It really depends I suppose in substance--forgetting about my point--on whether the Committee wants to have aconsultation if the rate gets there. That's what it mechanicallydoes.MR. FORRESTAL. It's a long time between meetings.MR. PARTEE. Well, this seems to me an entirely differentmatter than the December meeting vote, as I interpreted that. Themarket was surprised to read that we would have been prepared totighten if business had been strong. And, of course, they werereading this at a time when business was strengthening. Therefore,it's not so unreasonable to assume that if we were prepared then, wemust be prepared now. That's quite different from a technical top toa range before we have a consultation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Based upon all the experience, I don'tinterpret it as a barrier anyway. But it is a mechanical point thatmeans we have a consultation. So, where do you want the consultation?MR. GUFFEY. At 11 percent.MS. TEETERS. At 11 percent.MR. MARTIN. At 11 percent.MR. PARTEE. At 11-1/2 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. I'd rather have the consultation now. I don'tthink we will see anything in the next two weeks that is going to beconvincing on where the economy is going to go. And two weeks more onthe money numbers is not going to tell us anything about longer-termtrends of money, which is what really matters. I think we're pussy-footing. I think we've been sitting here for some months now looking-91-3/26-27/84at an economy that continues to exceed everybody's expectations. Thisis going to come back to haunt us if we don't decide to act. And wecan't act by just confirming what happened in the market in the pastcouple of weeks.MR. FORRESTAL. Do you interpret alternative B as justvalidating that?MR. GRAMLEY. I do indeed. That's what we're saying.MR. BOYKIN. That was the question I wanted to ask: If wetake "B" as specified and say 7 to 11 percent, have we done anything?MR. GRAMLEY. Not in my judgment.MR. BOYKIN. That's the way I'm reading it.SPEAKER(?). That's a matter of opinion.MS. TEETERS. We haven't done anything today, but the rateshave gone up 3/4 of a point in the past two weeks.MR. BOYKIN. Yes, I know, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, I think we've done something today--depending upon how one looks at it. You keep looking at the federalfunds rate. We are now operating on a directive that says we are notthat far over it; it says no free reserves and no net borrowedreserves, basically. And we just changed that. We now say we areoperating on a net borrowed reserve directive. Whether the marketreally has anticipated that in its movement is the real question. ButI don't think there's any question that we have tighter specificationsthan we are now operating under.MR. MARTIN & MR. GUFFEY. That's right.MR. GRAMLEY. I just don't translate net borrowed reserves asrestraint on the economy. I think the more relevant consideration iswhat happens to interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you can argue that interest rateshave already anticipated that.MR. GRAMLEY. That's my view. What I want is a largermovement in interest rates.MR. WALLICH. I agree. We need some move and the onlyvisible thing is interest rates.MR. MARTIN. But it has only been six weeks and rates havegone up 125 points. How fast do you want to move?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm assuming that the direction we'removing, with alternative B, is going to give us at least a 25 basispoint further move, in addition to what the market has done ininterest rates. And I think the Chairman is going to make darn surethat it comes out that way. In other words, there is going to be an-92-3/26-27/84impression in the market that we have tightened if we come out withalternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By no means would I say that it's not avalid view that we should be tightening and that one might just wantto get interest rates up--period. But I don't think we can be in aconceptual position of saying that every time the markets anticipate amove we have to ratchet it up one step further.MR. GRAMLEY. I agree with that, certainly.MR. MARTIN. I would agree with Tony, but I don't think it's25 basis points; it's more likely 50. I think we're talking [aboutgoing from] 10-1/4 percent to 10-3/4 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay, we can't pin it down that much.But I'm assuming that there will be some upward movement if we go inthis direction. Are you saying that you don't believe that or are yousaying that's too little?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, if I interpret the Chairman's commentscorrectly, he doesn't want to see the fed funds rate get down toward10 percent and he would be uncomfortable with it getting up to 11percent. And he's thinking about playing the net borrowed reserveobjective so that the federal funds rate stays in a 10-1/4 to 10-3/4percent range. Now, that has a midpoint of 10-1/2 percent and we'renot far from that now, which means that I don't see much change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the federal funds rate stayed at10-1/2 percent, just to put it there [unintelligible]. A perfectlygood example: I don't think it would be long before the prime ratewent up another half point.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the funds rate in this two-weekperiod so far is averaging just over 10 percent. That's how it'sgoing to come out tomorrow--say, 10-1/8 percent or somewhere aroundthere. We only had a 10-1/2 percent rate in passing for a couple ofdays. I think if borrowing of $1 billion with normal excess reservesgets you a funds rate of 10-1/2 percent, that will be viewed as asignificant tightening because it's sustained.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it will be too.MR. MARTIN. Of course it will.MR. GUFFEY. Just to reinforce that, last week the rate wasjust about at 10 percent; it was 10.04 percent. And it has gone upthis week if it comes out to 10-1/8 percent. Now you're talking about10-1/2 percent. That's where you're going to get some--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think Steve is absolutely rightabout this thing.MR. GRAMLEY. It's just that I'm not trying to hide the move,you see. I think the economy needs to be told that monetary policyhas tightened because the economy is growing much too fast forcomfort. I think we need to do something that's rather obvious anddecisive.-93-3/26-27/84MR. GUFFEY. As recently as two weeks ago it was at 9-3/4percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think maybe you have the wronginstrument in mind.MR. GRAMLEY. Oh no, I have both instruments in my mind. Ijust haven't got the right forum to talk [about the discount rate].MR. MARTIN. It's way too fast for one quarter.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, why don't we presidents walkout of the room while you fellows--MR. PARTEE. If we were to have a discussion, I don't thinkyou'd get an immediate decision.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we used to time these matters in three orfour weeks.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're all going to be at the WyePlantation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For these purposes, you are discussing thewrong instrument, I think. I would reinforce what Steve said; I don'thave much question about it.MR. CORRIGAN. I agree with Governor Gramley. I still thinkthat when the decision of last week to suspend the federal funds raterange is publicized this Friday, that in itself is going to be seen bythe market as--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. As confirmation of what they suspect.MR. CORRIGAN. --symptomatic of the kind of thing they'relooking for.MR. PARTEE. Why don't we leave it suspended?MR. BLACK. That makes sense to me, but I didn't want to sayit again.MS. TEETERS. Alternatively, we can take out thespecifications for M1, M2, and M3.MS. HORN. Maybe.MR. BLACK. No, that would be very bad!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, as I think you know, there is notmuch in this difference between 7 to 11 and 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.Which way do you want to make it?MR. MARTIN. 7 to 11.MR. GUFFEY. 7 to 11.MR. BOEHNE. 7 to 11.-94-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE. 7-1/2 to 11-1/2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just Committee members: How many want it 7to 11 percent?MR. BERNARD. Five.MR. GRAMLEY. I currently get seven.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Hold up your hands again.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm going to vote for both sides.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many want it 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent?It can't be much closer. Can we live with 7-1/2 to 11-1/2? Let'shope we can. Now, we have this other number to worry about. I thinkthe only one that's relevant to worry about there is M1. How many canlive with or want it just the way it is: 6-1/2, 8, and 8-1/2 percent?MR. BERNARD. Five.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're only going to get two choices here.The other side is: How many want 6, 8, and 8-1/2 percent. I came outthat it goes the other way--6-1/2 percent.MR. PARTEE. Let's try again.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the 6-1/2, 8, and 8-1/2 percenthad the majority. It's a perfect balance. Those who wanted thehigher federal funds rate won, and those who wanted the higher M1 won.How can we get a better consensus than that? Now we can return to thelanguage of the directive.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The trouble with this whole processis that there's no quid-pro-quo bargain. I would trade my vote onsome of those last votes for the wording of the directive you'resaving. The way you're slicing us off, it's a salami tactic.MR. PARTEE. Paul's saying no salami goes with it!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how to word this directivewith reserve pressures [unintelligible]. I'm not opposed to it inprinciple; after listening to this other discussion, I just don't knowhow to do it.MR. BOEHNE. I'd like to suggest that we use Variant II onpage 4.MR. PARTEE. Variant II on page 4 of the draft directive?MR. BOEHNE. Yes.MR. GUFFEY. Well, that's misleading to begin with.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what it means. I literallydo not know what that means. If I had to explain that in public, Iwould be absolutely lost.-95-3/26-27/84MR. GUFFEY. It's misleading.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My only problem with it is that I justdon't understand it.MR. MORRIS. We've been using this language for quite sometime.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I didn't have this problem whenexcess reserves were going up and borrowings were going up at the sametime. That's why I say it's just a little technical problem.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if you thought of it that we areunder net borrowed reserves--.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're not talking about that. We'resaying there's a significant increase in net borrowed reserves.MR. PARTEE. It goes from 0 to $400 million, so we have tosay that we're going to tighten.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We'd have to say Variant I, then.Would you have the same problem with not knowing what Variant I means?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. "To increase."MR. MARTIN. "Increase somewhat."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's a little better, butI obviously interpreted it in terms of net borrowed reserves.MR. WALLICH. I think there's some merit in referring to theincrease in reserve positions that has recently emerged. But itdoesn't swear that we'd maintain that. I think it should be increasedabove that recently emerged level.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what has emerged recently in the netborrowed reserve sense is no different than what it was beforehand.MS. TEETERS. "Emerged" is the problem.MR. PARTEE. That's the problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the problem, I think.MR. MARTIN. Because it moved from 0.MS. TEETERS. Well, no. Actually, it has been fluctuatingbetween plus and minus $200 million; it averages out to 0.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's because we don't hit the--MS. TEETERS. I know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In a borrowing sense it's going up, if itis interpreted as borrowing.-96-3/26-27/84MS. TEETERS. In a net borrowed reserve sense it is going up.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Since you can live with Variant I,then the real issue, it seems to me is: Do we stay with that kind ofwording in the directive or do we go to the new wording? What I'mconcerned about is that this new wording leads us in a direction ofmore automaticity in the monetary aggregates.MR. MARTIN. I would share that concern. I think we need tomove up front the language with regard to the economy. That's whatwe've been discussing here--the economy.MR. PARTEE. Well, we certainly ought not to keep M1 at theend of the list, as M2, M3, and then M1. I would buy your proposalthat we can make it M1, M2, and M3 as just a more logical way toexpress it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is to me almost a purely cosmeticpoint, but I think we're walking into difficulties. The whole attackon the Federal Reserve is that we're trying to manage a good growthsituation and that leaves us extremely exposed.MR. PARTEE. Because we've tightened. We say here "toretain."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We say we're tightening because theeconomy is growing too fast. I'm not talking substance now; I'msaying that we are walking into--.MR. CORRIGAN. I'm very sensitive, Tony, to your concernsabout--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, he may have this great concern aboutthe market; I have a very considerable concern that we are walkingdirectly into the trap of our most vociferous critics.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But there's also going to be a heckof a lot of concern if people think that we are going back to the kindof volatility we had in interest rates, which I think is damaging bothsubstantively and perception-wise.MR. MARTIN. And may have interest rate effects itself.MR. ROBERTS. I think it's a very great leap to say we'regoing back to volatility. My impression of the market is that itwould receive this favorably, Tony. In fact, the market has alreadydiscounted an increased emphasis on M1, which it monitors very, veryclosely, as you know. I think all these arcane issues of theplacement of one thing somewhere else are viewed by the market asrather silly.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we follow the Chairman'ssuggestion on the directive as shown on the paper he passed out, wewould be encouraging an increased emphasis on weekly volatility.Moreover, I think the impression that we are going to be moreinfluenced than we have been by money growth is going to lead toexpectations that maybe by the end of the year we won't have seen just-97-3/26-27/84a point or point and a half move, but something significantly largerthan that.MR. ROBERTS. Of course, the real question is: Suppose wehave 10 percent money growth--pick your own aggregate--for a while.What would we do except to let interest rates go up if the market wasdemanding that level of credit? Since that's all we can do, why isthat such a concern?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I feel that we did a lot of damage tothe economy by the enormous swings [in interest rates] from 8 percentto 20 percent and then down again. I think if we had stayed longer attighter levels, we wouldn't have had to go up to 20 percent. Now, Iunderstand the rationale, but I think the notion that we don'tinfluence interest rates--that all we are doing is targeting moneygrowth--has gotten very thin in the country. We moved away from thatand we used the excuse that the velocity of circulation was no longerin a typical traditional relationship. What would you say? You haveto say that we're back again in a period where the velocity ofcirculation is a little more dependable. And this all fits in withthe feeling that we would get in the market that we're returning tothe pre-summer of 1982 [approach to policy].MR. ROBERTS. Well, in fact our language has been suggestingjust that: that we have been assuming we would get a more normalpattern of velocity. It does appear to be emerging. We are chargedlegislatively with managing the aggregates. This takes us away fromthis accusation that we're trying to downplay the growth in the realeconomy. I think this is an excellent statement in the rightdirection.MR. BOEHNE. I think Tony is right that it is wearing thin inthe country. I don't think the rationale that interest rates aregoing up because of the money supply cuts much ice anymore. It serveda useful purpose in the late '70s and early '80s, but I don't think itwill fly to try to go back to using that as a rationale.MR. ROBERTS. We don't in fact use it as a rationale. We saythat is our policy--that what we control is the money supply and ifdemand rises, the effect of that is that interest rates move--insteadof saying that we set an interest rate independent of its response onthe aggregates. [The latter] doesn't seem to be very rational in aperiod when we all agree that the inflationary danger is rising.MS. TEETERS. We were legislatively instructed not only towatch the aggregates but interest rates, real growth, inflation, andunemployment. And the sentiment on the Hill is toward managing thereal economy, not the monetary aggregates, at the present time. Iagree with Tony. If we go back to emphasis on M1 and put it up frontand at the beginning of the road, we could create very unstableconditions in the economy. And interest rates will be transferredinto the economy.MR. GRAMLEY. I don't think anybody's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think our theology is in full swing onboth sides.-98-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE. Everybody so far has taken a predictable pointof view--100 percent predictable. I was wondering whether we couldfuzz this up a little.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's fuzz.MR. PARTEE. In the first place, we could make it "broadlyconsistent" as a way to fuzz the annual rates of growth in M1, M2, andM3. That's what has to be done--make it broadly consistent--becausewe don't know what those multiplier changes are or what excessreserves are going to be and all that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could take the radical step of puttinga range around all the aggregates.MR. PARTEE. I was thinking we could say annual rates of"around." That would be one other way.MR. MARTIN. We could actually use ranges.MR. PARTEE. The trouble with that is that it makes the edgepoints of the ranges pretty sensitive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You know, we're really exaggerating thedifference between these two languages. The first says "maintain/increase somewhat/ decrease" and that gets into this problem of whatit is now. It is possible to say in variant I "anticipating that thisapproach will be consistent." This says "consistent".MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, apart from the possibility thatyou may for some reason I didn't understand release this prior to thenormal time, I don't understand what all the fuss is about. By thetime the directive comes out at the normal time it is all history.The next meeting has already been held. The May meeting would havebeen over by a week. Am I missing something?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The argument is what people will read intothat for the next meeting. But there must be some language thatdoesn't raise the sharpness of the concerns on both sides.MR. WALLICH. Well, putting a range around these short-termmoney aggregates I think would make sense. I'm not very happy withgoing back to M1 in first place.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no feeling about that one way orthe other.MR. PARTEE. I don't know, Henry. I think the range makes itsomewhat more difficult.MR. WALLICH. Because we might miss it?MR. PARTEE. Yes. There's a pretty fair chance that M1 isgoing to be at 10 percent or something like that. And if we set arange of 5 to 7 percent, 10 percent is way above the range.MS. TEETERS. It's going to be above 6-1/2 too, if it's 10.-99-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE. I know, but the range makes it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does it help anybody to say "In the shortrun the Committee seeks a degree of pressure on bank reserve positionsconsistent with..."?MR. GRAMLEY. I was just hunting for something like that too:"The Committee seeks to maintain pressures on reserve positionsconsistent with..."MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think that has a lot of merit towardfuzziness!MR. PARTEE. It even has the great word "maintain" in it.MR. WALLICH. "Maintain" suggests that there was no change.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Unintelligible] the plural:"maintains."MR. PARTEE. I really think "seeks a degree of" is betterthan "maintain."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Seeks a degree of pressure"?MR. PARTEE. Yes, because we have to test, to probe.MR. BOEHNE. And then if we put in "broadly consistent"--MR. PARTEE. And "over time."MR. GUFFEY. "As may be modified."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Over time" sounds a little funny when wetalk about--SPEAKER(?). "Broadly consistent."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Broadly consistent" is all right but thatmakes it [a change]. Last month we were consistent. This month wewill be broadly consistent.MR. PARTEE. "At annual rates of around..."MR. GRAMLEY. Or we could go even so far as to say "duringthe period from March to June." We don't hit it from June to July.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to leave out the "broadly" and putin the "around 6-1/2, 8, and 8-1/2 percent." Is that what we have?In the next sentence, though, do we want to clarify precisely whatwe're doing initially on borrowings?MR. GUFFEY. The sentence in parenthesis?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I think it reads all right withoutthat.-100-3/26-27/84MR. PARTEE. I have trouble understanding just what thatmeans when I read it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't have any troubleunderstanding it in view of our discussion. I think it is going tolook a little strange because, after all, it's not unusual for thereto be fluctuations of borrowing in one direction somewhatunexpectedly. And yet I don't think we have noted that before indirectives, have we?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we have used reservepressure or reserve restraint as a synonym for borrowing. This justsays borrowings because of the confusion about what the heck we mean.It raises questions, I suppose, but it depends upon how fully we wantto describe what we decided. It reads perfectly well without it.MR. CORRIGAN. I'd just as soon take it out.MR. BOEHNE. So would I.MR. CORRIGAN. It gives us more flexibility without it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can leave it out and point out allthese problems in the text [of the policy record]. That's one way ofhandling it.MR. PARTEE. Yes. It's just that when we say we're seekingthe degree that allows for changing that pressure--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but it's kind of funny when you lookat it. Maybe it will have to be changed. We say "The Committee seeksa degree of pressure." That's a perfectly general statement. Then itsays "greater reserve restraint." Well, that's implied already.There is something logically lacking when you leave out the secondsentence. I have no great desire to leave the second sentence in, butit raises a question about the next sentence.MR. CORRIGAN. Could we change the parenthetical statement toread "should take account of" rather than "be consistent with"? Itsays "initially the reserve path and the associated ranges should beconsistent with." Instead of that say "would take account of."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what that means.MR. PARTEE. I don't know either.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I'm concerned with the way the sentencereads now. It's subject to the interpretation, indeed the meaning,that all we are doing and are prepared to do is ratify what hasalready happened. And I understand this discussion to say somethingmore than that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What it's saying is that all these peoplehave raised questions. I think what we understand it to mean is quiteclear: a billion dollar borrowing assumption.-101-3/26-27/84MR. CORRIGAN. I think it's a little more than that. It's abillion dollar borrowing assumption in which we go to $400 to $500million of net borrowed reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there is going to be avariety of reactions in the market as to what that sentence means--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is true too.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. --because they haven't seen itbefore. Therefore, they are going to have a field day with it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just have a small logical point. Whereare we starting from when we say "greater restraint or lesserrestraint"?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We know what we're starting from; wehaven't told them before anything about whether the initial borrowingassumption is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what is the meaning of the nextsentence: Greater reserve restraint than the degree of pressure onbank reserve positions consistent with? We're not saying that.MR. BOEHNE. Well, you could leave out the word "reserve."We could just say "greater restraint would be acceptable in the event"and so on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are better off to make thesentences hang together. Let's go back to Lyle's language: In theshort run the Committee seeks to maintain pressure on bank reservesconsistent. .."MR. GRAMLEY. But use "anticipate will be consistent."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right--"anticipate will beconsistent with."MR. GUFFEY. That's just an alteration of variant I.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So that's what we're ending up with.Would you put M1 last in the order? Do you want M2, M3, and Ml?MR. WALLICH. I would prefer that, although it's very smallsymbolism. To put M1 first has some meaning.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Every little bit of symbolism counts.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Should we start with M3 and say M3, M2,and M1? Is that what you're saying?SEVERAL. No. M2, M3, and Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That just looks so peculiar. We couldleave it as separate sentences, I guess.-102-3/26-27/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's the way we've been doing it.MR. PARTEE. Once we had it in there like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to leave it this way orsay M3, M2, and Ml.MS. TEETERS. If you do it backwards--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we leave it this way.MR. MARTIN. You could say M1 from a range of 1 to N!MR. GRAMLEY. M1 from 1 to [unintelligible].SPEAKER(?). Just say consistent with the various Ms.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask this: Are you saying thatif you were asked by a Congressional committee whether we are givingequal weight to M1 these days with M2 and M3, you would say yes?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I would say at this particularmeeting "Broadly, yes."MR. MARTIN. That's the fact of the matter. That's the waywe've been discussing it. We have been talking about M1 all the time;we haven't been talking about M3 much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's because the market gives 90 percentof its attention to M1; and I don't think it is going to change much.MS. TEETERS. Aren't you just encouraging that after-hourstrading?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it makes the slightest bitof difference.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They are now trading U.S. governmentsecurities in London on an increasingly large scale, so in New Yorkoffices are now opening at 4:00 in the morning, as soon as the Londonmarket opens. There is around-the-world trading in governmentsecurities.MR. ROBERTS. They can take the time they gain on Fridays!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I now have "In the short run the Committeeseeks to maintain pressures on bank reserve positions judged to beconsistent with growth in M1, M2, and M3 at annual rates around 6-1/2,8, and 8-1/2 percent respectively during the period from March toJune." Skip the next sentence. Now we go to the next sentence.There is a slight bias in this thing.MR. PARTEE. You could make it a little more by making thesecond one "might" instead of "would."MS. TEETERS. If you want to make it absolutely symmetricaltake out the word "significant."-103-3/26-27/84MR. CORRIGAN. I don't want it to be symmetrical.MS. TEETERS. It's already symmetrical the way it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Put a comma after "business expansion" andtake out the big substantive change.MR. PARTEE. You really don't want this last sentence inhere, do you?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can take out the last sentence.We have a two sentence directive. Put in the word "might."MR. MARTIN. Isn't the rate of credit growth the end of theparade here? We've been bringing it up in our consideration a gooddeal more, it seems to me, at this meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess the question is whether toput a separate sentence in about it. I don't know whether that's goodor bad. I don't know exactly what the sentence would be but I thoughtit might depend on whether we put another sentence in up above.MR. MARTIN. In our discussions we certainly have given it agood deal of consideration.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If you don't think this gives it toomuch importance, we could simply say "more substantial growth in themonetary aggregates and the rate of credit growth" in that secondsentence.MR. CORRIGAN. If there is a difference, any more substantialcredit growth from where we are now is different from even--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We get in trouble if we put it in thefirst half of the sentence. It's logical in the first half of thesentence, but you have to put it in the second half too, I guess.SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Monetary and credit aggregates.MR. WALLICH. Shouldn't it be "or credit aggregates"?Otherwise you're diluting it; everything has to go up if you say"and."MR. PARTEE. I think it is fairly highlighted where it is.We could use the technical term for it, "the rate of growth ofdomestic nonfinancial debt" to show that we're really looking at that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somehow that makes it sound so technical.I think it would be the first time we've had that in the directive; ithas some significance just putting it in.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The market knows that we don't getdata on the technical classification--total domestic nonfinancialdebt--until after a considerable lag. We get some indications ofvarious types of credit growth with less of a lag and, therefore, byleaving the rate of credit growth we are making it a little more-104-3/26-27/84general and a little more operative. Otherwise, they know it's notthat operative since we don't get that particular data.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's better that way. If we wantto highlight it more we could say "the rate of credit growth, whichhas been excessive recently." Are we ready to vote? We have asentence here with the federal funds rate range of 7-1/2 to 11-1/2percent, the standard sentence for that.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley NoPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin NoGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich NoCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You are going to let Lyle[unintelligible] your explanation and you are going to be set free.MR. BALLES. May I ask one question just so we don'tmisunderstand the new ground rules here on access to this material?Do I understand now that we are not to inform even our economicadvisors of the numbers in the directive? This is for the Presidentsonly?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you can inform them and follow therule. The numbers in the directive are all right, I think.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The recommendations of our Committeesaid specifically a "normal" type of meeting. We didn't get into anyrecommendations on what is executive only [material]. The Chairman issaying handle it in the usual way.SPEAKER(?). It's all right to tell them? Your memo says onlythe Presidents receive the directive.MR. PARTEE. The directive. That's true.SPEAKER(?). The written directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever the rule on that says.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the rule says that the directiveshould only go to the President, so the other people who would havebeen here won't know the specifications. Unless they see thedirective, they will not know the specifications.SPEAKER(?). Unless the President tells them.-105-3/26-27/84 -106-MR. AXILROD. What I assume you're saying is to act--MR. PARTEE. Do you want to do that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I would say that they have tohave [this information].SPEAKER(?). You can reproduce the Bluebook.END OF MEETING