Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 16-17, 1984A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Monday, July 16, 1984, at 3:00 p.m., and continuingon Tuesday, July 17, 1984, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.MrsMr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker,Solomon,BoehneBoykinCorriganGramleyHornMartinParteeRiceSegerWallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Kohn, Lang,Prell, Stern, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account7/16-17/84Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill,l/ Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Madigan 2/ and Rosine,2/ Economists, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. T. Davis, Keran, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofKansas City, San Francisco, Chicago, and Atlanta,respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus, Burger, Fieleke, and Meek, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, Boston,and New York, respectivelyMs. Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department, FederalReserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJuly 16-17, 1984July 16--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether you've had a chanceto meet all these people yet, Ms. Seger. We can make ourintroductions afterwards, but we welcome you to the meeting.We don't have a coffee break this afternoon, I guess.MR. BERNARD. There is coffee out there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Don't tell them that! We will proceed.We need the minutes approved.MR. MARTIN. So moved.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they are approved. Wewill turn to Mr. Kichline.MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, TRUMAN, and PRELL. [Statements--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a sense that the inflationforecasts from people sitting around this table are considerablypessimistic relative to what has happened recently.Let me ask a question about this debt number. I don't knowhow you figure all this; I'm sure you don't have any very precise wayof allowing for the mergers. Suppose you did this differently--orthis may be what you did--and included the normal level of stockfinancing in the numbers, whatever it is. What would these ratioslook like relative to [the normal] experience?MR. PRELL. Ratios? Are you referring to the bottom panels?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm looking at the bottom panel butthat doesn't give me the answer. Suppose this measure that we usewere not net domestic credit or whatever we call it but net domesticfund raising.MR. PRELL. That is, of course, what I plotted in the bottomleft panel. That is both debt and equity. So that is the total fundsraised or the total external financing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But would these lines go below zero?Shouldn't the red line have gone all the way to the bottom in somesense?MR. KICHLINE. Are you looking at the first chart in Mike'spresentation?MR. PRELL. Are you referring to the nonfinancialcorporations?7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't make any difference what chartI'm referring to.MR. PARTEE. I think he has a point.MR. PRELL. The way we got the adjustment, in essence, was tomake an estimate on the basis of all that we know about the equityflows and all the merger activities. And we came up with a net equityabsorption number. There was a net decline in equities of somethinglike $60 or $65 billion in each of the first two quarters. We thenwould hypothesize that, in the conditions that prevailed, that wouldbe the relevant number. We know that new equity issuance is somethingslightly positive--say, on the order of $10 billion. So, the [grossretirement] is on the order of $70 or $75 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what you subtracted?MR. PRELL. That's right--a number of that magnitude. Itwould be a shade over a percentage point of the total debt flow.MR. BOEHNE. How do you read the chart at the bottom onnonfinancial corporations when you have equity in the negative?MR. PRELL. Well, that shows that net equity liquidation isabout $60 to $65 billion by our estimates. Then the borrowing is thetotal height of the red part.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The borrowing must be the total amount ofthe red part.MR. PRELL. That's right. This [chart] is defective. I'msorry. The total funds raised is the height and the borrowing reallyshould be the entire length of that bar. That is not properlyplotted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, all I asked was: If you took both ofthose together and had some base--I don't know if you used itcorrectly--what would the percentage increase there be?MR. PRELL. If you put them both together, it's 12 percent.The debt was--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 12 percent if you just apply it to abase of 10.MR. PRELL. If there had not been any mergers, the debtpresumably would have grown by 12 percent. I guess the right answerto your question is that the number would not be far different from 13percent to the extent that equities are not a gigantic sum of thetotal liabilities in the economy. They are a significant part but thedebt is much larger, so that absent the mergers you would have afigure approaching 13 percent, I think. I stand open to corrections.I'm having a hard time--MR. CORRIGAN. Not absent the mergers per se. It's absentthe stock [unintelligible] regardless of whether they came frommergers or something else. Then the number would have been 13percent.7/16-17/84MR. GRAMLEY. If you put the market value of equities intoit, you can't do that. You have to figure out what base to put inthere; the amount of the base that's included is the critical issue.MR. PRELL. That's the problem. That's one of the reasons wehave not created a total financial aggregate. It's an arbitraryassumption.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you also have a distortion when you doit this way if in fact there is a lot of retiring of equity.MR. PRELL. Well, that's what we've had this year.MR. BOEHNE. I have a question on the chart that has the wageincreases, which is about in the middle of the package. I keepreading these figures in the Greenbook that show wage increases around4 percent or a little under or a little above. Yet everywhere I go inmy District, except for the really hard-pressed manufacturing areas, 6percent is the most common number. There are very few under that andmost are over that; yet the national figures keep showing theserelatively low rates. My District could be different or there couldbe some wide discrepancies among industries. Do you have any sense ofhow firm these numbers are?MR. ZEISEL. Well, it's hard in any absolute sense toevaluate them. They have shown a reasonable pattern. There is noquestion that they have been remarkably optimistic in measuring therate of [increase] and they have been somewhat lower than theemployment cost index, which is another measure of wages and otherchanges for a broader group including supervisors and white collarworkers. Those data have been showing something closer to the 6percent rate. It's conceivable that this has a somewhat downward biasbecause it includes just production workers. Essentially, other thanthat, I don't have any basis for questioning them except that theylook awfully good.MR. BOEHNE. Well, my personnel department keeps coming backwith these surveys and my research staff keeps coming back with thesenumbers, and there's a gap.MR. ZEISEL. Yes, something of a credibility gap.MR. PARTEE. A difference in objectives.MR. MARTIN. Let me raise a question about your comment withregard to long-term productivity growth. I'm going to give you theKendrick argument--you know whom I'm referring to--and then you shootit down. The demographics are favoring productivity with regard tothe age brackets, the experience of the labor force--women in thelabor force having been on the job a while--and deregulation. Laborand management have negotiated quite a few work rule changes.[Management can say]: Work on this machine, work on that line, workon this shift, work on that shift. There has been a good deal ofinvestment in business equipment, including computers. The computersmay be a negative, but at any rate a lot of money has been spent onthem supposedly leading to some kind of [increased] output. There isless environmental investment these days; there is not quite so muchworry about what the smokestack looks like but whether or not there is7/16-17/84somebody working underneath the smokestack. Management attitudes area little different; there is a younger breed in some cases. We havepeople who have experienced many years of slow growth and a couple ofrecessions that were close together. Supposedly there is some changein that. There is foreign competition. I could go on and on. But wehave a whole number of factors that point toward getting back to themore historic trend in productivity--2 percent or whatever that is--and yet we seem to be gearing on the 1 percent. This makes adifference in unit labor cost, etc., etc. Can you help me?MR. ZEISEL. It's another one of those things that are verydifficult to grab hold of. Kendrick, I think, would be one of thefirst to admit that in many areas we don't have any very hard [data]that address the issue of productivity growth. He has demographicsand he has a couple of other things, but when you cumulate them theyonly make up a relatively small proportion of the forces that reallydetermine productivity gains. As you point out, productivity in theearly postwar years of the 1950s was in the 2-1/2 percent range andthere has been a progressive deterioration through the postwar years.How do we evaluate what we have? Obviously, productivity has atendency to swing very wildly during a cycle. With real GNP increasesof 9 percent we're going to have a different productivity performancethan when GNP growth is 4 percent. First-quarter productivity appearsto be at about a 4 percent rate. We have a model--I say this with acertain temerity--which attempts to characterize the cyclical behaviorof productivity consistent with the trend; and the numbers that we aregetting at the moment still appear to be consistent with an underlyingtrend in productivity, when adjusted for cyclical performance, in the1-1/4 percent range. There is certainly reason to argue that there isthe prospect for an improved productivity trend. That sort of thingtakes time, however. The introduction of new technology, for example,has a marginal [effect]. It doesn't overwhelmingly change thecharacter of the production process overnight. The effect of thematuring of the labor force again is a slow accretion in productivity.We just don't see enough solid evidence yet to convince us that asignificantly higher productivity trend than we have been able tomeasure is warranted. I think we will know a great deal more within afew quarters when, in a sense, we have a fully matured cycle to lookat. Also, by the way, when we have some revised GNP numbers in a fewdays they may tell us a slightly different story about productivity.MR. ROBERTS. Isn't it true that up to now in this expansion,notwithstanding cost reduction stories and so on, productivity hasgained less than in the average expansion in the postwar period?MR. ZEISEL. Yes--that is, to the extent that it's consistentwith a very slow rate of productivity improvement. In previousexpansions over the postwar years the underlying productivity trendwas substantially higher and, therefore, the cyclical performance wasoverlaid with a higher--MR. MARTIN. I would suggest to you that a part of that is alag phenomenon. That is, the economy took on so many employees soquickly here that even if these other factors that I cited wereworking toward a 2 or 2-1/2 percent productivity increase, almost 7million people were hired in this past 20 months or whatever and--7/16-17/84MR. ROBERTS. Do you mean that the percentage gain in thelabor force has been higher in this cyclical expansion than in thepast?MR. MARTIN. Right. It has.MR. GRAMLEY. That's the converse of the argument thatproductivity hasn't gone up so much; those two are mirror images ofone another. It's hard to use the one to justify the argument thatproductivity is going up faster than it really is. The reasonproductivity didn't go up so fast explains why we had such a bigincrease in employment given the rise in GNP. The rise in GNP in thefirst 6 quarters has been a little above average but not much. So, ifyou had that much larger increase in employment, it is preciselybecause the rise in productivity has not been so great.MR. ROBERTS. Despite all the talk of cost reductions?MR. GRAMLEY. I think the fact was that the recessionphenomenon was one in which we had a better productivity performancethan one could have anticipated, but there just wasn't any followthrough, if the GNP statistics are right. Now, we may get a revisionto the GNP statistics. But unless we get a marked upward revision,one has to hope for the future in productivity rather than pointing tosomething that's a fact now.MR. MORRIS. The one piece of evidence we have that mightlend some support to Pres's position--which I share, incidentally--isthat we're seeing this enormous capital goods boom occur at a timewhen the cost of capital is extremely high. We discussed thiswho is the head of acapital goods producing company had this answer: that we have beenstoring up technology in this country for the past ten years or sothat hasn't been applied, and now when companies have the money toinvest they find the productivity of the new technology is so highthat they can afford it--that it makes sense to go ahead--even thoughthe cost of capital is so high. But the fact is that if ourcorporations are making rational decisions, they are expectingextraordinarily high productivity from the capital in which they areinvesting.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How much does your inflationprojection come down if we don't get the 15 percent dollar decline?MR. TRUMAN. It would be about 1 percentage point off thefour quarters of 1985. It would make very little difference for 1984at this point but about 1 percentage point for 1985.MR. PARTEE. If the dollar is held steady?MR. TRUMAN. If we held it steady.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have it coming down pretty quickly.MR. TRUMAN. Well, in '85 we have 15 percent [unintelligible]the first year.7/16-17/84MR. BLACK. Ted, is this off the deflator you are talkingabout?MR. TRUMAN. It's not the deflator [where the decline wouldbe] a little less because of the offsetting effect [of rising importprices]. This would be the CPE [deflator] or the consumer priceindex.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. That was the question I was going to ask, Mr.Chairman, but let me follow up on it. You are projecting a 15 percentdecline in the value of the dollar. Are you expecting that to occurslowly over the next 18 months or are you expecting it to happen inmid-1985? What's your feel for that? Are we going to get a softlanding of the dollar?MR. TRUMAN. We're projecting it to happen slowly but it'slikely to happen by fits and starts. If you look at the chart on thedollar's rise, you see that it proceeded by fits and starts; so if andwhen it should ever start to decline, we might well see something likethat trend line but find some jagged moves going down as we have hadsome jagged moves going up. In fact, we started one just after thelast chart show.MR. FORRESTAL. Could I just ask another question about thedeficit? Your projection is for a deficit of $189 billion in 1985.Does that factor in any deficit reduction measures by the Congress?MR. KICHLINE. Not beyond the Deficit Reduction Act, which ison the President's desk and is estimated to be about $15 billion ofactions for 1985. It is expected that he will sign that and we assumethat an additional $10 billion will come out of further actions in theCongress, particularly in the area of the accommodation between theAdministration and the Congress on defense expenditures. But ourprojection doesn't go beyond this $25 billion area that most folkscurrently are talking about. If we had something major occurring in1985, that is not captured.MR. MARTIN. If the indexing stays in the statute, how doesthat affect things?MR. KICHLINE. The personal income tax rates? That was nottouched by this Deficit Reduction Act and is scheduled to take effectJanuary 1, 1985. We estimate that to be worth about $5 billion.Assuming that our price forecast of about a 4 percent rise is right,that would translate into a revenue loss for 1985 of about $5 billion.MR. MORRIS. But don't those numbers get very much bigger asyou go out a few years?MR. KICHLINE. That's correct. They grow over time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I have another question on the exchange value ofthe dollar. Some analysts believe that this recent action toeliminate the 30 percent withholding on foreign-owned U.S. securities7/16-17/84is cause for a renewed surge of funding for the United States to takeadvantage of. Is that likely to change your forecast of a 15 percentdecline?MR. TRUMAN. There may be some [effect], but I would notexpect it to be substantial basically because most people could getinto dollar-denominated assets on a tax-free basis already and theredidn't have to be a withholding tax move in order to change that. Myassumption would be that most major portfolios in the world alreadywere into essentially tax-exempt dollar-denominated assets, so wewould not get a move from nondollar- to dollar-denominated assetsbecause of a change in the tax. There might be some marginal effect.Some people are pointing to Japanese pension funds as one area wherethe fact that there was withholding tax [was a factor] and they mayhave a preference for safer U.S. market-oriented instruments.Therefore, there might be a slight change in the portfolio between yenand dollars. But in general I think it would be unlikely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We learn from experience--and I have greatsympathy--that nothing changes that 15 percent decline.MR. TRUMAN. We'll fool you next time!MR. PARTEE. Well, I was going to ask how come 15 percent?Last time you told us that it needed to drop 45 percent.MR. TRUMAN. First installment!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, they have always said 15 percent.MR. TRUMAN. [Unintelligible.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any other comments?MS. SEGER. May I ask another productivity question? Ihaven't seen your model but I've been very interested in theproductivity issue and I too have seen a lot of people withfundamentally different ideas about what is happening to productivity.Did your model forecast the size of the improvement of productivitylast year?MR. KICHLINE. Yes. Let me talk a little about this. I havebeen asking similar questions and probably have been living with these"models" more than Jerry. Essentially what we're talking about is,starting in 1980 and going forward, trying to explain or decomposeactual productivity growth into a cyclical component and its long-termtrend component. In the preceding period of the '70s, about 0.6percent is the estimated trend growth of productivity. Now, a 1.1percent--or with the revised data I think it's 1-1/4 percent--increase in trend productivity growth is very close [to theexperience] quarter by quarter from 1980 through the second quarter of1984. So, in a sense, that explains it; it does very well with thattrend and a few other variables in decomposing the two components. Sowhat we have to be looking for is [something] saying that this can'texplain the total productivity growth, and we haven't really foundthat yet. I might say that the last four quarters changed a tenthfrom 1.1 to 1.2 percent, so it may well be that future observationswill suggest that we're far off. But we're somewhat hesitant at the7/16-17/84moment because in fact we've done very well for the last three years.If a change is coming, it's really in the future. It's not in ourreading of the past. There are other folks--productivity experts onthe outside--who in looking at the past would argue the same. Butthere are many issues that suggest productivity trends may be in theprocess of change; that has not yet shown through and we would be thefirst to admit that.MR. MARTIN. If you took some other period prior to the firstoil shock--I don't know what period, but suppose you took 1965 through1974 or something like that--what kind of independent variables wouldyou get and what kind of model would that produce?MR. KICHLINE. Well, you'd get the same sort of analysis,which comes up with trend productivity growth at 2-1/2 to 3 percent,depending upon the time period you pick. You mentioned the 3 percentnumber in the future. That really was [true], for example, for theperiod of the '50s and the first half of the '60s. Later on, andafter the oil shock in particular, is when we found the dismalproductivity growth. So, if we return to that--.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we didn't have the drop in thedollar in our model and yet we come out with an inflation projectionthe same as the staff's. I guess that's at the low end, though.MR. PARTEE. With no drop in the dollar?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. With no drop in the dollar we cameout about the same as the staff in our inflation [projection].MR. GRAMLEY. One of the determining factors will be whetheror not we get 2-3/4 percent real GNP growth fourth quarter to fourthquarter for 1985 or, let us say, 1/2 or 3/4 percentage point more.We're getting down into the range on the unemployment rate where thatmuch additional growth, quite possibly, could trigger quite differentresponses in labor market conditions and wage rates than the staff hasanticipated. Similarly, an additional half percentage point real GNPgrowth would result in maybe 1-1/2 to 2 percentage points [more] inmanufacturing output and that gets the capacity utilization rate intoa range in which we begin to have problems. So, while the staff'sforecast might not be unbelievable in terms of internal consistency, asomewhat stronger economy can produce quite different results.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What weight do you put in these remarkablylow wage trends from the fact that the index that goes into wages isalso remarkably low so far? I think for the past year or so theconsumer price index W or whatever it's called [unintelligible] isfully 1 percent lower than the one that everybody looks at. And [thedifference is] more than that this year.MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's important. We do that exercise.I don't have the disaggregation in our [material here]. But it's veryclear that the feedback effects from low rates of inflation and lowCOLAS do track into lower rates of wage increase. We do have thatnumber, and maybe while I mumble here Jerry can find it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That index is going to reverse on us now,isn't it?7/16-17/84MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's correct--in our forecast.MR. PARTEE. If mortgage rates rise.MR. KICHLINE. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was going down while mortgage rateswere rising because of this mix problem, I take it.MR. KICHLINE. We don't have the COLA separately. Iapologize. But that is important and, in any event, it does reverse.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, on the subject of differences inforecasts, in Cleveland we have forecast a very strong underlyingeconomy--stronger than the staff's--through the third quarter of '85because of the assumptions. We make essentially no assumption aboutexchange rate changes; we have a five percent [decline]. But we madean assumption about fiscal policy that there would be a second downpayment, if you will, enacted in the fourth quarter of this year orthe first quarter of next year. And that would bite in the fourthquarter of '85. So then our pattern is a strong economy, not aslowing one--surprising us. We have a strong economy in 1985, growingat about a 4 percent real rate until the fourth quarter. That givesus an inflation projection very close to the staff's projection, butit does have the significant risk that the exchange rate correction,when it occurs, could bring about even more inflation. And we haven'treally dealt effectively with the wage rate issue in our set ofassumptions, and we consider that the other major risk besides theexchange rate.MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of the task of sitting down and doingone of these forecasts twice a year, as Mr. Kichline knows, it isnever very easy. From my perspective right now it's harder than ithas been because on the one hand we have an economy that on thesurface--by most indicators, statistical and otherwise--looksabsolutely terrific. But underneath that gloss we have some veryserious problems that seem to me on balance to be getting worse ratherthan better, and that colors my thinking about a forecast. Forexample, as Jim indicated, the Federal budget deficit in a structuralsense continues to deteriorate in a very significant way and withnothing in sight that I know of that is going to change that. AndJim's estimate of the structural budget deficit next year of $172billion is literally off the scale of experience. Similarly, andagain notwithstanding the spectacular performance of the aggregateeconomy, high interest rates are clearly placing very serious strainson selected classes of domestic and international debtors. Thebanking system, to put it mildly, is fragile. The conditions areaffecting all sizes of banks and thrifts which, as Jim indicated, arenow right back on the edge, if not worse. As for external trade, thefinancial position of the United States, which is helpful in somerespects for us and for others, now leaves us highly vulnerable to thesudden and sharp fall of the dollar. Whether that will materialize,of course, is another question. From my perspective, looking at thefirst six months of this year, it seems to me that what we have on ourhands is a good old fashioned credit binge--almost irrespective ofwhich set of numbers we look at. They all say the same thing; andsome of them relative to GNP or relative to inflation or relative tosomething are outside the spectrum of experience. Against that7/16-17/84background, as I said, I find it very hard to make a forecast. Forwhat it's worth the forecast that I've come up with is one that showsthe real economy a little stronger, by 1/2 point or so, than the staffhas. I have no real good reason for that other than my sense of thesheer momentum that the economy has right now, notwithstanding thehigh interest rates.In the inflation area, which I really think is the swingvariable for 1985, I also found it very tough [to make a forecast].In July of last year and February of this year, I had an inflationforecast that was very much at the bottom of the range of Committeemembers' forecasts. And I had it that way for two fundamentalreasons. One was that I thought the economy was going to be strongerand at that phase of the cycle a stronger economy implied strongerproductivity in a context in which wage restraint was still very muchin evidence. Clearly, in retrospect, inflation was better than even Ihad thought and I attribute that almost exclusively to the dollar.Looking at 1985, unlike 1984, I have an inflation forecast of almost 6percent on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis, which is on thehigh side of the Committee members' forecasts. I ended up there withconsiderable reluctance. But fundamentally the reason I ended upthere was that I did have in mind an acceleration, however modest, incompensation, very much like the staff's. Strangely enough I had inmind stronger productivity growth than the staff, at around 1-1/2percent. But the difference in my case is that my forecast basicallyassumes that we will continue to have a positive spread, on the orderof 1-1/2 to 2 percent, between the deflator and the rise in unit laborcosts in the economy. I arrived at that for three reasons. First, itis certainly not without a precedent at this stage of the recovery.Second, we are moving into ranges of capacity utilization andunemployment that seem to me to imply at least some further pressuresin those areas. Last, but certainly not least and perhaps mostimportantly, I continue to think that the point will come when thedollar will have to come off; and if it does come off, my view is thatthe potential effects of that on domestic inflation coming from thedirect effect on imported prices and also the indirect effect on thekind of restraint that these imports are producing could be evengreater than the 1 percent that Mr. Truman spoke of. I am, of course,mindful of the fact that not only wage statistics but commodity pricesand other things right now could very well lead to a different view oninflation. But even in terms of commodity prices, I assume at themoment that an awful lot of that also is a direct and indirectreflection of the international situation. I am not yet ready toconclude that its effects will be permanent over the forecast cycle.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the one thing that throws offthe historical relationship between labor costs and prices is therather unique price constraint influence of imports. It is unique inthis recovery to such a degree. I continue to run into businessmenwho keep talking about the fact that even though volume has picked upthey can't raise prices; they can't get the margin because of importcompetition. And unless you make an assumption that the exchangerates [are] going to come down significantly, it seems to me you comeup with a fairly low projection of inflation.MR. CORRIGAN. I would agree with that. As I said, there isno question in my own thinking that precisely those circumstances youhave described are one of the reasons why I end up with a higher rate-10-7/16-17/84of inflation. I think at some point in the cycle the dollar will comeoff and the effect of that on domestic prices will be greater than theaverage effect one picks up by looking at models. The reverse isclearly true, in a context in which the dollar were to stay evenwithin, say, 5 or 10 percent of where it is now over the wholeforecast period. To me that would easily translate into a percentagepoint, if not more, of better price performance.MR. MARTIN. Not only are there firms that are reluctant toraise prices but some firms have raised prices and have had to backoff.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are busy getting legislation enacted.MR. TRUMAN. There are only two features, I think, to thedollar's role. Its rise has helped to hold down inflation, and evenif it stops rising the rate of inflation has been suppressed becauseof the dollar's rise. Then if it should decline, as we believe iteventually will, we will pay back some of the dividends that we hadcollected. One of the problems--and it's been seen in other countries--is that you start assuming that the underlying rate of inflation isthe rate of inflation that's associated with a continuously risingcurrency and then that leads to some distortion in and of itself inthe way macro policy operates. Then once you get to the point--I'mthinking particularly of Germany--where you come down the other sideof that mountain, that creates its own problems. Everybody has beenamused at the constant 15 percent [dollar decline we have forecast];it is obviously a somewhat notional figure--less precise than some ofthe other imprecise numbers in our forecast. But I think it is partlymotivated by the view that eventually we will have not only a[cessation] of this benefit but a rolling back of some of it. Andit's better, at least in terms of thinking about what the correctunderlying rate of inflation might be and in trying to forecast therate even though the short-run favorable developments on the inflationside might be continuing because of the dollar's value.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. It's hard to pinpoint the precise reason why ourstaff forecast is a bit higher than the Board staff's on the inflationrate for next year. But I think it probably has to do with ourestimate that as we get into 1985 we will be approaching or at thepoint, both in terms of the capacity utilization rising and theunemployment rate declining, where in the past we typically have seenan acceleration of inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a difficult questionto ask. I don't know who to ask, but the staff is forecasting a $115billion current account deficit in 1985 and a decline in the exchangerate of the dollar against foreign currencies of 15 percent. Myquestion is: What levels of interest rates are going to be required toattract that amount of foreign capital to the United States in aregime in which the foreign investor may be contemplating furtherdevaluation of the dollar, and what will be the implications for theeconomy of that level of interest rates?-11-7/16-17/84MR. AXILROD. Well, we have only a small rise in interestrates in the forecast.MR. MORRIS. I know. That's what I don't understand.MR. AXILROD. It would be a lot higher if you don't want thedollar to go down.MR. TRUMAN. President Morris is saying that if the dollargoes down, somehow we need even higher interest rates in order toprevent it from going down faster.MR. AXILROD. We think we have a mutually consistent set ofrelationships. It entails somewhat higher interest rates, the sharpdrop in the dollar, and the projected rate of inflation. We wouldargue, I guess, that if you think the dollar isn't going to go down,you need a lot higher interest rates. I don't know quite how toanswer the question otherwise. If you believe that people don't wantto hold dollars to the extent that we implicitly are saying, you'reforced to argue that you have to pay them a lot more to do it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think at this time we don't have theanswer to your questions.MR. PARTEE. He said it was a difficult question.MR. MORRIS. It seems to me that if there is something wrongwith this forecast, it's in this area. Can we carry this off neatlywithout any significant change in interest rates?MR. AXILROD. But these are high real interest rates still--very high relative to the rest of the world.MR. MORRIS. But we're also asking the rest of the worldafter investing $100 billion in the United States this year to come upwith another $115 billion.MR. TRUMAN. But the point is that in the last 12 months theyhave over-invested in the United States or in dollar-denominatedassets or the dollar wouldn't have appreciated by 15 percent or so.It's no more illogical that the dollar would go down slightly in thisinterest rate forecast than that the dollar would go up with adoubling of the current account deficit.MR. MORRIS. But the fact that that has happened means thatat the end of this year foreign investors are going to be sitting witha big accumulation of dollars. And the question is whether we canfinance this current account deficit without offering much greaterinducements for them to hold more dollars.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Excellent question.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But right now they are more thanfinancing the current account deficit. That's why the dollar isrising, you see.MR. MORRIS. Yes, I understand that.-12-7/16-17/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And the financial markets in NewYork--I don't know whether they are right or not--are placing enormousemphasis on the abolition of a 30 percent withholding tax. And eventhough there are very strongly mixed views about it, the possibilitythat the Treasury might consider bearer bonds is a separate issue.There are a lot of people who feel that there are going to be somesubstantial flows from that; and we're still getting some intrabankassistance as well. The dollar is being pulled back from theEurodollar market, which is helping to finance the current accountdeficit. My sense is that even though, obviously, it's almost atautology in the long run--neither we nor the world can accept thatlarge current account deficit to finance indefinitely--I wouldn'tassume it is going to be in 1985 necessarily that we're going to seethat kind of change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have very little confidence ineconomic forecasts--my own in particular--but forecast we must, so Iguess I will have to bare my soul. Like most everybody else, we endedup pretty close to the staff's forecast for 1984. But when we got to1985 we differed in the same direction that Jerry Corrigan did, onlymore so. We came out with a little higher real growth, but the maindifference was on the inflation side. We were on the high end of thatand we would stress the factors that he stressed, but also would pointout that we still have not yet paid the piper for the rather rapidgrowth--or what I view as rather rapid growth--in the money supply inthe past. And even after allowing for the possibility of a rightwardshift in the demand for money, I still think we're going to see moreinflation probably than the staff is projecting. This, obviously, isone argument that I don't want to win.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can all be encouraged to know thatMilton Friedman has decided that with the downward shift in velocityof--I can't remember whether it's 8 percent or 11 percent--all betsare off in the future for inflationary implications of that rapidgrowth.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. He has retracted that inflationary[unintelligible]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Our forecast with regard to the GNP this year andnext year is perhaps a touch higher than the staff's, and ourinflation [forecast] is broadly consistent--a bit higher. But amongstall the good news, and I really do think we have a very powerfuleconomic expansion in place, I continue to be distressed by theunevenness of it all. The people I talk to, particularly those peoplewho run large capital intensive heavy industry companies, arecontinuing to experience very, very difficult times; by no means havethey in any way really caught up with the euphoria that seems to bepresent in other areas. I tried to look at this a bit. We took theindustrial production index and assumed that 1979 was 100 and thenlooked at the April physical output numbers in various parts of thatindex. A lot of these are the industries that are central to theMidwest. For example, in the primary metal category, consumer durablesteel was 75 percent for April of 1984 versus 100 for 1979; equipment-13-7/16-17/84steel was 53 percent versus 100 for 1979; farm tractors were 35percent; construction and equipment were 78 percent; the big tractorslike the kind Caterpillar makes were 40 percent; railroad equipment,which I have commented on in the past, was 15 percent.SPEAKER(?). Fifteen?MR. KEEHN. It was 15, but that's not quite fair because 1979was, for some tax reasons, a uniquely high year. But as you go downthese individual categories in the industrial production index, manyof these big, heavy [machinery] companies are still operating at very,very low rates. Universally, the people I talk with say that thevalue of the dollar is of extreme concern. And we think that will bekey to our forecast for next year. Caterpillar, for example, is aclassic example of a company that just has been decimated, bothdomestically and in the export markets. Therefore, I look at thenumbers and statistically they all seem to make great sense and I canfind no overall reason to disagree. But I have this nagging feelingas I look around at many of these big companies that, with thecontinuation of the trends with regard to interest rates and the valueof the dollar or both, something could come a little unglued here aswe look to the forecast--not so much this year, but next year. It'sthis unevenness that I find in the industrial component that has meparticularly worried.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I think we're at a stage in the business cyclein which the uncertainties of forecasting are a heck of a lot greaterthan they have been. If you look at a recovery in prospect, thefirst four to six quarters do differ from one cycle to the next butnot all that much. But what happens after you get up to where we arenow is much harder to foresee. It's certainly very logical toanticipate some slowdown in the pace of the economic expansion butwhether we slow down to something like a 3 percent rate, let us say,or a 4 percent rate, makes a hell of a lot of difference to the rateof resource utilization when it is up this high and, therefore, toprice behavior. The other big factor on the price side now that makesprice forecasting very, very uncertain is the issue that Frank waspointing out about the accumulation of dollars abroad and what thatmeans for interest rates. When we have dollars accumulating abroad onthe scale that has been occurring, the willingness of foreigners tocontinue accumulation on anything like the scale that the staff isforecasting depends on what happens to prices here and what happens totheir expectations of prices. If we get the beginnings of someupswing in wages and prices in the United States, it will then inducethe kind of drop in the value of the dollar that Chuck is talkingabout, which in turn will reinforce this price cycle. And that's whyit seems to me the outlook for prices is very, very uncertain.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. In times like this when nobody knows what reallyis going to happen--more so than most other times--what we say aboutthe economy tells more about the people [talking] than it does aboutthe economy. Some people are just pessimists by nature and basicallysay: "Well, things are good but that means they have to get bad." AndI think that's in most of us; it's our central banking blood. Others-14-7/16-17/84are optimists and believe things are good and they are going tocontinue. I think the truth probably is somewhere in between. That'snot very profound, but I suppose things won't turn out as bad as wethink nor as good as we think. My own hunch is that we may end upwith less inflation than one might expect in this kind of businesscycle, largely because of the dollar. I just hear everywhere abouthow much a constraint it is on prices. We've been hearing that thedollar is going to come down, down, down and maybe it will at somepoint. Like Tony, I think it will come down but further out there onthe horizon; and I think this is going to have a positive effect oninflation. On the growth side, we have talked mostly about what ishappening in the real sector, but the financial side of the economyreally is in pretty fragile condition. Just what those linkages areand how they spill over to the real side are hard to define, largelybecause so much of it is psychological. But it does seem to me thatover an 18-month time horizon the fragility on the financial side isbound to have some downward impact on the economy. So, my hunch isthat we probably will end up with both less inflation and less growthin 1985 than one might normally expect.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think there is an awful lotof uncertainty as we try to make a forecast at this particular time.Generally speaking, we agree with most of the staff forecast with theexception of the inflation and unemployment numbers. I do think thatthe staff's inflation numbers are low. We look more for a 6 percentinflation number, fourth quarter '85 over fourth quarter '84, basedpretty much on reasons that have already been alluded to by othermembers--namely, the depreciation of the dollar and so on. But I alsothink it is very unrealistic to think that the wage concessions andwage moderation that we fortunately have had so far are going tocontinue. Nobody knows, of course, what is going to happen with theautomobile negotiations but I'm fearful that they could turn out to bedifficult. And there are other wage pressures that I think are goingto develop in the economy.The other thing that I haven't heard mentioned, which wefactored into our projection, is the monetary growth through aboutmid-1984. So, I think the factors of expansionary policy, wagepressures, depreciation of the dollar, and capacity constraints--whichwe certainly see in our District, incidentally--augur for a somewhathigher inflation rate than the staff projects. Also, as theunemployment rate goes through 7 percent, those wage pressures aregoing to increase as well. I also think unemployment is going to be abit higher than the staff suggests, but otherwise I think theirprojection is pretty accurate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I'm no more confident in my own forecast thanothers are [in theirs]. In terms of real growth, we're about wherethe Board staff is; we have a little higher nominal GNP and are higheron the deflator. When we are as uncertain as we are, maybe we canlearn something from history just from the standpoint of where we arein the cycle. We are going into the third year of recovery;inflationary pressures tend to increase at that point. Looking at ittoday, it feels considerably different. But we've said that, [thusfar] at least, this recovery is pretty well tracking a normalrecovery. So, it makes one wonder if it really is going to be that-15-7/16-17/84different as we go forward. I have some real concerns about theexchange value of the dollar. If the drop-off does materialize, thatwill likely bring inflation pressures back on the domestic side.Given capacity utilization and the other things that we normally lookat, it just seems to me that pressures are going to start building aswe get into 1985. Therefore, I'm not as optimistic on inflation asthe staff.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By a considerable margin. GovernorWallich.MR. WALLICH. My numbers are on the high side of theforecasts, but not extraordinarily so. I ask myself: If these numberscome out approximately like this, what happens at the end of 1985? Dowe then level off forever at a moderate rate of inflation and at amoderate rate of unemployment? Do we go on up toward higher rates ofinflation? Do we encounter on the way--either before or after the endof 1985--a downturn? The answers, obviously, are unknowable. But ifthe numbers turn out pretty good through '85, as they are projectedhere, the chance is that it means we will be into a rather long andcontinued period of expansion that will carry us to a very low rate ofunemployment and considerably higher rates of inflation. That seemsto me the likely outcome of the present numbers being true. At most,the staff projections would get us to a growth rate below 3 percent,which would suggest that we are tapering off toward an even lower rateof expansion than potential that theoretically could be sustainablefor a very long time. It's contrary to history. The economy eitherexpands or contracts over time. And I'm concerned that the makings ofa stronger and longer expansion are likely to leave us eventually outon a limb with high rates of inflation. Well, I guess I've expressedno more than my usual prejudice on the subject.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would you be reassured if we allthought there would be a recession in '86?MR. WALLICH. I would certainly be reassured, but I wouldprefer then to try to modulate that rather than run into it helterskelter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, we have discussed whether ornot this expansion is typical of cycles, if we eliminate a couple ofthem. It seems to me that this expansion is significantly morevigorous than the typical cycle. That's certainly true of employment,as we have already touched upon. That always raises the question ofwhether we try to do too much in too short a period of time--in 20months or whatever it has been. Is this expansion too fast in thesense of being inflationary? It seems to me that there already hasbeen some slowing. We all have conceded the difficulties offorecasting and we know numbers are revised and revised and revised.But, just looking at the numbers, in terms of nominal GNP the range is13.9 to 9.8 percent [unintelligible]. In the [remarks] of our twelvecolleagues around the country, the comment that the rate of expansionis slowing is almost unanimously true of that group. Is a drop innominal of 4.1 percentage points over some period of time enough? Ifwe look at the calendar year 1985, using the staff forecast we getnominal GNP of 8.4 percent. Is that still too high a rate of growth?-16-7/16-17/84I think in terms of those absolutes, it's difficult to make a case.Is business fixed investment coming on stream too fast? The firstestimate of the rate of growth in the second quarter was almost 21percent. But it is equipping; it is retrofitting; it is productivityoriented; and it's pretty short term. Only now are we beginning tobuild a plant as distinct from equipment, and so the payback in termsof output should be reasonably short term. As for capacityutilization, it's difficult to factor in all that retrofitting ofplant into the bare number of the domestic capacity utilization and,unfortunately, no one has figured a really good way to figure thecapacity utilization of all those thousands of firms around thePacific Basin and in Europe and the developing countries that areselling to us. I don't know how to measure it; maybe no one knows howto measure that capacity utilization. Are we expanding too fast?We're not back to any reasonable trend line using various recentperiods of time and using GNP growth. It seems to me that the casefor arguing that we're expanding too fast is a weak one. I've triedto reflect that and probably have failed in my numbers, which aresomewhat at variance with those of the staff.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I've been reflecting on Jerry's comment aboutfinancial fragility, which contrasts so sharply with the strongeconomy. And I suppose that the link is what Henry is talking about:the next recession. There are probably many roads to recession. Butone that seems quite certain to me is to get into an environment inwhich interest rates have to increase substantially, because I think asubstantial increase in interest rates, in fact, would turn thefinancial system on its ear--certainly the thrifts, probably the LDCs,and very possibly some of these people who have signed up for variablerate mortgages and that kind of thing. And, of course, the thing thatbothers me is that if you look at past recoveries, we've always gotteninto a period in which interest rates went up substantially toward theend of the recovery. So, I suppose the best and safest insurance thatwe could buy would be to try to insure that the economy does not growso rapidly as to bring the inflationary consequences that will lead tosubstantially higher interest rates and bring the next recession.Now, the reason I haven't commented along those lines is that thestaff forecast, I think, does that. That is, the staff forecast givesus a [slowing of] real growth in time to keep off some of these touchpoints that Lyle was talking about. It gives us a 3 percent rate ofreal GNP growth, roughly, in the four quarters of 1985. I have toadmit that I forecast the same thing, but I'm darned if I know why Idid because, taking it right up to where we are today, everything isstronger--and quite a lot stronger--than that. Maybe it's just a hopethat the real growth will recede to a point where we can live with itover an extended period rather than a true forecast that all of us areexpressing here. As I said, there is nothing in the consumptionfigures or certainly in business and plant and equipment spending oreven in housing so far that would give one the strong assurance thatthe 3 percent rate of growth would be established by the latter partof this year. And I think we need to try to guard against thepossibility that for the quarters ahead, as in the quarters past, wewill find real results to be substantially greater than what had beenforecast beforehand. That is very important because, otherwise, I dothink the financial system is going to tumble.-17-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. Well, I won't repeat the comments that othershave made, many of which I would have stated. But I feel that thecyclical momentum of this expansion will probably carry us comfortablythrough 1985. I think growth is slowing now and that growth willcontinue as we approach capacity utilization as it always does. Ithink price pressures will increase from capacity utilization andprobably from a leveling of the dollar rather than a decline and fromthe lagged effect of rapid monetary growth in the past. That leads meto the point that is critical: that we not provide excess moneygrowth to fuel inflation in the future. I share Governor Wallich'sview that we will have a critical problem at the end of 1985 if we dothat. As to financial fragility, I'm aware of Continental's situationand the fact that the thrifts on an operating basis are breaking evenor are slightly in the red. But to put that in perspective: We'vebeen through a stiff recession. There is always a lagged effect ofproblem loans after one of those. If I'm not mistaken, thenonperforming assets in March were lower than they were at year-end.And we have some specialized problems, including the energy situation,which seems to be improving some. My own guess is that we couldeasily exaggerate this, including on the LDC front; it appears to methat major progress is being made. So, I'm not concerned that amoderate increase in interest rates, which would appear to beappropriate in terms of the direction of the economy, would in any waycause a major problem in the financial system.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've had a long and I guess usefuldiscussion. If nobody else wants to say anything--.MR. RICE. Since my forecast is rather way out, I'd like tosay a word. Ed Boehne pointed out that a lot of the forecasts reflectindividual personalities and whether one is a pessimist or anoptimist. When things are going poorly, I'm an optimist and I expectthings to get better; when they are going very well, I'm a pessimistand I expect them to get worse.MR. PARTEE. You can make money on that!MR. RICE. So, while my forecast was very close to the medianfor 1984, it's way out of line for 1985 and I'm going to revise itbecause I've been influenced by both the staff forecast and some ofthe comments I've heard. Basically, I forecast a growth recessionstarting in the latter part of 1985; I just thought somebody shouldreflect that possibility among our forecasts. Based on what I'veheard and what I've looked at more recently, I don't really expectthat to happen. But it seems to me to be a possibility--enough of apossibility to note. Having made my forecast before the latestfigures on unemployment and employment and some of the more recentdata reflecting more strength than I had assumed, I had real GNPfalling off very substantially in the latter half of 1985. So, I cameout on the low side for growth in 1985 and that's the basis for myway-out forecast. The reason is simply that real interest rates arerising very rapidly. The price forecast is very favorable but at thesame time our forecast is for rising interest rates. And realinterest rates now, and as projected, are going to be fairly close towhere they were in the latter part of '81 and early '82, at whichpoint the economy began to reflect this by turning down. I think it-18-7/16-17/84is distinctly possible, though not probable, that in the latter halfof next year we will see such a severe slowing in real output that wecould think of it as a growth recession.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to go on to Mr. Axilrod'spresentation before we quit today. But before we do that, I just wantto say a few things myself. I want to ask, because it has been on alot of people's minds in this city, about a theory going around thatwe are on the verge of deflation--a theory that is widely publicizedby one group morning, noon, and night. It has been an expanding groupin political terms. I haven't detected it, but I just want to confirmthat that theory that we're close to some deflationary movement is notshared by anybody around this table.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's price deflation?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's price deflation as I read thesethings--price deflation followed by severe recession down the road.MR. BOEHNE. The only place I've seen anything aboutdeflation is in these articles I read in The Wall Street Journal. Ihaven't heard anybody in the business community anywhere worried aboutdeflation or giving any evidence that it's a risk that much weightneeds to be put on.MR. CORRIGAN. Actually, the only way I can see somethinglike that in the time frame we're talking about here is if we reallyhad some kind of financial blowout--not that we haven't had somealready. I don't know how to define that, but there is very littlequestion in my mind that if something of that nature happens in thenear term on top of everything else that already has happened, thatcould precipitate a pretty nasty situation.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But even in that situation, a drop inreal output would come first and then the price deflation.MR. CORRIGAN. That's even worse; you're right.MR. PARTEE. Prices of some sensitive industrial commodities--for example, the price of gold--have been moving down. They areprobably the source of much of this, but it's hard for me to see howthat could become general.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me make a couple of commentsthat have occurred to me in listening to all this. I could have leftthese for later, but what jumps out at me is how atypical this cycleis. Just on the face of it, we have had more rapid growth than at anytime during the postwar period--which I guess makes it atypical--though we started from a low level, to be sure. Take those domesticdemand figures, which didn't include inventories, that were presentedto us a little while ago. If you compared the domestic demand withearlier cycles, I think you would see nothing like what has been goingon in the past 20 months. And, in fact, it doesn't show much sign ofa slowdown. If you look behind it, we obviously have a budgetdeficit, as was mentioned, that is out of line with all ourexperience. It is in fact rising in the third year of expansion andthe full employment deficit, however calculated I guess, is risingrather sharply. Of course, the mirror image of that is the trade-19-7/16-17/84deficit, and however one adds it up I cannot believe such a deficit issustainable forever--however long forever is.I would like to think that there is something else atypical--but it remains to be seen--and that is that prices are moving upexceptionally slowly, given the strength of demand at this point. I'msure the dollar has something to do with that. But how much we haveingrained in the wage situation from a succession of recessions orother factors remains to be seen. I share the feeling that a numberof people have expressed that the reliability of any economic forecastin the 18 months ahead under these conditions is exceedingly limited,to say the most for it. I don't doubt that there's a lot of momentumin the economy right now; I wasn't so sure a month or so ago, but itsurely looks that way now. And I don't doubt that we're getting acontinuing thrust on fiscal policy. I must say that I don't see mucheffect from the rise in interest rates we've had and I'm not surewe're going to get it when we're in the midst of one of these periodsof considerable momentum. I was--I don't know the right word--bemused, I guess, by the analysis of the last Michigan survey thatsays the public thinks interest rates are low and one of the reasonsthey are buying is that they think rates are going to be a lot higherlater. That doesn't sound as if marginal changes in interest ratesare going to affect purchasing very much. Of course, consumerinterest rates in fact aren't doing anything, except maybe veryrecently, and I doubt that there is much there to change the behaviorvery strikingly. At the same time, all these interest rates produce alot of income on the other side of the balance sheet--on the incomestatement--that we haven't had in past expansions. We certainly needsome slowdown in my judgment, given all that's going on. In fact, Ithink we're having a test of monetary policy in deregulated marketsand it doesn't look very sensitive in terms of responses out in theeconomy. I have to say that I think a lot of the difficulty we arefacing is due to no great news on the budgetary situation. The onlypromise I can see in that area is that the budgetary situation wasn'tabsolutely written in heaven or wherever it was written, maybe theopposite place, and it conceivably could be changed--not in the nextthree months but looking beyond the next three months. I'm almostinclined to say it better be changed or we have an almost insolubleproblem. I won't berate the fact that we now have a financial systemunder pressure in every direction. I don't for a moment want tounderestimate that problem, which I think is a considerable risk onall sides in terms of looking ahead. We'll talk more about thattomorrow when we get to the short-run policy. So, with that muchcomment from here, why don't you give us your wisdom about the longrun, Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, thank you. I'm aware that it's 5:00p.m. and somewhat warm. But maybe we at least ought to deal with anyspecific questions that people have or go on and say something aboutthe ranges themselves. We can do so or wait until the morning.MR. BOEHNE. I have one technical question on the history ofthe 4 to 8 percent range on M1. Wasn't it at one point 4 to 9 percentand then dropped to 4 to 8 percent? It seems to me that a year or twoago there was some special reason that it was dropped to 8 percent.Do you remember that?-20-7/16-17/84MR. AXILROD. I don't remember. Maybe Norm has the historyin front of him to see if it was. I don't remember that.MR. BERNARD. Well, at the beginning of 1983, the range forM1 was 4 to 8 percent. And then it was raised to 5 to 9 percent, butwith the base shifted to the second quarter; so it applied only forthe second half of last year.MR. BOEHNE. And that was because of the velocity.MR. AXILROD. It was never 4 to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were way over the 4 to 8 percent range,I guess.MR. BOEHNE. Well, that's right. And then it was droppedback to 4 to 8 percent.MR. WALLICH. Could I just ask the role that the midpoint ofthese ranges plays? To me, the upper end is generally the importantone. But I realize that if the staff works with the midpoint assomething to base projections on, for instance, then it makes adifference whether one also pulls down the lower end or not. That's atechnical item that I've never found the answer to.MR. AXILROD. Well, in the earlier part of this year, thestaff generally had been working with something around the midpointfor M1 because that was what was indicated at the February meeting.As M1 began being much stronger, we interpreted "around the midpoint"as being 6-1/2 percent instead of being specifically 6 percent. Butwe would assume that it's somewhere around that midpoint at the momentunless the Committee were to say that it was expecting growth to bearound 8 percent, in which case we'd change our assumption.MR. WALLICH. So, in that sense, 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent isthe same as 4 to 7 percent?MR. AXILROD. Yes, in terms of the midpoint. But whetherit's going to have the same effect on the markets and the policy oractual operations followed by the Committee is yet another question.At 4 to 7 percent, if M1 is running at 6-1/2 to 7 percent, I can't sayin advance whether the Committee is going to feel that more work isneeded to restrain it than if the range were 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent.That is the issue, it seems to me.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's going to try and get you, Henry;it's like Jello!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It means what the Committee says. Arethere any other technical questions?MR. BALLES. This is a technical observation, I guess, Mr.Chairman. If I remember your most recent testimony correctly, you atleast--and perhaps the Committee--are on record as saying that M1 isstill on probation. I would think that before this meeting is over weought to get that question settled as to whether it is or isn't. Interms of public understanding at least, the record should show whether-21-7/16-17/84we're still placing primary emphasis on M2 and M3 or whether, in fact,we're going to restore M1 to its prior position.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We ought to put them all on probation!MR. BOEHNE. Yes, put them all on probation.MR. PARTEE. Certainly, M3 ought to be on probation.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Perhaps put credit on probation.MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] false signal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions or clarifications orwhatever? I wonder if we can just do one other thing: get apreliminary view just on the 1984 ranges. Maybe it will be easy; ifnot, we won't carry it through to a conclusion. Why don't we presentit with a relatively simple option here, which is a largely cosmeticingredient. It may be more cosmetic than substantive, but I'll findthat out. Mr. Axilrod is not suggesting any change in M1 or M2. Isthat going to meet with general approval?SEVERAL. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then the analysis says--whether it's rightor not is another issue--that for M3 and debt we in all likelihood aregoing to end up above the present ranges. Is that a good reason forraising them or should we keep them the same?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Keep them.MR. BLACK. No, keep them and explain.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree we should keep them the same.It seems to me that the fact that they are running over is not a goodreason for changing the ranges unless we're prepared to say that we'regoing to tighten policy or ease policy as a result of changing. Inother words, it's got to imply a policy change that would bemeaningful rather than a statistical adjustment just to come in withinthe range.MR. WALLICH. It's a question of whether it's a forecast or atarget. I think of it as a target.MR. MARTIN. If it's a target, then that would argue forchanging the range.MR. BOEHNE. I think I would argue for raising it.MR. WALLICH. If it's a forecast, I would say we made a badforecast, but--MR. RICE. Well, the target is the forecast.MR. PARTEE. A target is the desired number.-22-7/16-17/84MR. MORRIS. The problem with raising the upper limit fordebt is that we would be saying implicitly that we think a 12 percentrate of growth for debt is acceptable.MR. MARTIN. Given the acquisitions, mergers, and leveragedbuyout situation, I would argue that it is acceptable.MR. BOEHNE. So would I.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would leave the Ml,M2, and M3 ranges the same, but I would argue for increasing the debtrange at this time to 9 to 12 percent. It's not so much to make theargument for 1984, but I'd like to move on to 1983 and be able toreduce that in 1983 back to 8 to 11 percent.MR. BLACK. You mean 1985.MR. GUFFEY. Pardon me, I mean 1985. I'd like to increase itin the last half of 1984 to 9 to 12 percent with the anticipation ofshowing a reduction for 1985 back to an 8 to 11 percent range. It'smore consistent. It is only a monitoring aggregate at the moment, andwe have had very little experience in this Committee with using thedebt aggregate. It seems quite logical to me that the Chairman canpresent the picture that with the merger situation there areuncertainties as to what the debt aggregate really means. Becausewe're still monitoring it, one could make the case for increasing itnow and dropping it in 1985--carrying through the idea of continuingto move down on all of the aggregates for 1985.MR. PARTEE. Roger, wouldn't we have to raise M3 too?MR. GUFFEY. No, I think not.MR. PARTEE. Because that's how they finance the creditnumbers.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, I understand that. But I would prefer,simply because we've had more experience with M3 and consistently havebeen over that targeted range in past years, to leave it as it is.Because if we raise both of them, it seems to suggest to me that wehave indeed turned the reins loose a bit and I would not want to givethat view.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's funny, but I come to theopposite conclusion. It seems to me that if we raise the target forcredit, we are implying to the markets that we're going to be somewhateasier in our policy than if we don't raise the target. It seems tome that there has to be a policy implication to making a midyearadjustment. You don't read it that way, I guess.MR. GUFFEY. Tony, I would just rebut that by saying it's amonitoring range now that we've had very little experience with. Weelevated M1 at the last meeting to a higher position, equal to M2 andM3. And we have not elevated the debt aggregate to that position. Asa result, if we're still experimenting with it, let's experiment withit by raising it to be somewhat more consistent, with the thought of-23-7/16-17/84dropping it in the '85 presentment that the Chairman will make at thesame time he talks about '84.MR. CORRIGAN. I'd go one step further even than Tony. I'dbe troubled by raising that credit range, particularly on the groundsof raising it because of mergers and leveraged buyouts. It seems tome that that's tantamount to sanctioning a pattern of financialbehavior that is going to get us in trouble sooner or later. If we'regoing to raise it, raise it. But I would not say that we're going toraise it because we have all these damned leveraged buyouts. Thatseems to me to be just bad policy.MR. GUFFEY. It's simply a recognition of what has happenedover the first 6 months.MR. PARTEE. I agree with Jerry on this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we may not want to debate this atthis time of night. My own inclination is to keep them the same andsay that we expect that we're going to come out above these ranges butwe're not too happy about it and that's why we're not changing them.MR. ROBERTS. We monitor it and see if it leads us tosomething we can do or control as against something we look at.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We think they're higher than they shouldbe for the long run.MR. MORRIS. That says it's desirable in this year to havesomething that's running above the range, it seems to me.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what it means if we raise it.If we raise it a little, we're probably saying we better darn well getwithin it. I don't know how people will interpret that.MR. BOEHNE. A lot depends on the context and what we do fornext year. It seems perfectly reasonable to me to say that we aren'tgoing to tighten policy because of a lot of churning of funds relatingto mergers. I would think we'd gain some credibility with that. Italso would indicate that once these things are fixed they aren't fixedin cement and that we do adjust them to unfolding circumstances. Ifwe then lowered the ranges for next year, that would minimize the riskof concerns that we're throwing away the discipline. To adjust wouldshow more realism. Now, one can get at it the way you suggested, bysaying: "Here they are, but we're going to go over them." It seems tome it's two ways to skin the same cat.MR. PARTEE. Well, if I understand it, we're over them evenwithout the leveraged buyouts, but not so much. And it seems to methat we might just say we are running over and to a considerableextent it is due to the leveraged buyouts and the mergers and soforth. We expect this damn fool nonsense to stop and, therefore, wehaven't raised the ranges.-24-7/16-17/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Particularly since Frank Morris hasassured us that this is the one target that we did come in within therange up until the time we monitored--MR. MORRIS. It still is. It's the only aggregate thatpredicted a 12 percent rate of growth in nominal GNP in the firsthalf. Certainly, M1 didn't and M2 didn't.MR. GRAMLEY. May I talk a bit about what I think this creditvariable is supposed to be?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Predicted or accompanied?SPEAKER(?). Yes, what is this?MR. MORRIS. In other words, if you were to have predicted anominal GNP of 12 percent, you wouldn't be surprised to see a 13percent rate of growth in total debt. That would be fairly in linewith past experience.MR. GRAMLEY. I would have thought the way we were supposedto use a variable like this--a monitoring variable that we're nottargeting on--is as a variable that gives us some information aboutthe adequacy of the monetary targets we set in the first place. M3very much falls into that same category also. If we set ranges, say,of 4 to 8 percent for M1 and 6 to 9 for M2, and we think we're doingpretty well in those and get these gigantic increases in M3 and incredit, what we really ought to do is to lower our targets for M1 andM2. That's the logical thing to do. To go to the conclusion thatwhat we should do is increase the target for the credit variablebecause we didn't anticipate it right is totally the wrong thing todo. If we're not gutsy enough to follow the logic to its conclusion,which is to pull the growth rates of M1 and M2 down--and I'm not goingto suggest that we do that--at least let's hold to the targets for M3and debt.MR. BOEHNE. It's getting time for cocktails, I think!MR. MORRIS. But it does tell us that the monetary policy inthe first half of '84 has been much more expansionary than M1 or M2would indicate.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, we provided a lot more credit than weshould have.MR. BOEHNE. Even though there are some distorting financialfactors out there in merger actions?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, but if you take out the 1 percent or sofor mergers, we still end up well above the upper limit of the rangefor the first two quarters.MR. MARTIN. But the 1 percent is a very feeble measure ofthe volume of leveraged buyouts, mergers, and acquisitions. It onlymeasures the very biggest ones. And this phenomenon is happeningthroughout the industrial complex and the services [industry].MR. PARTEE. That's not how I understand it.-25-7/16-17/84 -26-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand the way they measure it,that is not the way they get the number. They say they get the numberby the amount the stock was reduced. [Unintelligible] statistic.MR. MARTIN. It's not enough.MR. PRELL. Well, we tried to calculate every merger and makeallowance for those that we can't itemize. So we really do think itis our best guess of the total. It could be short; that's clearbecause there's so much that is below the surface.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I won't pursue it any further.Let's dispose of this first thing in the morning.[Meeting recessed]7/16-17/84July 17--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I had a little research done overnight ona couple of factual points that arose yesterday. Let me just reportthe results of my research. Nonperforming loans of the big banks havebeen going up rather regularly--through March, anyway. They were 3.8percent compared to 3.5 percent at the end of last year. From veryincomplete reports that we have so far, my impression is that theyhave taken another jump in the second quarter. Mr. Boehne raised thequestion of impressions about wages--and I think we all have beensurprised at the low level of the figures--and whether the figures areright. We went back and looked at wage settlements that have beenreported so far this year and it's a rather interesting story. Let meread the list, which begins in January and goes more or less to date:Commercial builders in New York City in January--a big settlement,no cola, but 6-3/4 percent;Teamsters/Motor Express--minus 15 percent;Oil refineries, the first big settlement of the year--l-1/2percent, no cola;Highway contractors in Pennsylvania--0 to 2-1/4 percent;Container industries, 17,000 production workers at the four largestcompanies--0;Fieldcrest Mills clothing--5.5 percent, no cola;Honeywell office machines--0, no cola;Minneapolis hospitals -- 4 percent, no cola;United Airlines flight attendants--6 percent increase over threeyears and they get it right away;Dow Jones & Co.--not, I think, terribly affected by businessconditions--7-1/2 percent, a big one;Los Angeles hospitals--5 percent;Western Coal Mines, United Mine Workers, 10,000 people--2 percent,no cola;Hawaii hotels--4 percent, no cola;Southern California Gas--6 percent, no cola;Frontier Airlines--minus 11 percent;New Jersey building contractors, unlike New York--3 percent, nocola;Northwest Airlines flight attendants--6 percent, lower for newhires;Public Service Elec. & Gas, New Jersey--5-1/4 percent, but withlower pay for new hires;McDonnell Douglas Aircraft, 9,600 workers--0;Chain Food Stores, New York & New Jersey--5 percent, lower pay fornew hires;Pipeline contracts nationwide agreement in June, 45,000 workers--0;Houston Power Co., a utility--3 percent, no cola in the first year;Cargo and Tanker operators, National Maritime Union, 20,000workers--0, no cola;Chicago area contractors, 45,000 workers--0 to 2 percent, no cola;Niagara Power Corp., 8000 utility workers--5-1/4 percent, no cola;United Airlines, mechanics and ground crews--4-1/2 percent, lowerpay for new hires, no cola.What is BNA? I don't know.MR. KICHLINE. Bureau of National Affairs.-27-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A private outfit. I guess they updatethis and do some summary of wage agreements. For all industries themedian first-year wage increase negotiated to date in 1984 is 2.8percent, compared to 5 percent last year. From the report of thecomparability survey of the government, average salaries among whitecollar workers increased between 3 and 6 percent over the year endingin March 1984, the lowest rate of increase in more than 10 years.That is the government's pay comparability survey. So, I think thereis some comfort that what we see reported in average weekly earningsis not off the wall. We have some big agreements coming along and Ionly have the vaguest impression of them. The Post Office [workers]are in negotiation now and I understand there's some prospect of verylittle or no increase. As for mine workers, I don't know but Isuspect they're far apart. There is another big one apart from theauto workers coming along. What am I forgetting about here, Jim?MR. CORRIGAN. Coal miners.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Coal miners I just mentioned.MR. MARTIN. Construction union?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The automobile one is coming, and we knowthat's a big, dangerous one. I thought there was one other. Thepostal workers are very big as are the mine workers and [thosenegotiations] going on right now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You'd expect very little, if any,wage increase in the depressed industries. What explains the erraticpattern that in some nondepressed industries the increases are stillextremely low, whereas in others--?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's very clear that we're gettinglow settlements in some of the deregulated industries. There are twoindustries in particular: the airlines, which came up here again andagain; and the construction workers, for which these aggregate figuresshow practically no increase in wages. The explanation I hear aboutthat, despite very large increases in construction activity shown inthese charts, is the threat of non-unionized workers.MR. MARTIN. Not only the threat, but the utilization bydevelopers of non-union workers.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, in New York, they got [6-3/4]percent.MR. GUFFEY. Did I understand that most of these are one-yearcontracts?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, no. I think a lot of them are two-year contracts and this gives the first year. There was a variety,but I think these numbers were for the first year.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There seems to be a qualitativedifference in the psychology in the country in that for the secondyear of a recovery people are being much more careful about wageincreases. One can either attribute that to the greater intensity ofthe recession than some earlier recessions or to some feeling that-28-7/16-17/84they can't pass on these wages as easily in price increases. I don'tknow if there is any other explanation.MR. MARTIN. Or the competition that you mentioned yesterday.MR. RICE. Strike behavior has been very favorable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me raise another question while Ithink of it and we can return to it. These price estimates thateverybody has given bother me a bit, partly because I'm not sure weshould be in the public posture of saying our monetary policy isineffective in keeping prices under control. It became very clearyesterday that you have a variety of assumptions about the dollar andI have no doubt that over a period of time--I don't know about nextyear--that can be a big influence, [particularly] if the dollar reallyfell out of bed. I wonder whether it would make some sense to have astandardized assumption on the dollar and do all these projections onthe assumption that the dollar isn't going to be changedsubstantially, which would encompass a depreciation of 5 percent plusmaybe, but not, I think, 15 to 20 percent. We could present the priceforecast that way and say quite clearly in the material that theseprice forecasts are made on a standardized assumption that the dollaris not going to change very substantially and that if the dollar doesdecline substantially, everyone would be raising his inflationforecast appreciably. That would get us out of this business ofevaluating different assumptions about the dollar, where I take itthere is a good deal of uncertainty about the timing of any declineanyway, although there is a good deal of feeling that the dollar mightdecline, as I well understand.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But there is still a difference. Wedid that, as I mentioned, and we still came up--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're still going to have somedifferences; having differences doesn't particularly bother me. Ithink a certain dispersion of the estimates may even be helpful. Iunderstand the overall level if one is assuming declines in thedollar. But I think that is a separable and an unknown factor.MR. WALLICH. It concerns me that this injects a degree ofoptimism, not to say euphoria, into the approach that could misleadanyone who forgets the assumption. One really then always has to makeanother 1/2 or 1 percent adjustment to one's inflation expectation inorder to be reasonably realistic.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you assume the dollar is going down.MR. WALLICH. Well, if it isn't, then one can say onedeserves the dividend and bonus and perhaps one has missed a littlebit of growth as a result of that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We missed by about 1 percent this year, itlooks like.MR. MARTIN. A million jobs. The coal miners. Nothingsignificant!MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible.]-29-7/16-17/84MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we had a little trouble with the[draft] wording of the continuation of the credit and policy stance,or whatever it was. I can't find it right now. But after we havevoted on our long-run target ranges, I think this might bring us alittle closer together.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You all ought to have a chance to redoyour forecast and I was planning that in the ordinary course ofevents. You may make any re-evaluation you want after the meeting andafter any decisions we make. I'm raising the additional questions:Do we want to standardize the assumption on the dollar and, if we wantto standardize that, how do we do it? I find it a little difficult tostandardize it if [our report] says the Open Market Committee isunanimously expecting a big decline in the dollar. I just don't thinkthat--MR. GRAMLEY. Another aspect we have to think about is thatif we have a standardized, very small decline in the dollar, that isgoing to touch not only the price forecast but also the real growthforecast. And it begins to look perhaps a bit artificial.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know how much it wouldaffect people's growth forecasts during this particular time period.I guess nobody is assuming any budgetary action next year. I'm notsure that's a good assumption.MS. HORN. We were.MR. PARTEE. Not enough to affect my numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't exclude the possibility. Idon't see any way out of the box. I wouldn't bet a lot on it, butthere is a chance of their going after the budget after the election.I would not like to presume that that's impossible.MR. MARTIN. It may be politically very attractive to goafter the budget after the election.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And come up with a mini-result.MR. MARTIN. It's the going after it; it's the form, not thesubstance.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They'll go after it, no question.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I mean an official program.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Treasury is considering varioustax proposals.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that is going to materializein anything in 1985.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. With that same assumption we came upwith a 2.9 percent real growth forecast for '85. That's not toodifferent from the staff's, with their 15 percent [dollar] decline. Idon't know why we come out so closely to the staff on both inflation-30-7/16-17/84and real growth when we don't have that dollar decline that they have.I haven't analyzed it. Dick [Davis], do you know the reason?MR. DAVIS. We are essentially [unintelligible] net exports.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Stronger somewhere else--MR. PARTEE. That's consistent with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can substantially overdo ourability to make any of these forecasts.MR. MARTIN. That would be the reason I would support yoursuggestion of a standardized assumption, whatever the percentage is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me return to that question later on.MR. WALLICH. Let me mention something. This technique of nochange in the exchange rates is one that the OECD has adopted [andfollowed] for many years as a result of a resolution. It is beingquestioned increasingly because it leads to conflicts with respect toprojections made by the countries themselves, which contain all kindsof assumptions about their exchange rates. The same is true withrespect to monetary policy. They are not allowed to make anassumption that their monetary policy--that is, budget policy--wouldbe changed, whereas the countries that put in their projections havemade whatever assumption they want to.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how I would interpret that.MR. WALLICH. Well, I think we are moving in the directionthat the OECD now is considering abandoning.MR. MARTIN. But why did the OECD take the position in thefirst place, Henry, unless there had been some good and compellingreasons to get them to square one?MR. WALLICH. It made countries angry to have their policiespreempted, so to speak, by suggestion of the OECD Secretariat. Itlooked like implicit policy advice. So to do it that way was theneutral and simple thing to do. I'm not sure what the IMF does.MR. TRUMAN. They do the same thing, Henry. Of course, theAdministration also does it, but for reasons on the political [side].They do it for reasons of sensitivity--the same reason the Chairmancited, if I may put it that way.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Doesn't it get a little embarrassing,Paul, if you're asked by the [Congressional] Committee about thereasons for the wide spectrum [of views] among the members of theFOMC? If you said that some of them assumed a 15 percent [dollar]decline and some of them didn't assume that, is that going to look alittle strange up there?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it doesn't make me too happy. I'mnot sure I've thought this all through, but I think I would rather saythat it's based upon an assumption that may or may not be right thatthe dollar is unchanged or that if it does change, as everybody thinks-31-7/16-17/84[is likely], there is a substantial danger that one would have to add1 percent or so to these figures.MR. WALLICH. After all, what is the mental process by whichwe ourselves arrive at these numbers? I would say there is a fairchance that the dollar will decline. I don't know by how much and Idon't know how great the probability is. I pushed my numbers a littlein the direction that reflects this possibility. It's all a matter ofprobabilities and of having some ranges in mind, but I don't have afixed assumption that the dollar will or will not depreciate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My main conclusion is that not too muchweight should be put on these economic forecasts, but people look atthem; they didn't look at them all that much in the past. I think thestaff had an assumption of a big decline in the dollar a year ago; infact, that may help explain why the inflation picture is better. Itdoesn't explain why the economy is doing a lot better than the staffprojected a year ago.MR. TRUMAN. I was just doing some calculations this morning,Mr. Chairman, which indicate that the dollar in June was only 8percent above its peak.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 8 percent above?MR. TRUMAN. It's 8 percent above where it was in November of1982, which in the way these things go I'm not sure is much of anappreciation anyhow. It happens that November '82 was the peak; itwas the trough of the recession. Recently it hit another peak but thepeaks have not been that far apart. It has been more level, I think,over the period despite [unintelligible], in part buoyed by the risein interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way the dollar bounces up and down, Ithink a decrease of 10 percent may be insignificant!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One sees these things in hindsight.If we had waited 10 years, we wouldn't have had to float the dollar.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me return to picking out thesetargets. On 1984, I'll make another attempt to see whether we candispose of it relatively quickly. When I said no change yesterday, Ithought I noted some oral acclamation. I may have been wrong aboutthat because people began saying they disagreed. But let me just trysomething out to see whether we can [agree] without spending a lot oftime on this. Suppose we keep them the same with a very clear caveatthat we're keeping M3 and debt the same and expect to come in over theranges for them but are not too happy about that. Is that the bestway to present these? The alternative, obviously, is to increase theM3 and debt ranges. Among Committee members, is that the desirablecourse?MR. WALLICH. I would like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Apparently a couple of people think that'snot the desirable course.-32-7/16-17/84MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, it is just a matter of emphasis.It would seem to me that in the presentation we shouldn't couple theimportance of M3 and debt. We are learning something about whatinformation the debt numbers will give us. My only footnote to thatto join the raised hands would be that we differentiate between thetwo aggregates. M3 is more important.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The debt range is awfully high. It seemsto me inconsistent with any--. Mr. Prell gave me a figure after themeeting yesterday, but I don't know whether it made me feel better ornot. If I understood it correctly, the trouble here is knowing whatthe base is. If you took net issuance of debt and equity this yearand used as a base debt outstanding plus the market value of equity,which is a big question, the rate of growth would be about 9 percent.MR. BOEHNE. Well, my preference would be to do thealternative, but I can accept the approach that you suggest.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anybody else who feels that way?My problem with the alternative--and I think we could do it eitherway--is that if we raise them we really have to say we're going to tryto meet them. And then there's the question of how far to raise them.I think the worst of all worlds is raising them and then saying we'regoing to go over them anyway.MR. MARTIN. And we are so uncertain about the merger/acquisition/LBO component of debt that I don't see how we could--MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think that is a good argument. It maybe best to say "Here they are" and then say "Hell, we don't know."MR. BLACK. Leave out the interjection in the testimony!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's tentatively assume that's what we'regoing to do then, and return to the '85 targets.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If you put a lot of emphasis on themergers and the LBOs, you're going to be asked to send out a letterasking the bankers not to finance that activity.MR. MARTIN. We already sent out a caution on the LBOs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may not be the worst thing in the worldto send one out. For 1985 the proposals here, which we don't have tolimit ourselves to, range from no change to partial change to reducingthem by roughly a half point. I will entertain any comments.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The whole thing boils down, ofcourse, to the forecast on the velocity of circulation. I gather fromthis that Steve is projecting that in a year in which we don't havesubstantial price increases, the long-term average [growth rate ofthe] velocity of circulation for M1 is 2. Is that correct? And youare not talking about seeing relatively modest interest rate increasesnext year; you're talking about substantial--.MR. AXILROD. In the projection we have very modest interestrate increases.-33-7/16-17/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If he's really right that the long-term average [growth rate] is 2--and I don't have a view on that, Ijust assume that he's correct--then it seems to me that we probablyshould confine the M1 growth rate to 4 to 7 percent or else we mightpump in too much money. On the other hand, my instinct is maybe to godown only a half point in this midyear preliminary proposal in orderto preserve room in February of next year to go down all the way to 4to 7 if that still looks [appropriate]. That's because it would bemuch harder to move up a half point if we go to 4 to 7 percent now;then it's going to look bad to retreat by that half point. So, eventhough I think there is an intellectual case at the moment for 4 to 7percent, tactically I think we would be better off moving cautiouslynow and if the situation is still the same in February of next year,going all the way to 4 to 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just observe, along the lines ofyour concerns about velocity, that something like 4 to 7 percent orwhatever number you pick looks pretty good compared to the staff'snominal GNP forecast. Yesterday [we noted that] the staff's nominalGNP is below everybody else's except for one; quite a few of thenominal GNP forecasts are around 9 percent and some are as high asalmost 11 percent, which raises the greater question of consistency.MR. PARTEE. Well, the question is whether we want to have 11percent.MR. GRAMLEY. Not only that but if you had a stronger GNPforecast and more price inflation, then you probably would be talkingabout increases in nominal interest rates, in which case you're nolonger confined to the projection of velocity that assumes thatinterest rates are unchanged.MR. PARTEE. It seems to me that we ought to be thinking ofnominal GNP of 8 percent as about right next year. And we ought tohave money numbers more consistent with GNP around 8 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, 8 to 8-1/2 percent.MR. PARTEE. Yes. Let's say 3 percent real and 5 percent onprices or 3-1/2 percent real and 4-1/2 percent prices.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's fine with me. I just hopethe forecast--MR. PARTEE. I hope we are right. That's an indicator ofpossible difficulty if the forecast is higher than that because itmeans higher rates and all that.MR. MARTIN. It means we would adjust the ranges.MR. PARTEE. Or let [interest] rates go up because we don'twant that much GNP.MR. MARTIN. Or don't want that much inflation.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But your point, Chuck, then alsotends to work in the direction of concluding that a 4 to 7 percentrange makes sense.7/16-17/84MR. PARTEE. I think I would agree with that. But I alsoagree with the other thing you said. I don't know if it's possible topreserve any freedom, but if we can preserve any freedom, we ought totry to do it for early next year.MR. MARTIN. With velocity growth moving from 2-1/2 to 4-1/2to a presumed 2 or [a little less than] 2, we better leave some degreeof freedom, by going to 7-1/2 percent rather than 7 percent for a top.MR. WALLICH. Well, historically, I think we have made thesemoves at midyear. That is, we have changed the ranges at midyear andthen confirmed them in February. I could visualize the marketwatching us and saying "Well, they've decided not to continue [to movethe ranges] downward." I think this could send a wrong message.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, no. We still would be movingthem downward; I'm talking about at least 1/2 point.MR. WALLICH. Oh, you do want to go down?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, yes.MR. PARTEE. Instead of saying alternative II at this point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would move down a half point nowand then if the substantive case is still solid in February I'd move[down] another 1/2 point. After last year we made some significantrevisions between the preliminary targets adopted in July and thoseadopted later, in February. It would be a little embarrassing,though, to move a full point now and then, if we felt we had toretreat, move up 1/2 point. That's why I'm suggesting this othersequence. You're shaking your head skeptically.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm just trying to imagine thecircumstances. I don't think it's so hard moving [the ranges] up ifthe economy isn't doing well. It depends on all the circumstances.If inflation is doing well and we get no increase in velocity, wewould say we're getting no increase in velocity and move up. That's avery favorable circumstance.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Suppose inflation isn't doing wellbut you can't be as tight in your monetary policy for internationalreasons or whatever. Then that's not so good.MR. GRAMLEY. Then you leave the targets where they are and[let growth] run over them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's the alternative--runningover a little.MR. GRAMLEY. I think we mainly have to ask ourselves whatsort of message we want to convey now with the targets for 1985. Inthis connection, we ought to be thinking about what we're going to dowith the others before we decide what we're going to do with M1. Myguess would be that one would have a pretty hard time arguing for areduction in the target ranges for any of the other aggregates. M3and credit probably are going to end up way over the upper end of therange [this year]. If we can get back down into the range for 1985,-35-7/16-17/84we will be doing well. For M2, there's a case [to be made] that itscurrent behavior will persist, but the current behavior is reallyvery, very odd relative to historical trends. Normally speaking, wedon't expect to see much velocity increase for M2 over time. So, Iwould argue that we'd be better off now to play it safe and leave theranges for M2, M3 and domestic nonfinancial debt where they are. Thenthat would argue, if we want to do something that conveys a message,for dropping off a percentage point from the top of the M1 range andbeing ready to go back up if the circumstances strongly recommend thatin February.MR. MARTIN. I think the limitations on that kind of policywould be the emphasis we would then be putting on M1. If we singlethat aggregate out and reduce that one, that's the signal to watch M1for a signal of our policy.MR. GRAMLEY. We could color that by noting that we've beenlooking at a range for M1 that was 1 percentage point wider than thosefor the other aggregates and now that the velocity of M1 is beginningto behave along a more normal cyclical pattern we changed the width ofthe range to 3 percentage points.MR. MARTIN. Is it beginning to behave or are we assumingthat it may behave in a more normal cyclical pattern?MR. PARTEE. It's been all right for a couple of quarters.MR. MARTIN. Oh, a couple of quarters!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there's as solid anintellectual argument for 5 to 8 percent for M2 as there is for 4 to 7percent for M1. Why would the assumption of roughly, let's say, 0 to1 percent velocity of circulation for M2, be any different than a 2percent assumption for velocity of circulation for M1? I don't thinkthat's any shakier. We've been running about 1 percent, haven't we,for velocity of circulation for M2?MR. AXILROD. It's a little higher than that recently, butit's very erratic.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What's surprising about M2 is how lowit has been running.MR. GRAMLEY. What would the secular trend be on M2?MR. AXILROD. Well, we keep saying it's zero, but I wouldtake that with a grain of salt.MR. MORRIS. It depends on the model one is predicting from.MR. WALLICH. But wouldn't you say that M3 at any rate has alower velocity than M2?MR. AXILROD. If my memory's right, historically, the growthof M3 runs a little higher than that of M2 so its velocity growthwould run a little lower, and that has been our very recentexperience. It might be worth giving our point estimates for 1985,Mr. Chairman: On an assumption of M1 growth on the order of 5-1/2 to-36-7/16-17/846 percent, we would have M2 growth around 7 to 7-1/2 percent, M3growth on the order of 8 percent, and debt [growth] declining toaround 10 percent for 1985.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's based on your economic forecast?MR. AXILROD. On 8 percent nominal GNP growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you say for Ml?MR. AXILROD. We've assumed 5-3/4 percent as a pointestimate; 5-1/2 to 6 percent seems to me the area--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's with only an 8 percent nominalGNP, which I remind you is lower than everybody's forecast except thestaff's.MR. CORRIGAN. Personally, an 8 percent nominal GNP as agoal--as distinct from a forecast--is very appealing to me because Ithink the optimum that one could reasonably think about for 1985 issomething like 4 percent [real] and 4 percent [on prices]. In mymind, to the extent that nominal GNP grows faster than that, it wouldincrease the likelihood that more of it would be prices and less of itwould be real. So, primarily for that reason, if I think about '85from a policy viewpoint and what we should be shooting for, I come outwith around 8 percent nominal. In terms of the targets I am more thana little attracted to Tony's thought, but my initial thought had been4 to 7 percent for M1. But as I said, Tony's point has some merit.Personally, I would go with 4 to 7 percent, 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent,leave M3 where it is, and use 8 to 10-1/2 percent on credit. Thebottom of the credit range doesn't matter at all, but I do think thatshaving a half point off the top of that has some value. As I've saidbefore, I am really troubled by this explosion of credit that we areseeing. That consumer credit number yesterday is another indicationof this. Gosh--a 30 percent annual rate of increase in consumercredit! That's where I would be.MR. MARTIN. Jerry, you mentioned around 8 percent on nominalGNP for 1985; I'd be more in the 8-1/2 percent area or,optimistically, even 9 percent. I think we'll do better on thedeflator again as we've done better on the deflator repeatedly in veryrecent history. I demur from the staff's productivity projections, asyou know. And on that basis, I would leave the ranges for theaggregates where they are for now, as under alternative Roman numeralI. Then I'd be hopeful that in the review of 1985 a few months fromnow, we could either take the top of M1 down to 7 percent or, moreimportantly, take the top on M2 down to 8-1/2 or even 8 percent, as wesee what happens to velocity. The velocity variability has been sosubstantial that I'd hate to have the Chairman saddled with thoseassumptions in his testimony.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask a basic question. I don'tunderstand Jerry's remark. If you're presenting the range of views ofthe FOMC and all of us are above the 8 percent that the staff has, areyou going to come up with an 8 percent figure and ignore the FOMCmembers? Is it the staff who make that assumption? Don't you have toadjust to an 8-1/2 percent [assumption for GNP] or whatever it may be?-37-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose theoretically we can say thateverybody thinks it's going to be higher but, ideally, we want itlower. That's what we seem to be saying.MR. CORRIGAN(?). Tony, that's not what I--MR. GRAMLEY. The staff's views are of less value than theFOMC's! [Laughter.]MR. MORRIS. Those numbers are not very useful, if we agreeto standardize an assumption on the value of the dollar. Certainly,our number would be lower on that assumption by 1 percentage point.MR. PARTEE. Mine too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because the deflator would be lower.MR. MORRIS. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but there are some other thingsyou have to assume.MR. CORRIGAN. I think you've misunderstood what I wassaying. I was not suggesting anything like what you just said; I wasmaking a different point. A forecast is one thing. But part of theobjective of policy isn't to accept the forecast; part of theobjective of policy is to try to influence the way in which theeconomy behaves. I am simply saying that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have a bit of a problem, Ithink. At this stage that's right. But once you've set the policy,you should go back and look at the forecast, theoretically, I guess.MR. CORRIGAN. You start off with the policy too, but in thelatter context of trying to have policy influence the economy in themost constructive way--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, [but] 8-1/2 percent is still apretty ambitious target.MR. MORRIS. In regard to this year?MR. PARTEE. He means in terms of cutting [inflation].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I mean considering the priceinflation--keeping that [moderate]. After all, this is the third andlast year of a recovery! [Laughter.] In the two previous ones theinflation hit what--12 to 14 percent at the peak? If we can confineit to 5-1/2 percent, that's going to be quite a triumph, I think.MR. MARTIN. But my point is that the economy is going tofunction in such a way that it will be confined. It won't beexclusively [the result of] what we do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, we forecast an 8-1/2percent nominal GNP for 1985 and that includes some depreciation of-38-7/16-17/84the dollar. Now, that's a forecast. I also think that that would bea pretty good objective to try to reach as well. With that in mind,as I look at the specifications for the monetary aggregates, I'minclined to go with alternative II. I think that M1 range of 4 to 7-1/2 percent is about right. It gives us a bit of maneuverability atthe top end. I'd leave M3 and debt where they are. M2 gives me alittle trouble. I would like to show some downward movement in thataggregate. On the other hand, it has been growing at a fairly slowpace, as we all know. The Bluebook mentions the fact that we're goingto have some financial changes due to the [regulatory] decrease in theminimum level of various accounts and indicates that those changesprobably will have a minimal effect. On the other hand, even aminimal effect might have an impact of moving M1 in the direction ofmore rapid growth than we've had. What I'm saying is that there's notmuch maneuverability if M2 moves a little faster than it has. So forthat reason, I think one could make an argument to move the M2 rangeup to 6 to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I would feel most comfortable with alternativeII. I think it does send out the signal of continuing this longer-term goal of reducing inflation. It still gives us some flexibility,and I think it's consistent with our general ignorance about nextyear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also would opt foralternative II. I'm puzzled, however, why there is a narrowing of the[M2] range to 2-1/2 points as opposed to 3 points and, as a result, Iwould alter alternative II to 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent [for M2]. Wealso came out with 8-1/2 percent nominal for 1985 and alternative IImay or may not be consistent with that; but I am persuaded by Tony'sstrategy, if you will, to do 1/2 point now and if it looks as if inFebruary some other change could be made on the down side, then Iwould opt to do it then. It leaves us some flexibility for movementin February.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. To speak about M1 for a moment: When we revisedthe M1 targets because of the problems we were having with velocityand the NOW account assumptions and so forth, if my memory serves meright, we moved them up 1-1/2 percentage points on the bottom of therange and 2-1/2 percentage points on the upper end of the range. Now,with the threat of future inflation and the course of fiscal policybeing slow [to adjust] in the future and, of course, with ourincreasing confidence in velocity of M1, I'd like to see the M1 rangenarrowed first and lowered second. I would narrow it because of thereduced uncertainty. That brings me to something like alternativeIII. I suppose between the two options [for M1] in alternative III,the 4 to 7 percent is more appealing to me because I think the upperend of the range has been particularly meaningful to us in theCommittee as we've operated. But I'm a little uncomfortable even with4 to 7 percent because I, like some other people around the table,like the idea of 8 percent nominal GNP as a policy objective. And I'ma little uncomfortable with assuming 2 percent velocity [growth]. I-39-7/16-17/84think we might get velocity coming in a bit higher than that. So, asI say, the two things I'd like to see are a narrowing of the M1 rangeand a lowering of the M1 range. And 4 to 7 percent doesn't quite makeme comfortable at this stage.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Karen has pretty well made my talkexcept that I feel comfortable with a 4 to 7 percent range. I wouldgo with all the ranges under alternative III. But I'd just like toemphasize a bit more perhaps than she did that I think equallyimportant is our decision on the emphasis that we will put on Ml.With velocity picking up and the money market models tracking M1 muchbetter than usual, that suggests to me that M1 may be reassuming itsmore traditional relationship with GNP. So, I would like to makeanother quick pitch to restore M1 to at least its former full positionof equality. Of course, I'd like to push it a little more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. In my view, the options are between alternativesI and II. One could make a compelling argument for "I" on the theorythat, given the forecasting uncertainties that we talked aboutyesterday as well as the now compounding velocity considerations, wecould just simply leave the present ranges in place and suggest thatwhen the year is over and we're setting the targets more firmly inFebruary, we will take another look. But a bit more compelling is themessage that would be conveyed. Therefore, I would come down onoption II with the thought that it is a continuation of a program thatwe have been embarked on. I [support] Tony's argument that if, as weget into next February, the history is such that we could go down to 7percent, that would be appropriate too. So, I think it's a closebalance, but of the two I'd come down for option number II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. I agree with Tony that the intellectualargument is for 4 to 7 percent, with Lyle that the message is muchmore important than the tactics, and with Karen that narrowing is thecritical thing at this point. I think we need to have a strongmessage. We have a very strong momentum going here and I'd muchrather see us, if necessary, run over [the range] and say we'reworking toward something that we think is satisfactory in the longrun, which is what we're talking about here. So, I would prefer tosee us have a 4 to 7 percent band on M1 and that range should be verycomfortable whether velocity growth is 2 or 3 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. In deciding between alternatives II and III, I'minfluenced by our staff's forecast of velocity for the coming year.We expect it to continue to show a significant rise--certainly abovethe less than 2 percent that the Board's staff has forecast. Afterall, the first half of this year is up, with a 4-1/2 percent annualrate. We look at it on a quarter-by-quarter basis; we've had threesignificant rises in velocity and we expect that to go up further in1985. Who is right, of course, remains to be determined. But basedon that and based on our views of long standing here that we really7/16-17/84need to restore M1 to at least its former position--I agree with BobBlack on that--I would come down in favor of alternative III, usingthe 4 to 7 percent option.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't think we ought to reduce the lowerend of any of the ranges. Regardless of whether or not they have beenan issue, they would become an issue if there should be a flagging inthe economy and [monetary growth] should drop down toward them. Andit seems to me that at this stage of the recovery there's no reason weshould want to have very low rates of increase in any of theaggregates. So, that leads me to alternative II. Leaving M3 and debtas they are this year is certainly reasonable and appropriate when oneconsiders that growth is going to be over on both of them this year.So, I think that's right. I would cut the top on M2 to 8-1/2 percentas alternative II does. I'm sympathetic with Lyle's point. We don'treally know what has been going on there, but my view is that we oughtto show some progress and if, in fact, something has been odd aboutit, we'll just have to run over a bit. On M1, I'm sympathetic to theidea of narrowing the range and I would make it 4 to 7 percent--choosing from alternative III in that case--accepting not the midpointas our target but someplace within the range, and very possibly towardthe upper end of that 4 to 7 percent range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. Perhaps because I live in Si Keehn's District,I'm inclined to emphasize the uncertainties that we seem to face todayand the lack of our ability to hit bull's eyes with forecasts.Therefore, I think it makes sense to go either with alternative I orpossibly to pick up for M1 the 4 to 7-1/2 percent range, which wouldbe simply a signal of narrowing the range a bit. This would leave uswith the option in February to review the situation and at that pointtake off another half point from the upper end. It leaves us morelatitude to move.My basic reason for going this way is that I'm impressed bythe slowing that I see in the economy. Certainly, at least in theDetroit area, [economic activity] is way above where it was two yearsago and yet the rate of increase is definitely slowing. And I'm alsoimpressed by the chances for an auto strike this fall. No one knowsfor sure, certainly, but I think that definitely is a possibility; andif it does occur, chances are good that it would be [against] GM whichwould put a big dent in overall economic activity. So that's on mymind. Also, I think we have made some tremendous changes in theeconomy that are not showing up yet in the econometric models, etc.In terms of our basic inflationary problem, I think the capacityfigures are underestimating what the capacity is in this country;therefore, I believe the capacity utilization rates show us operatingmuch more closely to our ceilings than, in fact, is the case. Also,looking in a very microeconomic way industry-by-industry, it's hardfor me to find one that's in a boil or is really bumping against oreven close to its ceiling. So, that influences me.On the productivity question, I think there are changes goingon in the business community that are really dramatic: a greatcommitment in manufacturing to modernize, to adopt the latest-41-7/16-17/84technology, and to gut existing factories and put in more modern kindsof equipment. I think management today realizes that they either haveto do this or they are not going to survive very long; that commitmentis really there. Also, with the improved profits, they are able tofund some of these improvements, which is very important. It probablydoesn't show up in our productivity numbers right this minute, but Ithink it definitely will show up. In non-manufacturing industriesalso, I think management has a commitment to greater efficiency. Theprofits squeeze back in '81 and '82 and a little in '83 reallypunished them. There's a bottom line discipline in business thatmaybe people in government don't understand. And I think that also isgoing to show up more and more. Finally, in terms of wagesettlements, there are obviously the union settlements that theChairman referred to, but there are also a lot of nonunionized workersand a lot of small businesses that Mr. Boehne's personnel departmentdoesn't bother to include in its survey. And many of these employershaven't given any wage increases for the last couple of years; a lotof people were just darn happy to hold onto their jobs which, again,is a big change in attitude. And the fact that we have had goodinflation numbers in '82 and '83 and so far in '84 is convincingmanagement that they can be tougher. Furthermore, they are doing morediscriminating in the good sense of the word; that is, they're tryingto reward the producers and the high achievers very well and the "dud"types can get zero or something less than zero. So, all of this to mesuggests that the inflation outlook for next year is probably somewhatmore optimistic than I've been hearing around this table. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I'd say M1, 4 to 7 percent; M2, 5 to 8 percent;M3, 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent; and debt, 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent. Whenthe chips are down, I think it's the upper end of the range and notthe midpoint that really sticks in peoples' minds. Four to sevenpercent, therefore, means--if we're lucky on velocity--nine percent onthe nominal GNP, or it could be ten percent. And I think that's toohigh. That does not give us a chance for a soft landing. As betweenM2 and M3, I would like to introduce the old differentiation therebecause I sense that there is a difference; but I don't have a verystrong conviction. On debt, it troubles me very much to see thisrapid expansion. The consumer credit numbers are not the results ofany buyouts or mergers. So, I would be very reluctant to see thatraised simply to adjust to what may be a reality. We ought toindicate that this is a target rather than a projection.MR. CORRIGAN. It's kind of like a hippopotamus, Henry!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, being a bit of an outlier interms of the forecast, I don't think it is overly surprising thatalternative III has appeal to me. I'd take 4 to 7 percent for the M1range and M2, M3 and --CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because it's so inconsistent with yourforecast.MR. BOYKIN. I would take the [alternative III] M2, M3, anddebt ranges as presented in the Bluebook. I will concede that Tony's-42-7/16-17/84argument, in terms of the presentation and the flexibility it wouldgive us, has some appeal. If we were doing this in February, I wouldfeel much stronger in that view than I do right now. But I leantoward "III."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think it's much more logical forus to be setting targets for '85 in February than it is in July thepreceding year. In the past we have typically--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We tried that once.MR. MORRIS. Well, that is one reason that I like alternativeI--that is, no change in the guidelines for the moment. That's notwith any conviction that we wouldn't want to change them in Februarybut, obviously, we'll have a lot more information in February insetting these ranges than we do now. That seems to me a good argumentfor staying with the present guidelines, with the understanding thatwe might, and probably would, want to change them in February. Ithink that would be a better procedure than doing what we've done inthe past when we have changed the guidelines at midyear and then feltthat we were more or less stuck with those guidelines in February whenwe really ought to be doing our basic thinkingCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I really don't think that option is opento us. If you will recall, everybody was on the Committee when wetried precisely that one year and got sent back like bad boys to go doour work over again. We were told to come up with the guidelines forthe following year in July--that that was what the law required.MR. MORRIS. Well, I'm not saying that we don't present somenumbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you're coming pretty close to sayingthat.MR. BLACK. We also would be operating for at least a month,or more than a month, before we really decided what our targets forthat period were.MR. MORRIS. Well, that's true, but the kinds of changeswe're talking about here are not so dramatic that that is particularlyoperational.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have anything to say?Well, let me try this in reverse order. After listening to this, Icome out very close to where some other people came out, but without acomplete sense of conviction. On debt, we are all conscious thatwe're running way above and I don't hear any great sentiment to reducethat very much. You put down 8 to 11 percent; that bothers me a bit.No, let me start differently. From what I hear people saying, interms of policy--and this encompasses most people's, but noteverybody's, forecast--we are talking about a nominal GNP of 8 to 9percent. There aren't many at 8 percent--only the staff. There are alot between 8-1/2 and 9 percent and some above 9 percent, to be sure.But in terms of a policy objective I sense that that's about where weare. If that's where we are, a debt range of 8 to 11 percent, which-43-7/16-17/84is unchanged and allows for a larger growth in debt than GNP for thethird or fourth consecutive year, is not an entirely happycircumstance.MR. MORRIS. Well, the midpoint of that range would becompatible with an 8-1/2 percent growth in nominal GNP.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's 1 percent higher.MR. MORRIS. Yes, but I think one would expect that in athird year of expansion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I'm saying is that if I had anyquestion about it, just as a normative proposition, I'd make it 8 to10-1/2 percent or someplace in that neighborhood. For M3, 6 to 9percent seems to reflect a lot of the thinking, I guess on the basisthat the debt has been running high and it certainly allows us enoughroom on the down side. On M2, we get more questionable. If we'regiving weight to running high on the others, we might give a littleweight to running low on M2, and in the interest of showing somedecline go with a range of 6 to 8-1/2 percent. I don't know; it maybe psychological, but perhaps it doesn't look too bad. When we get toMl--. What has nominal GNP been in the first half of this year?MR. KICHLINE. 12 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On M1, I get a little concerned. It hasrun about 7-1/2 percent so far this year--within the range--with the12 percent nominal GNP. If we're aiming for an 8 to 9 percent nominalGNP, based upon recent experience it seems to me that the range oughtto be lower or we will give a rather peculiar signal. Then it's aquestion of how much to lower it. If you allow a 2 to 3 percentvelocity increase, 4 to 7 percent seems all right and gives the rightsignal. Then we get into this tactical question of whether to do ahalf point now and maybe do a half point later. Just sitting here, Idon't have any absolute final conviction about this. It has beenrunning 7-1/2 percent so far this year; announcing that we'resatisfied with 7-1/2 percent next year but are looking toward adecline in the nominal GNP on the order of 3 to 4 percentage pointsstrikes me as a bit peculiar. I'm assuming here that we don't puttremendous weight on the midpoint and that the most operative thingtends to be the upper limit. A number of people have said and a lotof people would interpret that as the same growth in the money supplynext year as this year with a hope or stated objective of havingsubstantially lower nominal GNP growth.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, except that we expect thevelocity of circulation to come down significantly from the 4-1/2percent it has been running over the first half of this year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would be true even if it were cut inhalf; the 7 percent would allow for that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there is an intellectualargument for 4 to 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I just put down here is the same as acouple of people have suggested: 8 to 11 percent; 6 to 9 percent; 6 to-44-7/16-17/848-1/2 percent; and 4 to 7 percent. And I think implicitly we weightthem all equally. There are a whole lot of caveats around all ofthem, as Mr. Axilrod suggested.MR. BOEHNE. The problem that I see with that is that if weuse 4 to 7 percent, I can conceive of a situation next February where7 percent might be too low. And it is difficult, I think, to raiseit; it's easier to drop it. I'm not sure we convey any more of amessage if we drop it by a whole point now and couch it in all these"iffy" terms. That's the main problem that I see with going all theway to 7 percent now. It does tend to foreclose on some of ourflexibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what could happen next February?None of us knows. Let's suppose we're running above that [range] nextFebruary for good and understandable reasons; that must mean thatwe're worried about something--interest rates or something in theeconomy. In that kind of scenario we would go [to Congress] and say,"Look, you haven't done anything about the budget. We can't hold itby monetary policy alone without running undue risks. We're going tohave to raise this target and that is all the more reason [you] oughtto be working on the budget deficit."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we raise the target, then they aregoing to feel less pressure to work on the budgetary deficit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we haven't made the decision. It'sat least debatable. I don't know whether they will or won't.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You have more faith than I do.MR. PARTEE. We would do that, I think, in a situation ofconsiderable upward pressure on interest rates and then say, "Well, wejust can't hold the money."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the circumstance in which wecouldn't hold the money is when we're having significant upwardpressures on interest rates.MR. MARTIN. A 7-1/2 percent top for M1 wouldn't be enough ofa signal?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's what we're debatinghere. I don't know whether it's enough or not, but it looks prettymealy-mouthed. It depends on how one interprets it. If oneinterprets it as the midpoint, it's okay. If one interprets it moreas the operative [number], what one really gets concerned about isbreaking through the top, which I think is more the reality in thissituation. And it looks like not much.MR. BOEHNE. But in the context of M1 running high in itsrange, it would signal more of a constraining message, I would think.MR. GRAMLEY. Not too bad an idea.MR. BOEHNE. I'm not saying it's a bad idea, but I'm sayingif you're looking at how it is going to be interpreted---45-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're using the present projection,which is for substantially slower growth in nominal GNP than we're nowgetting. The whole thing is based upon that assumption. It may bewrong. Who can tell all about it? But I think that is the assumptioneither as a forecast or as an objective that we're faced with.MR. GRAMLEY. I think one ought to put this in a somewhatlonger-run context also. That is, if the Federal Reserve is stillsetting as an objective a long-run return to price stability, we dohave to contemplate a gradual reduction in growth in all the monetaryaggregates over time. This is now the fifth year of this long-rangeprogram and we are talking about setting targets for the sixth year.And we begin to worry about an upper limit of 7 percent? That looks alittle bizarre to me in the context of where we're supposed to begoing. After all, if the long-run growth of velocity is 2 percent orthereabouts, with no rise in interest rates then we're going to haveto get M1 down somewhere in the neighborhood of 2 to 3 percentagepoints--given what we think is potential growth--to get back to pricestability.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. There may be no long-rangegrowth in velocity. I don't discard that hypothesis entirely in thepresent world, in which case this is going to be too low and we willjust have to say that. We don't have the evidence to make that caseright now.MR. RICE. Well, assuming that you are right and that Lyle isright, don't we get more psychological impact if we reduce the upperlimit twice--one-half point now and one-half point in February, ifthings still look promising--rather than going down one point now?MR. PARTEE. It might be pretty hard to make that secondhalf-point reduction.MR. RICE. Why?MR. PARTEE. Well, there would be a new Administrationsetting out on a new term and all that. I can see that there might besome political problems.MR. MARTIN. But the election would be over.MR. PARTEE. I know it would be over. And whichever partywins, there would be the new plans for the next four years.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me forget about M1 at themoment, just for the purpose of advancing the discussion. Do theother three look broadly acceptable or even narrowly acceptable?SEVERAL. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we just talking about Ml?MR. GUFFEY. I would like to raise a question again about M2.Why narrow the range of M2? What's the impact and what's the purposeof that?-46-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only, I guess, that nobody can envisionits growth being below 6 percent.MR. GUFFEY. Well, neither can one envision it being belowthe other ranges. It is a change that doesn't seem to net anything tome. Why do it?MR. GRAMLEY. It's a really gutty move.MR. GUFFEY. Really gutty, yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what would you do then--5-1/2to 8-1/2 percent?MR. GUFFEY. Sure. Keep the 3 percentage point range. Wehave narrowed the M1 range; however, we come out to a 3 point range.Why then would we take one additional step and narrow the M2 range?It makes no sense to me.MR. PARTEE. Well, it just seems to me, Roger, that wewouldn't want 5-1/2 percent growth in M2.MR. GUFFEY. Nor, I should think, would we want perhaps the 4percent of M1.MR. PARTEE. No, I can live with four percent, but I couldn'tlive with a lower M1.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think Roger has a point. Wewouldn't want M3 to come in at 6 percent. I don't know; I guess itdepends on what you place more importance. I assume people are notgoing to be looking at the bottom of the range in this recoveryperiod, although it might become important at the end of 1985. It'sthe scenario--MR. GUFFEY. As analysts look at it, they will detect thatthere is an area of the range that they won't have an explanation for.And we don't have an explanation for it, so why do it?MR. MORRIS. One thing we ought to keep in mind is that thestaff assumes that the reduction of the minimum on the Super NOWs andmoney market deposit accounts from $2,500 to $1,000 is going to haveno effect or a minimal effect. Now, if that assumption is wrong, thenwe might need a larger M1 than we're currently contemplating.MR. PARTEE. That's possible, Frank, but I think we wouldhave to say that at the time. We're not even going to know that onthe first of February or whenever it is we have to set the ranges;that [Super NOW change] takes effect, I believe, January 1. It mightbe that the way [the banks] would market this is to say that peoplecould give up the MMDA and put all the funds in a Super NOW and thebank will pay the [MMDA] interest rate. But we've got to see thathappen before [we change the range]. That's an institutional changeand, therefore, we would say that there has been an institutionalchange.MR. MORRIS. We have a little knowledge of what---47-7/16-17/84MR. BLACK. Well, to put a little meat on what I think was avery excellent statement by Lyle, we rebased last year and went to 5to 9 percent on M1 and we came out at about the midpoint. If we'relucky enough this year to come out somewhere near the midpoint of 6percent, that would be two years in a row that we are moving in thedirection we want. And if we come out somewhere near 5-1/2 percentnext year, that will add a lot to what I think is already a very highcredibility of our anti-inflationary stance. But I do think it isvital that we continue to move in that way because, as Lyle said, westill have a long way to go to get where I think we all ultimatelywant to be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm off M1 at the moment.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. You're talking about theother three. I think Roger has a point. I think it helps send amessage that we're going to be following a tough policy, and I don'tsee the reasoning for narrowing the spread. We certainly cannotanswer that we have slightly more certainty about hitting the M2 rangethan the others, which would be the only justification for narrowingthe spread.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's the justification. It maybe completely wrong, but M2 in fact has been behaving much more stablyfor quite a while than the other two have. It has been a nice, even--and it may be a total illusion but--.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought Steve was saying that thevelocity of circulation of M2 has been very erratic.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, historically it has been. It iserratic this year, but the [average] number has been quite steady.MR. AXILROD. I averaged it out for the past 22 years. Theaverage is close to zero. But there is hardly a number in any yearnear zero.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Velocity has been erratic because the[annual M2 growth] numbers have been so stable while the GNP [growthrate] has been changing.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What's your objection?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're not talking about a big dealhere; 5-1/2 percent just seems awful low to me.MR. MARTIN. Jim, the ranges the Chairman has tentativelysuggested would produce some upward pressures on interest ratesaccording to your analysis here. I've been trying to re-read this andI can't quite put it all together.MR. AXILROD. I was talking to President Balles. I didn'thear you.MR. MARTIN. I was asking Jim.MR. KICHLINE. In the forecast we have assumed M1 at around7-1/2 percent and for 1985 we have 5-1/2 to 6 percent for M1. We're-48-7/16-17/84talking about something close to the midpoints of these ranges, in anyevent. So, I don't see anything significantly different than in thestaff forecast.MR. MARTIN. There would be some upward pressure, you think?MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we had that in the forecast. That'sright.MR. MARTIN. And that would remain?MR. KICHLINE. Correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With these near the midpoint?MR. KICHLINE. Correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Were there any other comments on anythingbut M1? This question has been raised about M2. Let me narrow itdown to M2. Is there any feeling about 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent versus6 to 8-1/2 percent?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I could go either way on that one.MR. PARTEE. I have a slight preference for the 6 to 8-1/2.MR. MARTIN. I do also.MR. RICE. So do I.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me return to M1. I don't thinkthat I'm going to press this to an absolute vote right at the moment.We can come back and pull everything together in light of [ourdecision on] the short run. But I think we're between 4 and 7 percentand 4 and 7-1/2 percent. That seems to be the general range of[views].MR. PARTEE. Only Karen wanted a lower range.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, this is an observation about whatwe've done in the past. I've just been asking Steve what the recordshows. My recollection has been that whatever targets we set atmidyear, we very seldom--in fact, I thought never--changed them. Hehas come up with one exception, in recent years at least, and that wasin February of 1983 when we apparently did depart from what we'd setin mid-1982. I don't recall [why]. In any event, for whateverreason, I never quite understood why we didn't allow ourselves theflexibility that at least in theory we ought to have. But the recordshows that when we've adopted a set of targets in July, we apparentlyhave felt compelled for some reason to go along with those again inJanuary in almost every case.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think "in almost every case" is acorrect statement.MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of the M1 target, as I said before, Iwould prefer the 4 to 7 percent. That's what I keep coming back to inthinking about it. Again, I could probably live with something like-49-7/16-17/84Tony suggested. What really is at stake here is not just trying tohave a policy that will produce a result that will look something likethe staff forecast in 1985. It's beyond that. I don't think it'sinevitable that 1985 has to be the last year of the recovery. But myview is rather strongly that if it's not going to be the last year ofrecovery, it has to be a year in which we have the kind of moremoderate growth that we're all talking about. So, personally, I thinkpolicy should lean on the side of the result that not only enhancesthe possibility of growth and modest inflation in 1985, but being ableto sustain it beyond that. And I think the risks are very clearlythat the more we deviate from that on the up side, the more itincreases the likelihood that it will be the last year of therecovery.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're down to a very narrow issue.How many of the Committee members prefer the 4 to 7 percent? Six.Maybe some are indifferent. How many prefer the 4 to 7-1/2 percent?All right. Let's look at it in the light of our short-run decision.What do we have to do yet? We have to listen to Mr. Sternlight--[Mr.Meek, today]--and Mr. Cross first. Now is as good a time as any toget that in. Mr. Meek.MR. CROSS. Did you call on me?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, whoever goes first. I guess you gofirst.MR. CROSS. I usually go first.MR. ROBERTS. Stay in there, Sam!MR. BLACK. Fight for your rights, Sam!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to follow all theprecedents.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments?MR. BOEHNE. I have a question on this decoupling of foreigninterest rates from U.S. interest rates. Some foreign central bankerstake a great deal of pride in talking about that. Does anybody haveany sense as to whether that indeed has been successful and what theoutlook for its success is?MR. CROSS. Well, it's awfully hard to speak very generally.The conditions vary a great deal from country to country and situationto situation. Obviously, the Canadians found great difficulty inkeeping their interest rates very far away from reflecting the rise inours. The Germans have been seeking to avoid following the increasesin U.S. interest rates but, as I said here, it has resulted in quitelarge amounts of intervention in the exchange market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make a general comment on thesubject. More generally, as I read the situation, economicdevelopments abroad are quite unsatisfactory in terms even of earlierexpectations, which weren't all that buoyant. I don't want to-50-7/16-17/84overdramatize this, but they are just not moving with any speed andalacrity. I don't think there's any doubt that our interest rates arecomplicating things. The two most marked examples, I think, are theCanadians and the British. The British talk proudly about decoupling;they don't think they're decoupled today. They've had problemsdomestically that have aggravated this situation, but they are veryunhappy about having to see this very sharp increase in interest ratesthat they currently have when the economy is doing nothing and theyhave a 12 percent unemployment rate. In Canada, the unemployment rateis between 11 and 12 percent. It has sat there for a long time eventhough the economy is growing, mainly because of exports to the UnitedStates. On the continent of Europe and in Japan, the economies arenot exceeding our earlier expectations, which weren't all thatbuoyant. If anything, they're falling a bit below. Is that true, Mr.Truman?MR. TRUMAN. Yes. Slightly above, if I may correct you, onJapan, but below elsewhere.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is increasing concern there. Idon't want to overemphasize it but the concern is there. I think ourinterest rate picture is not helping things in that connection.Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I wanted to ask Sam: How much support do youthink there would be in the market for a projection that the dollarwill drop 15 percent over the next year, ignoring the immediate short-term situation that causes people, of course, to take the positionsthey do take.MR. CROSS. Do you mean do I think that there would be a viewthat the dollar might do this? I didn't quite [hear you].MR. WALLICH. Yes.MR. CROSS. I think that most of the people in the markethave become quite jaundiced after having seen a number of very largebalance of payments deficits and large trade deficits and hearingrepeatedly that this was going to bring down the dollar but not havingseen it happen. So the people in the market, as opposed to the peoplemaking the forecasts, do not really seem much impressed by this. Theyknow, as everybody knows, that at some point the dollar is going tocome down. But the matter of when is of extreme importance in theexchange market, and these people tend to take a fairly short timehorizon anyhow. So, I don't think there is a widespread expectationof any very early decline in the dollar.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And a lot of them have been losingmoney on foreign exchange operations. went from a $24million profit in foreign exchange operations in the first quarter toa $12 million loss in the second quarter because most of them had beenbetting on some decline. I would agree with Sam that they are takingboth a short-term view and a fairly jaundiced view about their earlierexpectations of a dollar decline. So, they have retreated somewhatnow to thinking that maybe the dollar isn't going to decline.-51-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would think that most people would sayintellectually that the dollar ought to decline, but they're notwilling to bet on it right now.MR. CROSS. That's right. Those who have are now in thehardware business!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions? We have to ratifysome transactions.MR. CROSS. Yes. We did $135 million.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So moved.MR. CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Meek.MR. MEEK. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments?MR. MARTIN. What is your evaluation of, let's say, theintermediate-term strength of the fears and the difficulties withregard to bank CDs, bank soundness, interbank market availability andso forth? Is it a passing phase associated with Continental,Argentina, and so forth? Or is something going on here that's likelyto be a malaise going forward? What's your feel for it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what Mr. Meek's view is, butI'll tell you my opinion is that there's no chance that it's a passingphase that is going to evaporate in a matter of weeks or months.MR. ROBERTS. One should give some consideration to the factthat banks have been expanding CDs very rapidly in recent months,however. I don't think this entire widening of spreads would be asqualitative as you analyze it. Spreads always widen when they pumpCDs up.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One significant indicator--and I feelit's going to be with us for a while--is that it's very hard now toget term money in the Eurodollar market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless you're a Swiss bank.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm talking about the U.S. banks.The maturities have shortened, and it's very significant.MR. ROBERTS. But in that context, the banks have expandedtheir loans tremendously, and have financed it with expansion ofdomestic CDs. That is my point. And you would expect that to resultin a widening of spreads, notwithstanding the fact that, obviously,Continental and Manufacturers Hanover have been a qualitative factorin the market. The market really, I guess, has worked pretty well.MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems that the banks have not only hadto finance their domestic operations but apparently also theirbranches abroad, because those have no longer brought in money but7/16-17/84apparently have needed money. That suggests that there are thosefunding problems.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to have a prolongeddiscussion right now because we need to get on; we can discuss it alittle later if you want. But just symptomatic of this, among otherthings, the Comptroller has developed a new plan for evaluating oilloans, which may not be overly conservative in some theoretical orabstract sense. But there is a certain fear--I don't know about this,but it needs some testing--that application of those standards tonational oil credits will result in billions of dollars of loans beingput in classified status because they won't pass the stiffer hurdlethat's implied by the new evaluation. The only sense we have of thatin a direct measurable sense is that they have done it to Continentaland it has added $200 to $300 million to their classified items in abank that already has had its oil portfolio examined and reexamined.At one point I heard a figure of $350 million. Maybe you know thefigure as a result of the examination.MR. PARTEE. No, I don't.MR. KEEHN. It's in that magnitude. The loss category forContinental, including oil credits, is going to be $575 million. Andthat is largely the result of a different set of standards forcredits.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's loss since the last examination,which was 6 months ago.MR. KEEHN. Right. That's as opposed to the deterioration ofthe assets themselves; it's a very significant amount.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can return to these questions,but I just don't want to interrupt the continuity of the marketdiscussion entirely. Are there any other questions?MR. PARTEE. It is true, isn't it, that we've had a couple ofbad bank reports? certainly couldn't have been much worse than itwas and looks like a continuing problem, and it doesn't seemto have shaken the market any more.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The shareholders, who are very strongin both those cases, are putting up more capital and the markets knowthis. assures us that they bent over backwards to write offeverything and reserve everything they possibly could. And they aregoing to show a substantial profit this quarter. And I think $80million more capital was put up. Also, of course, we know thatMidland is now offering to buy out the minority shareholders inCrocker and has a complete commitment to Crocker. So, that's why itdidn't really get hurt.MR. MEEK. My sense is that some of the anxiety that waspresent in the markets in late June has gone out of the market sincethen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] I think is right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Temporarily.-53-7/16-17/84MR. WALLICH. Paul, could I ask you a question? The last fewweeks seem to have produced an example of the relative workings of aborrowed reserves target or assumption versus a net free reservestarget or assumption. We seem to have stuck more or less with aborrowed reserves assumption. That has led to an increase in net freereserves. So, had we been on a net free reserves target, that wouldhave led to higher borrowings and tighter policies. Is that thecorrect way of looking at this?MR. MEEK. I think that's a fair statement.MR. WALLICH. So there is a difference between the twopolicies and, in this particular case, it has meant an easierapproach.MR. MEEK. Well, it has allowed us to accommodate somewhatthe extraordinary demand for excess reserves by the major banks earlyin the period.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we hadn't accommodated theextraordinary demand for excess reserves, we would have gotten evenmore of a rise. The Committee last time assumed that a billion dollarborrowing assumption was going to give us [a funds rate] in theneighborhood of 10-3/4 percent. Instead, we ended up with 11 to11-1/2 percent.MR. WALLICH. That's what I say. It was an easier policyand, given that interest rates were rising anyway, was preferable to apolicy that would have driven rates up more. I just want to bring outthe analytical difference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other comments, we havesome transactions to ratify.MR. MARTIN. Move the ratification.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll go to Mr. Axilrod and then to acoffee break.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I can be very brief. AlternativeB is the alternative that assumes the continuation of a billiondollars of borrowing. We believe the general constellation of moneymarket and other conditions that go with that reserve increase wouldbe consistent with rather moderate M1 growth from June to September--on the order of around 5-1/2 percent. That growth rate would bringthe growth in M1 from Q4 to September down to 7 percent and we believethat would be on a reasonable track, hopefully, if the Committee sowished, to end the year close to around 6-1/2 percent growth. Wewould expect, and of course it's only an expectation, that thatparticular constellation would involve about the current level ofinterest rates and that this level of interest rates has somerestraint in it that would carry forward into the fourth quarter.Alternative A suggests dropping the level of borrowing initially, byabout $250 million or so from the $1 billion, and borrowing underAlternative C is commensurately higher. If attitudes with respect tothe federal funds market and bank markets in general stay as they are,-54-7/16-17/84we would expect Alternative B to involve a funds rate around 11percent or a little higher; Alternative A would have funds moving downcloser to 10-1/2 percent and Alternative C moving up closer to 12percent. As Mr. Meek suggested, these attitudes could change. Ifthey did ease off and banks were viewed more favorably, or if themoney supply came in on what the market interprets as the reasonableside so that expectations of a monetary policy tightening edged off,or if the GNP data were weak, then the funds rate [pressures] couldalso probably subside some. In any event, Alternative B does have afunds rate range of 8 to 12 percent and Alternative A has a range of7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent. The present range is 7-1/2 to 11-1/2percent. We've suggested that somewhat higher range in connectionwith the billion dollars of borrowing, simply to reflect the shifts inattitudes that have occurred in the past two or three weeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's have a coffee break.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] about the perspectivewith which I, at least, approach this operational decision we have tomake. This has somewhat more importance, I'm afraid, than worryingabout the long-term ranges that we've been debating, anyway. I thinkwe are at a critical point from a number of directions. I don't haveany doubt about that; how much influence we can have is anothermatter. I am struck by the problems in the banking system. Wetouched upon that a few moments ago. As I understand the situation, Ithink the funding abilities of the multinational banks are virtuallyuniformly stretched. Psychologically, I think none of them has greatconfidence that they can do more funding than they are doing in anysubstantial amount. One evidence of that is the way [investors] allran away from Continental even when they thought it was in bettershape than, in fact, it was. Nobody was prepared, when they thoughtabout it, to take on the funding risk that would be involved even forthe biggest bank in the United States, even in considerably shrunkenform. I think there is no doubt that they are all worried about theirfunding in varying degrees. In fact, it's probably not too much tosay that a good many depositors would just as soon get out of bankpaper if they knew where to go. If they don't know quite where to go,some of it hangs more than it otherwise would on customerrelationships and all the rest.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They're going to have more of anopportunity now with the abolition of the withholding tax.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe. I do feel fairly confident thatthese problems aren't going to go away for a very simple reason. Theyreflect the fact that there are a lot of weak credits in the bankingsystem. And they seem to be coming more into the open rather than thereverse--even discounting the LDC problem which, of course, sits thereas the most looming threat. I might say, as a side point, that myimpression is that they are adding to the weak credits in the bankingsystem with new loans every day. I'm not full of pride about thesupervisory performance of the United States in general or the FederalReserve in particular. It's a very difficult area, but I think it'ssomething that we have to concern ourselves with a lot more. Oneaspect of that is the holding company situation. When there is acondition of crisis, as with Continental Illinois, we find out that we-55-7/16-17/84don't have a very good handle on the holding company and how it isfunded and how its assets match up with its liabilities. We justhaven't been analyzing these things in this way. One doesn't imaginethat they would ever get into this kind of difficulty, but we're atthe point where they are in this kind of difficulty, and I think wehave to do some rethinking in that area. I might say in thatconnection that this is not entirely a side issue in terms of monetarypolicy. We are going to be raising the capital ratios for holdingcompanies and banks and the FDIC and Comptroller have already madesome announcements in that direction. It's not final yet, but this isgoing to be done in the next week or so. We will be talking aboutmoving toward a more building-block approach with respect to capitalin the holding companies. Now, apart from the supervisoryimplications of that coming at this particular time--while the move isnot drastic in the sense that most of the multinational holdingcompanies will be able to meet the new capital ratios of 5-1/2percent, which I presume is where it will end up--some of them aren'tgoing to be very far above it. And I think there will probably be alittle accompanying music [suggesting] that this is another steptoward still higher ratios in the future. The net result, I think,moves in the direction of restraint on asset growth. It may even bemore potent than monetary policy--at least if we did it a little moreaggressively--at this particular point in time. So, that's just somebackground.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Two of the banks are going to fallshort.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know; two or three will fallshort, I think. will certainly fall short.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. was getting there; I forgetwhether they were there. But I think most banks will want to get morecomfortably above the new ratio than they are at the moment, sothere's a degree of pressure there.Looking at the rest of the financial climate: We referred abit to the problems abroad. I don't have anything to add to what Isaid earlier about the problems of the developed countries. Let mejust say a word about the LDC problem. I don't think there is anyquestion that the general psychological attitude in LDCs hasdeteriorated in terms of the determination to adjust and pay theirdebts. The focus of that, of course, is in Argentina. It's a littlehard to tell what is happening in Argentina now. It's rather at animpasse. But that feeling has affected other countries, even thoughwe can show objectively that countries like Mexico and Venezuela andBrazil are doing better than expected. It is not just an economicproblem but an increasingly difficult political problem. This lastincrease in the prime rate coming one day after the Cartagena meetingconvened, when there was a great effort to restrain the radicals inLatin America, hit our friends like a kick in the solar plexus interms of keeping the political situation under control. I'm notsaying, certainly not economically, that some further increase ininterest rates in the United States follows like night after day. Butthat situation falls apart. I don't think that is true economicallybut politically I think we are increasingly close to margins of-56-7/16-17/84tolerance. The significance of that, of course, is partly that itfeeds back into our domestic credit situation and the confidence inour own banking system. Now we have that whole set of problems. It'sa set of problems we have not seen the likes of, in my opinion, sincethe early 1930s or late 1920s. One of the reasons we have the problemis that it has been so long since we've had it that no bankers couldimagine it was going to happen again. So they went out perfectlyhappily and got rid of all their liquidity and filled up the balancesheet with less-than-strong loans.When you look at the real side of the economy, as I saidyesterday and I guess the view is widely shared around here, there isjust a lot of plain forward momentum. I see very little [slowing],except possibly in housing, and that's not clear. We get a housingstarts figure tomorrow. I did see a builder survey yesterday thatshows a further decline in sales; it was an attitudinal thing--traffic, sales prospects, and all the rest, which continues the trendthat started two or three months ago in a fairly decided way. Butthat's a limited piece of evidence. Generally, I think the momentumis very strong in the domestic economy and is propelled by a lot offactors. If I were just sitting here looking at that without any ofthe financial problems, I wouldn't have much doubt about what I woulddo within the limits of monetary policy. I would be more restrictivebecause, just looking at that, I think that's where the risks lie.When I look at the financial system, I get quite a different pictureof what maneuverability we have. To put it another way, I do think wehave something of a knife's edge problem. If we are too easy, thenthis momentum in the economy will be excessive and will materialize inmore strength than we'd like to see. If we are too tight, it mightpull out the rug from the whole thing in a rather sudden way due tothe financial concerns. I hope the knife has a dull edge rather thana sharp edge, but dull or sharp, it's not very easy to keep on aknife's edge. In a sense, I think we're coming close to running outof maneuvering room in terms of monetary policy alone. I don'tconclude from this, as I guess I implied, that any kind of easingsignal is justified or appropriate. But I do conclude, giveneverything we know at the moment, including that for the moment themonetary aggregates look reasonably quiescent, that it's not time totake a strong initiative in the restraining direction. So, thatreduces the choices, in my mind, to a fairly narrow range. I am notsaying that there is no room for some tightening down the road if themomentum of the economy continues and the aggregates move high and allthe rest. I'm not saying [we wouldn't ease]--although I find thispretty far-fetched--if something happens that makes the economy on itsown look considerably weaker. I really don't expect that. I do notdiscount the possibility of more financial stringency and difficultiesthat could arise from any number of directions, most likely from theLDC side. But it could arise from purely domestic or even developedcountry concerns. All of this leads me in terms of specifics tosomething like not doing very much right now, but remaining poised totighten a little if we have to in terms of what happens down the roadin the coming weeks. I guess I'll stop right there.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At the risk of sounding "me too-ish,"that's exactly my view of it. I think we should not tighten further;we should simply consolidate the tightening that has taken place inthe market. And we should certainly not ease. So, it seems to methat alternative B is what is indicated. I might argue--and this is a-57-7/16-17/84nitpick--that on M3 I'm not sure it makes sense to put in 9-1/2percent instead of 9 percent when 9 percent is the upper end [of thelong-run range] and we're running over that. I don't know whetherthat one-quarter period is significant enough to aim for somethingthat's over. But, with the exception of that nitpick, I would go with[alternative B]--$1 billion for borrowing and moving the funds rangeup that extra 1/2 point to 8 to 12 percent. I assume that the generallanguage would permit room so that if the banks relax further and $1billion of borrowing ends up giving us something in the neighborhoodof 10-3/4 percent [for the funds rate], there would be flexibility totighten a little so that we stay in that 11 or 11 plus percent range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just clarify one thing. I said Ithink the aggregates are quiescent for the moment; that's based uponwhat information we have and estimates for July. And, of course, thelast couple of weeks of July are a guess, but the first two or threeweeks of July look like they're not really above the June average.So, we could have a reasonably low July figure.MR. ROBERTS. Wasn't June rather high?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no doubt that June was on the highside; the average with July may not look too bad. May was high butthe average with April was not out of line.MR. BLACK. You were saying the level was approximately whatit was in June rather than the rate of growth?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Oh! I'm not saying the 12 percentrate of growth, I'm saying [the level].MR. BLACK. Yes. I think maybe Ted thought--MR. ROBERTS. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks pretty safe that it will come inat what, Steve--about a 5 percent rate of growth or less?MR. AXILROD. Yes, and we'd need an increase in the secondhalf of July.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would need a substantial increase inthe second half to get it up to 4 or 5 percent.MR. BOEHNE. The analysis that has been given is one that Ifeel comfortable with. The real side of things would tend to lead onein the direction of some snugging up. But I think the problems on thefinancial side are sufficiently scary that they put a constraint onthat. So, about where we are seems to make a lot of sense to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Martin.MR. MARTIN. I would certainly subscribe to the Chairman'ssummary analysis of where we stand. I'd support the status quo. I'mnot sure whether alternative B is that entirely; I will in a minutecomment on those numbers for the aggregates. In support of theChairman's position about the evidence of some precariousness in thefinancial system, I remind the Committee of the size of the largest-58-7/16-17/84savings and loan holding company, the Financial Corporation ofAmerica, which is now at about $32 billion with 80 plus percent of itsdeposits purchased, and the FSLIC insurance fund is running at $6billion or so. I would name also the[all of] which the FDIC has indicated it willmove on promptly. And we're talking about assets of $5.6 billion at$6.6 billion at and $7.5 billion atAdd that to the ongoing negotiations with Continentaland you get some interesting arithmetic. Let's not run the signalflag up the mast, but the arithmetic [indicates] that there iscertainly a vulnerability. The small banks have those agriculturalloans, which are not improving. Well, there's no point in goingthrough the risks; the Chairman has subsumed them in his comments.I would hope that in the implementation of alternative Bthere will be flexibility, frankly, on the accommodative side. I havea slight difference from previous commentators in that I think therisks are rather imminent. And I would hope that the usual good senseis applied by the people at the Desk and the people here, as wasevidenced in the very recent past so that as these crises develop andas the attitudinal waves pass through the money and capital markets,there will be flexibility on the accommodative side, which hopefullywe can pick up coming round the barn, so to speak. We should all beaware, if alternative B is the consensus here, that relative to theMarch-to-June pace for M1 and M2 we're talking of moving from an 8-1/4percent M1--I believe my numbers are right here--to 5-1/2 percent onM1. We're talking about M2 moving from something like 10-1/4 percentMarch-to-June to 7-1/2 percent. To me, that's too much. So, I'msomewhere between "A" and "B." I don't want to give the false signalsof trying to soften interest rates that A implies, if I read thiscorrectly. Nevertheless, I'm uncomfortable that we're bringing theseaggregates down too fast as implied in "B." So it seems to me that weshould give authority toward "B" but--yes, Steve?MR. AXILROD. You gave the M3 growth. That was 10.2 percent;M2 was quite a lot lower than that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, there's something the matter with M2.MR. MARTIN. Oh! What is it for the March[-to-June period]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just have the monthly figures here.Well, it was a quarterly growth rate of about 7 percent.MR. MARTIN. Oh, all right. I'm sorry. So it's true for M1but not M2.MR. AXILROD. Yes, the figure you gave was for [M3].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The quarterly average for monthly rates of6.9, 8.7, and 7.3 percent--MR. MARTIN. I stand corrected.MR. KOHN. It's 7.7 percent for M2.MR. MARTIN. For the three months?-59-7/16-17/84MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. MARTIN. So, I'm an "A to B" type, Mr. Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What are you on borrowing?MR. MARTIN. I'd like to see the borrowing at $1 billion but,as the difficulties develop, I'd like to see if we could go to $900 to$1 billion. In other words, Tony, I'm arguing for a littleflexibility on the accommodative side because I take these risks andthese vulnerabilities very seriously.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, we seem to be close to the situationwhere the central bank has the choice of facing the threat of afinancial debacle or risking inflation. It's something that has oftenbeen talked about, but it never looked quite as stark and immediate asnow. On the side of forbearance and status quo, one could argue thatwe've had a rise in interest rates and its effects may not be fullyembodied in our projections. It may slow down the economy. There arefinancial difficulties that may be on the rise and may themselvesexert a restraining effect on the real sector. So it seems notunjustified to wait and consolidate, as Tony said, the recent interestrate increases. But, of course, there is the risk that if theaggregates and inflation expectations do expand, then the need to actis only postponed and the level of action may have to be higher. Sixweeks or twelve weeks from now we may be sitting here and wish we haddone a little now in order to forestall the need for more later. Onething that leaves me unsure about the proper action is that, with$1 billion of borrowing, the funds rate may drop back to the 10 to 11percent range from the 10-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent range, and I thinkthat would be a mistake--to give a signal of the rate dropping. Ifthe present relationship of $1 billion of borrowing and 11 to 11-1/4percent holds, that would be a reasonable thing to do. But I wouldthen want to see flexibility in our assumptions with respect to excessreserves that would offset any effect of $1 billion of borrowing inthe direction of depressing the funds rate. On the aggregates, all Ihave to say is that "B" seems consonant with these generalpropositions, and I have no particular exception to make with "B,"always bearing in mind that the projected funds rate there is 11 to11-1/4 percent. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. Well, I think there is a time to do somesnugging, and there's a difference between snugging and a gross move.What I would like to see is sort of a "B+", which would be somethinglike a 5 percent growth from June-to-September because--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a "B-" in the normal nomenclature.MR. ROBERTS. Well, "B-," if you want to call it that way.MR. MARTIN. I like the first story!MR. ROBERTS. I think of that as a "B+." I note that thequarterly average under "B," in fact, accelerates to 7.7 percent. And7/16-17/84I think we ought to be raising the borrowing target modestly to, say,$1-1/4 billion, so that there is less opportunity to spill overinadvertently into a rapid growth in money as we maintain a borrowingtarget and provide reserves to get used and transferred into money. Ithink the momentum of the economy fully justifies this and I think themarket has probably already significantly discounted something likethis together with an increase in the discount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I support your position. I thinkthe evidence does suggest that the economy is decelerating. Theleading indicators available for June suggest a further slowing aheadof us. If we were in the situation where the evidence clearlysuggested the opposite, the decision would be a lot more difficult.But, I would certainly support alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, like a lot of other people,I've been waiting expectantly for some moderation in the growth of theeconomy. And while we've had some, the question is whether thatmoderation is enough. In my judgment, it isn't. I think that theeconomy at the moment is growing too fast to be sustained and thatunder normal circumstances such conditions in the economy wouldsuggest that we ought to be doing something affirmatively to brake theeconomy somewhat. Even interest-sensitive sectors of the economy,with the possible exception of housing, are not really showing mucheffect from higher interest rates. On the other hand, we are notseeing inflation, as evidenced by the fact that commodity prices andgold and the price of the dollar are not indicating inflationaryexpectations on the horizon. However, some of that at least can beexplained by exchange differentials. Ordinarily, because of thosefactors and believing as I do that we ought to be taking some firmingaction, I would like to see us somewhere between "B" and "C,"--a "B-"or "C+"-- with borrowing at around $1.2 billion. Now, I don't knowwhether that degree of snugging, if that's what it is, would reallyexacerbate the financial situation domestically and internationally.I, too, have a lot of concern about what is happening. So, if thatsituation is as dire as you have indicated, then I would be happy withalternative B. The real concern that I have is that both of theseproblems--certainly the LDC problem and the domestic financialsituation--are going to be with us for some time. These are nottemporary problems. So, the question is: How long can we wait beforewe do something and how long are we going to be constrained by theseforces?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just comment on that: Perhaps fora long time. I think the obvious economic policy approach in theseconditions--where we are getting too much strength in the real economyand we have the financial difficulties--is tightening up on fiscalpolicy. I can't rub my genie to produce that, but the inability toproduce it doesn't say there's another answer. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I agree with Tony's and Henry's version of "B":Use the specs of "B" and if, in fact, we see some different attitudesof borrowing develop, inch up on the borrowing number rather than letinterest rates go down. I do think, from a macro standpoint, that our-61-7/16-17/84real concern is that this slowdown in economic activity which thestaff foresees, and which I could foresee also, may or may not happen.It is still primarily a forecast. The concrete signs of that areprecious and slim at this point. We have to keep hoping that it willoccur. And if it doesn't occur and we have upward pressure oninterest rates, then we're going to have some very, very seriousproblems about what we should do. Henry is right: The choice for theshort run is either more inflation or a financial debacle. I thinkthe best we can do about this is not to let inflation happen, but justto hold to a rather steady, sensible policy. And if we don't get somebudget restraint, then there's going to be no way to avoid this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I would accept alternative B also. I'mconsiderably affected by the moderate numbers projected in alternativeB and would remind you that they are projections. If, in fact, theeconomy doesn't begin to slow as everybody is hoping, the numbers maywell be higher than that. And if they're higher than that, then Ithink we'll have to take some action. I'm as concerned about thefinancial situation as anybody but, as I said yesterday, I feel thatthe real problem would come from having an excessive expansion thatleads to inflation that [in turn] leads to significantly higherinterest rates, which would not just take [down] the FinancialCorporation of America but about 100 other savings and loans with it.I guess I wouldn't do anything to try to save Financial Corporation orBowery or somebody like that if what I were doing was risking losing agreat many more further on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which particular institution is savable?MR. PARTEE. So, I would pay a lot of attention to theperformance of the aggregates in this period. I don't like to fine-tune the funds rate. I'm shocked that Henry is fine-tuning it to 1/2of a point, because I always thought he believed that we ought to runon more basic things than just the funds rate. But I guess maybe it'sbecause he doesn't want it to go down and that's why he would fine-tune it. But I would say that if it flexed down, I wouldn't have anyproblem with that. In that sense, I guess I join Pres. I don't wantto bias the result. I'd take $1 billion [on borrowing] and the specsof alternative B, and if the funds rate happens to move down 1/4 oreven 1/2 point to where it was just a few weeks ago, I wouldn't haveany great problem with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have a strong preference for theaggregate targets in alternative C. As I mentioned before when Ilatched on to what Lyle was saying, I think it's vital that wecontinue our stated long-run policy of working the aggregates down.There are obviously risks if we try to push M1 down too fast afterthis rate of expansion, but I think there are also risks if we let itgrow at a rate of 7-1/2 percent for the last half of the year as itdid in the first half. And I hope, of course--and I even have somefaint expectations--that the rate of growth in the economy will slowsomewhat so it won't be necessary for us to take any action to try todeal with the aggregates. I'm very much encouraged by Steve'sprojection of M1. So, despite my ordinary predilections to do a-62-7/16-17/84little now in the hopes of avoiding a more disruptive and strongermove later on, I would stick with the $1 billion borrowing target nowand raise that only if the aggregates show greater strength than itnow appears that they're showing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. I'll stick with the Solomon/Gramley version ofalternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I also would go with what Jerry justcharacterized as the Solomon/Gramley version. I have a concern aboutthe uncertainty with respect to the $1 billion borrowing and itsrelationship to the current interest rate levels of 11 to 11-1/4percent. Because of that uncertainty, then, I would focus more uponthat [funds rate] itself, whether that's fine-tuning--Chuck'sterminology--or not. We haven't had good evidence of a slowing of the[growth in the] economy yet, which I think all of us would like tosee. The market essentially has taken us there, but for policypurposes it would seem to me more appropriate to focus on a federalfunds rate because of that uncertainty in the period ahead. In otherwords, I would not let it go up or let it go down below the 11 percentlevel. It also says to me that if that's the general consensus, thereshould not be a movement in the discount rate, which is on the tablebefore the Board. That's simply because if we follow the usualprocedures, a 1/2 percentage point increase--if that were the number--would imply a 1/2 point increase in the funds rate level, which Ithink would be quite inappropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would come out probably at"B-." I recognize the very real risks that you described, and theyare real. On the other hand, I think there are risks on the otherside. A perception that we were accommodating a lot of things couldbe almost as bad. I think, as Ted said, the markets have discountedquite a bit. I could see certainly holding where we are and maybeslightly more restraint. I would be inclined to go even fartherexcept for the fact that our next meeting is coming up fairly soon andwe will have another opportunity to discuss it and, obviously, we'llknow more then than we know now. On the borrowing level, I'd probablyopt for about $1.2 billion or $1.25 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. What I see is a difference of opinion between theSun Belt and the Rust Bowl. Coming from the Rust Bowl, as I saidearlier, I think the economy does show signs of slowing--not that wehave gone into a decline, certainly, but the rate of growth isslowing. Also, I don't feel that the participants in the economy havefully adjusted to the interest rate increases we've had so far--forexample, the last increase in the prime rate, which was rather recent.Business people don't adjust overnight and not even in a week or twoweeks; I think we have to factor that in. Also, like the Chairman,I'm extremely concerned about the condition of banks. I don't thinkit's just Continental. Out in the other states there are banks with-63-7/16-17/84problems and there are also tremendous problems with the thrifts. Theones that squeaked through the '81-'82 period by holding their breathhave certainly had a little chance to get healthy, but they need moretime to get healthy. And even with that 25 basis point increase onwhat they have to pay for funds we're going to have a lot of them inthe soup very quickly. Also, there are tremendous consumer risks. Ihaven't heard this pointed out, I don't believe, but more and moreconsumer loans have become variable rate loans. While that has helpedthe financial institutions get rid of some of their interest raterisk, it has also enhanced the credit risk by a great deal. I thinkmany consumers don't realize what they signed on for. I'm not justtalking about ARMs; there are other kinds of variable rate consumerloans--car loans, etc. And I think there is tremendous vulnerabilityas I look at this whole package here. So, if I had to vote for "A,""B," or "C," I would go along with the "B" [specifications] and withthe idea that the fed funds rate could range around 11 percent. Idon't think financial market participants would think we had gottensloppily easy if the fed funds rate were to drop, say, to 10-3/4percent on a given day.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're going to have to vote.MS. SEGER. Yes, I'm voting for "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't have to vote right now, butyou're going to have to vote either for it or against it at somepoint. I'm kidding!MS. SEGER. Yes.MR. BALLES. I generally support the position you outlined,Mr. Chairman, although my inclinations are to lean toward tighteningbecause of a fear of inflation down the road. I'm also very muchconcerned about avoiding any rocking of the boat in the near future ifwe can avoid it. So I come out for "B" with the proviso that GovernorGramley added.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. I would support the Solomon/Gramley version ofalternative B. And I hope it finds a knife's edge.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You have to wear gum shoes when I saythat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Maybe I'm missing something, but it does seem tobe that there's a bit of a divergence of opinion around the table asto whether or not we have an overheated economy or one that is movingalong quite well. For the reasons I stated yesterday, I fall in thelatter category. I think the numbers are good and they're solid; butit's very, very uneven, particularly in the industrial sector. As aconsequence, I would be very reluctant to see us make a move towardsnugging at this particular point for that reason and for the reasonsthat you suggested at the beginning. Importantly, also, I think myoutlook for inflation is perhaps a bit more positive than some. Ijust don't see in the current signs or the prospective signs that-64-7/16-17/84inflation really is likely to get away from us. So, as a consequence,I really do think this is good time to maintain a course that seems tobe working. I would be in favor of alternative B with borrowing at alevel of about $1.0 to $1.1 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. By year-end I'd very much like to come out at themidpoint of our M1 range. That would tie into all the longer-termkinds of considerations we were discussing earlier about what shouldhappen to those ranges. And that would cause me to choose somethingin the area of "B-," with a slight increase in the borrowingassumption, up to as high as $1.2 billion. I do that, of course, witha considerable amount of discomfort because I think the financialstrains that have been enumerated are very real and very serious. Butthe knife's edge has been referred to a number of times, and I thinkthe strength in the economy and that need for a long-term policy arealso very present.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would be sorely tempted, if we wereoperating the way the Open Market Committee operated 10 or 15 yearsago, to say "Thank you, we have a consensus. Goodbye." I'm afraid wehave to be a little more nitpicky. We're down to nuances. Just to beclear, I don't mean to suggest myself that we can do much about thesefinancial problems by these minor decisions. But, in the range we'retalking about, they're not going to go away if we stand pat; and inthe range that we're talking about, all these domestic things aren'tgoing to suddenly collapse on us. The international situation, atsome point, might collapse in the range in which we're talking. Butit's a question of how much justification we need, in some sense, totake an overt step at this stage. And I think we need a little morethan usual.There is obviously some small difference of opinion here; Isuspect the prevailing view is what has been referred to as theSolomon/Gramley approach. I interpret that as: We don't do much now;we'd be very cautious about anything interpreted as any easing; and wemight have to tighten if things come in stronger. I referred to theeconomy as having a lot of momentum; I may be wrong. I'm not sure Ifully see all the slowing down so far in domestic demand, but M1 looksfairly quiescent in July. It could be anything in August. I wouldn'tdrop out of my seat if August came in with some very high numbers, inwhich case we may have to respond. But then we would have theevidence of that in front of us.Now, how do we put this in terms of a directive? I think thenumbers are simple enough. We are really talking about thealternative B numbers. Some people said they were a little in-betweenbut the only real difference, described as a quibble about the number,is whether we make M3 9-1/4 percent--which is an odd number to put inthe directive anyway--or 9 percent. Let me say that this is no bigdeal with me, but in the interest of rounding, maybe 9 percent is theappropriate number to put in there. Does that make sense to people?I guess we are talking about 8 to 12 percent [on the funds range]. Idon't think that affects the substance, but it will affect the visualsof this when and if it's announced. And I don't know how hard-pressedI'm going to be in testimony to indicate some of this. I don'tinterpret [raising the funds rate range to] 8 to 12 percent as meaning-65-7/16-17/84anything significant, but the market or certain Congressmen will.That does not say, given that the rate is between 11 and 11-1/2percent, that we should not do that. But I just note that that willbe interpreted by some people as a tightening.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you expect this bill forcing us todisclose immediately to pass in this session?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. It will come up, but I just assume itwon't pass simply because they don't have much time. But anything canhappen in the wild last days of a Congressional session, and it's thekind of thing that could be tacked on to something and we would justdeal with it. I just want an understanding here that we are talkingabout [a funds rate range of] 8 to 12 percent despite the fact thatsome people may view this differently and it will get interpretedpublicly as a tightening. I'm not interpreting it as a tightening inand of itself, but just a recognition of the reality that the fundsrate is up around 11 plus percent currently. So, we give ourselves alittle more leeway. Is that where we are? I don't see any dissent onany of this, if I may say so, with these numbers. I'm just gettingthe numerology now. Now I will try to describe reality. And I don'tknow how to put it in words [in the directive]. One possibility,which occurred to me last night but I didn't look at it verycarefully, is to have a directive of the sort that we had in December,which basically says we're not going to ease, we're not going to doanything right now, but we might tighten during the period if theaggregates and the economy are running strong. Does that catch whatpeople are talking about?MR. RICE. Does that commit us to tightening if they runstrong?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it buys a little leeway; it suggestsa willingness to do a little something if both the aggregates and--.How is it worded here? Specifically what we said--and this is notmagic--is "The Committee seeks in the short run to maintain at leastthe existing degree of reserve restraint. The action is expected tobe associated with growth of [the aggregates].... Depending onevidence about the continuing strength of economic recovery and otherfactors bearing on the business and inflation outlook, somewhatgreater restraint would be acceptable should the aggregates expandmore rapidly." We could change that "depending on" clause. I supposewe'd add something there about financial markets in thesecircumstances. The rest of it is pretty standard.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What you're saying is that you wantit asymmetrical?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's one possibility.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Because the way it was last time--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was symmetrical.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It was symmetrical.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or that was the meaning. Just remember,we had all kinds of nuances there, but it was basically symmetrical.-66-7/16-17/84It wasn't, I guess absolutely symmetrical. Sometimes we use "would"in one sentence and "might" in the other. Maybe we were absolutelysymmetrical last time. This would be asymmetrical.MR. PARTEE. I couldn't support asymmetrical. No, I thinkthat's the wrong thing to do. And I think it was very widelymisinterpreted in December when it finally came out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure it was misinterpreted lasttime.MR. MARTIN. I could not support an asymmetrical directive.I don't know whether implicit in such a directive and not enunciatedbecause of the sensitivity of it would be an understanding that ifthere began to be trouble in financial markets, we would move in theother direction. I take it not. It would not have that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, we always have the option of doingwhatever we feel like doing with a consultation. I think it wouldassume that we don't expect to run into that contingency. That's ahard thing to put in the directive anyway, even if we had itsymmetrical.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I have a little problem with that kind ofasymmetrical directive. We might tilt it a bit in that direction byplaying around with words like "might." For example, we could say"Somewhat greater reserve restraint would be acceptable and leave"might" [for lesser restraint]. That might tip it a little; somethingof that order I could stomach more than a really overt loading of thedice to push rates up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In defense of December, we didn't doanything in this directive in December and I wish, in retrospect, thatwe had. We didn't have the evidence for it between the meetings.MR. BOEHNE. Yes, but when it was released, it was releasedin a different kind of context and even though we didn't do anything,it was interpreted as a bias towards tightening. And I guess I'drather not have that bias at this point. I'm prepared to see rates goup under the right kinds of circumstances. But I also wouldn't wantto create the image that that's where our biases are.MR. BOYKIN. If that were interpreted as a bias, I would viewthat favorably because I think that's where the bias should be.MR. MARTIN. Well, I'm not sure that's where the bias shouldbe. I think it may be a view of our setting policy such that we'reaccused of bias in the sense that [people say]: "These guys alwayssee inflation coming, no matter what the price figures are." I thinkwe have to avoid that appearance.MR. BOEHNE. That's my point, right.MR. MARTIN. "Knee-jerk inflation fighters" is the quote.That's a very unfair remark, but we do receive it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A pretty good reputation.7/16-17/84MR. BOYKIN. Well, my response to that is--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's what central bankers aresupposed to have.MR. MARTIN. Yes, but always?MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't think we can see the futureclearly enough to bias this. I think we could get both some very goodnews on inflation and a marked slowing in the economy. I don't thinkwe ought to seem to want to raise rates at every opportunity and notchthem upward over time. And that's what that suggests to me.MR. BOYKIN. Well, governor, it seems to me the conversationhas been that ex all of these other overriding considerations at themoment--LCDs, fragility, and so forth--the sentiment is that, allother things being equal, we would be [tightening].MR. PARTEE. I wouldn't--not with an M1 projection of 5-1/2percent. I would not be tightening unless M1 comes in above 5-1/2percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's all it says.MR. PARTEE. And if it comes in below, I think the funds rateought to flex down.MR. BLACK. That's what shifted my position right there.MR. GRAMLEY. I could certainly support an asymmetricaldirective because I do think we have to worry lots more about theeconomy growing too fast than the economy slowing down too much. Butprecisely for that reason, I think a modest move in that directionalong the lines suggested by Ed would be all right, in the sense thatI think the chances that M1 growth is going to slow below 5-1/2percent are about 1 in 10. I'm really not worried about that. Ithink the third quarter is going to be quite a strong quarter; unlesssomething very unusual happens, we're likely to get more M1 growth inthat [quarter]. I don't disagree with Chuck; if [M1 did slow to below5-1/2 percent], I'd want to think about easing. But I don't thinkit's going to.MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't really think so either, but Ithink it could.MR. GRAMLEY. If what we did was take that operationalparagraph and used the word "would" in line 81 [of the staff's draft]and left "might" in line 82, careful Fed watchers would say "Aha! adegree of asymmetry." So, we'd get our purposes served.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, you know the Oracle of Delphiused to have this kind of language in it--pretty subtle readings ofpigeons' entrails. Having said that, I think it's probably okay to dothat kind of thing. The very frankly asymmetrical approach isprobably not the most advisable. So, I also would vote for ajudicious mix of "mights" and "woulds" or "woulds" and "coulds" orwhatever else we can use.-68-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I do care, but I don't care thatmuch. I'm perfectly happy to be asymmetrical. I just want the recordto show that because the situation is asymmetrical without much doubtin my mind.MR. WALLICH. I think the symmetrical solution, in theunlikely event that the aggregates or the economy slowed down, wouldnot be bad. But the possibility of a fortuitous move down without anyreal change in the situation could be very adverse and would then bereversed. Subsequently, rates would go up again and we would havegiven the wrong signal. I don't think we ought to take that chance.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's the same point I made, Henry,and I'm assuming that this language could be interpreted to guardagainst that just because of changing bank attitudes toward excessreserves. This would prevent a meaningful drop in the rates. Wecould use this kind of [wording] and the flexibility would besufficient to cover that contingency as well. Would you agree withthat?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would agree with that, certainly. It'spreferable that we have enough leeway here so that we don't give afalse sense of easing if the money supply is not declining and thereisn't evidence of the economy slowing, and so forth. And that maytake a certain amount of flexibility in the management of reserves.MR. BOEHNE. I would think that the sentence beginning online 83--"In either case such a change would be considered against"all these things--certainly gives us enough flexibility to usejudgment to guard against these fortuitous events that might lead onedown the wrong path. It has everything in there except the kitchensink, really.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's mainly because I thought we'dbe clear about it. I take it the contingency that has been raisedhere, which strikes me as a real one, tends to say the aggregates aremore or less on path. We're always guessing what they will be nextmonth. Let's say we start out with [M1 growth in] July at 3 percentor 4 percent, but we have a strong suspicion that it's going to behigher later and the other aggregates might be a little on the lowside in July. But we have a strong suspicion that they're going to behigher later as the business news remains fairly good and there is nobig change in that. If the money markets began easing, we'd be verycautious about supplying reserves until there was further confirmationof low money supply numbers and all the rest.MR. CORRIGAN. I think you have to have a margin ofprotection in that direction. It would be almost calamitous to end upwith a situation in which interest rates went down in the thirdquarter and had to go up in the fourth quarter. That, to me, would bethe worst of all worlds.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would mean something as long-lastingeven as quarters. To get a great feeling of relief and then in thenext month to see them go back drastically in the other direction withthe money supply taking off would be unfortunate, I think.MR. BOEHNE. So do I.-69-7/16-17/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It also complicates the LDC politicalattitude. If they get a sense of relief and then they get whammedagain, it just makes things harder.MR. GUFFEY. I don't think I understand the rationale for thebias on the up side on rates. We're talking about a 4-week perioduntil the next meeting.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Five weeks.MR. GUFFEY. We're at the 17th now and we're talking about anFOMC meeting on the 21st of August. However many days that is, itisn't very many. And the amount of information that will come in tosuggest that we would push rates up from the present level further--.That's unconscionable in my view because we have had rates in the last30 days go from the 10-1/2 to 10-3/4 percent range to 11-1/4 percent.And to put a directive out that will be read 30 days from now thatsuggests that this Committee sat around and adopted an asymmetricaldirective that suggests a bias toward further tightening when wetalked about the LDC problems and we talked about the fragility in thefinancial markets makes no sense to me.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I would not interpret this, Roger, assomething we're bringing on just between now and August. Of course,this is the first meeting of a quarter. We're looking at quarterlygrowth rates for the third quarter for the first time. And we'retrying to structure a directive that hopefully will last us throughthe quarter--not just until the next time--and give some indicationabout our basic concerns about how fast the economy is growing, therisks in financial markets, and so on. I would prefer to interpret itmore broadly than that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would add that there's no doubt in mymind--although I may be wrong--that the risks are that the economy isgrowing too fast. And on the inflationary side, the only thing thatconcerns me is the financial side. I'd be just as tight as I could bewithout precipitating that situation.MR. GUFFEY. We may be there now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe. We're not too far from it. ButI'm always willing to probe a little further.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Aren't you going to be asked aboutcurrent short-term policy when you testify?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Probably.MR. PARTEE. Quite strongly, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think with any of these directivesI would say, if I have to say something, that it has not changed.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would you convey the flavor ofasymmetry in your answers to those questions?asked.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon how the questions are-70-7/16-17/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Suppose the questions were asked theright way, would you do it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might, yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Rather than symmetry?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe. I'm not going to say it justthat way, I don't think. I might say that as I look at the situationwith the economy moving the way it is and the inflationary risks, yes,there's a possibility we might have to tighten.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Particularly since you guys aren'tdoing anything on the deficit!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Particularly since you guys aren't doinganything on the deficit--and as I evaluate the economy--I don't seegreat prospects for much easing. I might well say that.MR. GRAMLEY. I would hope you would.MR. BLACK. I hope you would.MR. PARTEE. No great easing this time for the period. Itseems pretty unlikely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, where we are and if that's the wayyou like it, is "seeks to maintain." We'll make it "would" instead of"might" and leave the [other] "might." We'll stick in 5-1/2 percent,7-1/2 percent, and 9 percent. I think there's some understanding thatsome flexibility is necessary to prevent false [signals] and 8 to 12percent. If we don't have any general consensus [to try] to improveon that, let's close it now.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin NoGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now that we've disposed of that, we haveto return to our other little problem here, if I can remember where wewere. We have an issue yet. What we tentatively thought about waskeeping them all the same; I began to worry a bit that if we keep M3and debt the same, we actually ought to put a word in the directiveitself. I don't know just what it would say. I don't remember whatthis boiler plate, which is pretty awful, says. We ought to add asentence that while we reiterate the 6 to 9 percent and 8 to 11percent, the Committee thinks there is a certain probability thatgrowth will be above them.7/16-17/84MR. MARTIN. Because of certain--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what Steve was suggesting when Iraised this question with him was to add a sentence immediatelyfollowing the one on the ranges saying "It was anticipated that debtand M3 would increase at rates somewhat above their upper limits,reflecting in considerable part a rise in debt and the decline inequity financing related to recent merger activities." Maybe weshould put a "however" in there. I scribbled down something, which Iwasn't very happy with. In effect, it says that while this wasanticipated the Committee felt that these [recent] rates wereexcessive in the longer-term perspective--excessive as a benchmark forevaluating the appropriate trend for credit and M3 growth. Let me trythat out. That may not be so bad. Put a "while" in front of this.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That comes after the sentence youjust read about mergers?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. Make it all one sentence. We statethe ranges. They're unchanged. Then say "While it was anticipatedthat debt and M3 might increase at rates somewhat above their upperlevels, reflecting in large part a rise in debt and decline in equityfinancing related to recent merger activity, the Committee felt thathigher target ranges would provide an inappropriate benchmark forlonger-term trends in M3 and debt growth."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But then we're putting ourselves onrecord that we're projecting--if I understand it right--a continuedhectic pace of merger activity in 1985. Or are you saying that 1985is going to be higher because of the mergers?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is a 1984 sentence.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh! I'm sorry.MR. GRAMLEY. I would not like to put that "in considerablepart" as the main reason why the credit variable is growing above theupper end. It's because the economy is growing so fast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can take out the "in considerablepart." Or we could take out the whole thing about merger activitiesand say "will rise somewhat above their upper limits, the Committeefelt that such a rate of growth was an inappropriate benchmark forevaluating credit growth over time." Something like that tells themwhy we didn't raise the rate, even though we expect it to be higher.This is just for '84.MR. MARTIN. I think that's reasonable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, without worrying about theparticular language, but that it is something about this being toohigh a benchmark for evaluating what is right, is that okay?SEVERAL. Right. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we're set. Wait a minute. Do we needto change anything else? Maybe we ought to go over it. I'm lookingat the typed-in language. "In furtherance of these objectives, the-72-7/16-17/84Committee agreed to reaffirm the ranges for monetary growth that wereestablished in January" etc. We take out this stuff about M1. Thenwe give the total debt range, which is reaffirmed. Then we put it ina sentence. And that's the end of 1984. We're accepting all thelanguage the staff has here.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But what about the sentence at theend? "The Committee understood that policy implementation wouldrequire continuing appraisals of relationships--"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not there. I'm just talking about theranges. I assume that will stay in, but I'm not talking about '85yet, which is the next sentence. I'm talking about all the sentenceson page 3, or whatever I have in front of me, which I guess is thesame thing.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But doesn't the sentence I started toread, even though I jumped the gun, apply both to '84 and '85.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I assume that will stay in, but webetter [check]. Is that the general assumption--that that sentencestays in?MR. PARTEE. What sentence are you talking about?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The next sentence in the next paragraph.The one-sentence paragraph: "The Committee understood that policyimplementation would require...." I'm just assuming that stays in.Apply it both to '84 and '85. All I'm talking about now is '84 andI'm just accepting the language that was prepared here, with theaddition of the sentence we talked about. The effect of this languagechange from what we had before is to remove the probationary status ofMl, but the other paragraph says that they are all to a degreeprobationary. With that, let us vote on 1984.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me review the bidding on '85. We hada couple of questions. Is the consensus for debt unchanged at 8 to 11percent? Some people did suggest 8 to 10-1/2 percent.MR. CORRIGAN. I still like that, but I think 8 to 11 percentis all right. I assume you will be saying something about thishorrendous pace of credit and debt growth.-73-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The general consensus is toward 8 to 11percent, I take it. I think everybody was pretty much for 6 to 9percent for M3. Is that correct? We have this little cosmetic pointon M2. Let me just see: Among the Committee members, how many want itat 6 to 8-1/2 percent? Eight. [Secretary's note: Messrs. Boehne,Corrigan, Gramley, Martin, Partee, Rice, Ms. Seger, and Mr. Wallich.]There seems to be a clear majority for that. Can we live with 6 to8-1/2 percent? That brings us down to the M1 number, where I take itthe range is between 4 to 7-1/2 percent and 4 to 7 percent. We had atentative vote on this before, but we were split. Let me try again.For 4 to 7 percent? Six. [Secretary's note: Mr. Corrigan, Mr.Gramley, Ms. Horn, Mr. Partee, Ms. Seger, and Mr. Wallich.] Does thatmean the other five, excluding me, have a firm opinion or are someneutral?MR. PARTEE. Tie.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who wants 4 to 7-1/2 percent? Five. Thatmeans everybody has an opinion.MR. PARTEE. Now how about a "try to live with"?MR. CORRIGAN. Well, we can try to live with 4 to 7-1/2percent, but with some explicit statement that a further reduction to7 percent might well be forthcoming.MR. MARTIN. I don't have any trouble with that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then I think the tactical advantagegets lost because in a certain sense--MR. PARTEE. He's not talking about publicly saying it. Areyou?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I feel there is more to this thanthat. These are awfully weak reductions in these things if we don'tgo for 4 to 7 percent. I somewhat prefer going to 4 to 7 percent.MR. PARTEE. Who can live with it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --ranges of 8 to 11, 6 to 9, 6 to 8-1/2,and 4 to 7 percent.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesMR. PARTEE. Everybody could live with it!7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we still have to do some talkingabout the uncertainty of velocity. This is based upon an assumptionthat it returns to more normal behavior. If it doesn't, which couldbe in the upper direction, we obviously have to reexamine it.MR. CORRIGAN. But that last sentence you were talking aboutbefore provides for that.MR. GRAMLEY. He means in the testimony.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking about the testimony. Allright, I guess we're finished. I don't know where we are on theseprojections. I think you ought to look at them again anyway. I don'tfeel that strongly about it, but I don't think we have to sit here andsay we're assuming that the exchange rate is exactly where it is now.But I think an assumption that it does not decline [unintelligible]something like getting up toward 10 percent. We seem to have 5percent up and down wiggles regularly, and I'm not sure that that'sanything very much. But make an assumption that permits the Humphrey-Hawkins report to say that these projections are not based upon asevere, if that's the right word, depreciation of the dollar whichwould obviously have substantial, important and significantimplications for changes in prices. The dollar remains substantiallywithin the range of the last year. That probably allows for quite adecline, doesn't it?MR. WALLICH. Wouldn't that have a substantial market effect?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm trying partly to avoid themarket effect. We're saying we assume that the dollar is essentiallyin the range of the past year, but if it did decline a lot more thanthat, we would have more price inflation.MR. WALLICH. We wouldn't intervene. That might be theconclusion of some.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I hope we're going to intervene inthe deutschemark if the dollar goes above 3 deutschemark. Thatbecomes a threshold.MR. WALLICH. But I was thinking of supporting the dollar.MR. MARTIN. You wouldn't have to take a calculator to Europethen!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. I think Mr. Kichline wouldlike to have [your revised projections] as soon as possible, which heinterprets as midday on Thursday. What's today? Tuesday. I guessthat's all we have, except the [confirmation of the August 21] date ofthe next meeting and sandwiches outside.END OF MEETING-75-