
Certainly the potential exists for the situation to weaken quickly and perhaps even precipitously, but I'm not sure that that's the most likely scenario as of today.
<START>Concerning inflation, what I see happening is that from a low base it is now sluggishly but clearly moving up.<END>
Perhaps in today's high productivity environment this might be more easily reversed than in prior eras.
But I feel that the longer this uptrend goes on, the harder it will be to stop.
<START>And should the economy reaccelerate soon, inflation may well accelerate with it.<END>
The interrelationship of compensation costs and productivity will continue to be key, as will energy prices.
We will watch closely, of course.
Fortunately we have time to watch and to evaluate.
<START>Between the easing of upside risks on the one hand and ongoing substantial 70 momentum in the economy on the other, there would seem to be no urgent need to change either rates or rhetoric at this time.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
MR.
MEYER.
There is in my view relatively little change in the outlook compared to the assessment at our last meeting.
The data and developments we’ve seen since that meeting, however, do reinforce the expectation that we have transitioned into a period of below-trend growth.
In addition they justify a small downward revision to the forecast of real GDP growth, at least over the next few quarters, in line with the adjustment in the Greenbook forecast.
The two most important developments were highlighted in the staff presentation on the outlook this morning.
<START>First, there has been a deterioration in financial conditions, including the wider quality spreads, especially for below investment-grade bonds and tighter lending standards by banks and, second, a heightened anxiety about the financial conditions of some emerging market economies, especially Argentina.<END>
The deterioration in financial conditions in the United States reflects a response to the slowdown that is under way and reinforces the prospect of continued below-trend growth.
Both developments add an element of downside risk to the forecast.
The qualitative story nevertheless remains unchanged.
<START>We appear to be headed, in my view, to a period of below-trend growth and at the same time rising core inflation.<END>
If oil prices decline as projected in the Greenbook, overall inflation is likely to diminish and the rise in core inflation is likely to be significantly damped over the forecast period.
The focus in our discussion this morning is clearly on assessing or reassessing the balance of risks in the forecast.
In assessing the balance of risks, we have to look at both the 71 risks in the baseline forecast and the risks relative to the baseline forecast.
<START>The risks, for example, are balanced in the baseline Greenbook forecast between below-trend growth and a rising unemployment rate on the one hand and rising core inflation on the other hand.<END>
<START>This is an uncomfortable mix but one that may be inevitable following the long period of above-trend growth and the decline in the unemployment rate to its current exceptionally low level.<END>
It is this balance that I presume encouraged the staff to maintain a constant nominal funds rate through the next year in the Greenbook forecast.
Relative to the Greenbook baseline forecast, I'm slightly more concerned about weaker growth, especially next year.
<START>And if growth turns out to be in line with the Greenbook projection, I'm slightly more concerned that inflation might turn out to be higher than projected in the Greenbook.<END>
My assessment of the risks reflects my view that both the temporary demand and disinflationary effects of the productivity acceleration may now be dissipating.
While the risks in and relative to the baseline forecast may now be more balanced--and I think that is the case--there are nevertheless a number of reasons for this Committee to delay a move from a statement that the risks are unbalanced toward higher inflation to one of balanced risks.
First, we’ve had only a single quarter of below-trend growth after 4-1/2 years of persistent above-trend growth.
We might want to be more confident that growth will remain below trend before we take such a step.
Second, the unemployment rate today is at its cyclical low and significantly below the staff's estimate of the short-run NAIRU.
We might not want to remove the disproportionate focus on inflation risks until we see labor market tightness unwind at least a little.
And third, the benign inflation forecast depends importantly on the assumed 72 decline in the price of oil.
We might want to wait until we see at least some confirmation of that trend.
<START>My greatest concern today is that a move to a balanced risk assessment would reinforce expectations of a near-term easing.<END>
<START>I would have less of a problem if financial markets expected a balanced risk assessment and incorporated expectations of a stable funds rate going forward.<END>
<START>Perhaps the issue is how to communicate our assessment that the risks have become more balanced without appearing to downgrade our concern about the risk of higher core inflation and without reinforcing expectations of a near-term policy easing.<END>
<START>Finally, with core inflation at or above my long-run target and with a further increase in core inflation over the forecast horizon and beyond in the Greenbook and my own forecast, I would prefer that we be very cautious about removing an assessment that the risks are weighted mainly toward higher inflation.<END>
<START>True, growth is also expected to be below trend, and we have to be alert to the downside risks.<END>
But below-trend growth when output is above potential, as I believe is the case, is desirable.
That’s exactly what we need to mitigate the risks of rising core inflation.
There is nothing, on the other hand, desirable about the projected rise in core inflation.
<START>Maintaining the statement of unbalanced risks would effectively reinforce the point that, given the prevailing tightness in the labor market and inflation already above our long-run objective, there is a higher than normal threshold before the Fed would consider easing.<END>
I believe that would be the right message to send.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Before we break, Dave Stockton wanted to make a comment.
73 MR. STOCKTON.
Yes, Mr. Chairman.
It was an oversight on my part, in responding to President Poole’s question about the difference between the policy outlook of the staff and the markets, not to have noted that it's quite conceivable that the markets are viewing 4 percent unemployment as sustainable.
If we were to take that assumption on board in our forecast, we would have unemployment rising above the natural rate and inflation moving down over the forecast projection.
And both those factors would clearly push in the direction of lower nominal federal funds rates than we’re showing in our forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Shall we break for coffee?
[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Mr. Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The information on hand since your last meeting indicates that growth has slowed more definitively to a pace below that of the economy’s potential.
And tighter financial conditions along with greater uncertainty about the profitability of new investment going forward should provide greater assurance that the pace of economic expansion will not surge again any time soon.
At the same time, however, labor markets remain tight, and incoming data continue to point to some upward pressures on costs and underlying price inflation.
<START>As Dave detailed, the staff has responded by marking down its forecasts of growth in aggregate demand by a little more than potential supply, while retaining the projected upcreep in core inflation over the next two years.<END>
On balance, the new information would not appear to be sufficiently at odds with your expectations or your desires to cause you to alter the stance of policy at this meeting.
Instead, the question for the Committee would seem to be whether that information and changes in the outlook provide a basis for shifting from an assessment that the balance of risks going forward is weighted toward increased inflation pressures to one that risks are now balanced.
The judgment that risks are balanced does not have to wait until the point where you are no longer concerned about inflation pressures.
<START>Rather, the balance of risks statement envisions weighing the risks to economic performance relative to both of the Committee’s long-term goals--price stability and sustainable economic growth, the latter being a translation into growth rates of the legislated objective of maximum employment.<END>
<START>Because the statement is concerned with the 74 possibility of developments that might move the economy away from those goals, it is formulated in first differences--intensifying inflation pressures and economic weakness.<END>
<START>In this context, economic weakness refers to output growth below that of the economy’s potential--in other words, declining resource utilization.<END>
<START>In the circumstances in which the economy finds itself at this time, you can readily experience both intensifying inflation pressures and economic weakness, and be concerned about their extent in the future, in effect balancing the relative strengths of these two adverse outcomes.<END>
<START>Such a configuration of economic developments is typically associated with an adverse supply shock, like the increase in the price of oil, which raises prices and depresses demand.<END>
Rising inflation and weak growth also would be characteristic of a situation like that embodied in the staff forecast in which the economy had overshot the level of its long-run potential so that prices were accelerating, but policy already had become sufficiently restrictive to return resource utilization to its sustainable level.
In both cases, crosscurrents are playing on the appropriate stance of policy.
The rise in the inflation rate by itself would tend to suggest that the federal funds rate might need to increase over time.
But the shortfall in growth relative to the economy’s potential would tend to call for the federal funds rate to decrease as resource utilization fell.
For example, a policy that was restraining an economy operating with excess demand should become less restrictive as the level of the economy’s long-run potential is reached.
A balance of risks statement requires your judgment about whether one of these tendencies is likely to override the other in determining economic performance and affecting policy in the future.
<START>If the two tendencies were thought most likely to have roughly offsetting effects on policy, the risks still might not be balanced if you saw the possible outcomes around the modal forecast as skewed.<END>
In making these determinations, you need to be thinking not only about possible outcomes for prices and economic activity, but also about how much weight in your policy strategy you would place on each type of deviation from your objectives.
In the current situation, the state of the labor market would seem to support a judgment that considerable risks of rising inflation persist.
The unemployment rate has stayed at a level that at best you may consider to be around the lower end of the range of plausible values for a sustainable rate in the near term.
<START>Most of the recent compensation and price data have been broadly consistent with a mildly accelerating trend, like the one anticipated by a staff forecast that embeds a NAIRU above the current unemployment rate.<END>
Moreover, if productivity growth is leveling out as in the staff forecast, the economy is entering a period when unit labor costs will begin to come under added upward pressure as workers catch up 75 to previous increases in producitivity.
<START>And the longer energy prices remain elevated, the more they threaten to boost inflation expectations and foster added wage demands to offset the associated erosion of real income gains.<END>
<START>The question then is whether these inflation risks have now become balanced by risks to sustainable economic growth.<END>
<START>Several of you noted at the Committee’s last meeting that you found the choice between unbalanced and balanced risks a close call, and the evidence since that time would suggest that the risks of economic weakness have increased.<END>
Actual growth has come in a bit below staff expectations, with the shortfalls occurring in final demand, not inventory accumulation.
<START>Moreover, the decline in stock prices, firming in exchange rates, ratcheting up of terms and standards on bank credit to businesses, and rise in bond yields on marginal credits indicate an appreciable tightening of financial conditions at the existing federal funds rate, which will have restraining effects on demand.<END>
The staff response to these developments has been to reduce the assumed tightening and to postpone it until 2002--perhaps beyond the “foreseeable future” of the Committee’s statement.
<START>Over the next year, the gradual uptrend in both inflation and unemployment rates in the staff forecast would seem to have about offsetting effects on the desired funds rate, suggesting balanced risks over this period, unless you were placing much greater weight on containing inflation than on damping variability in output.<END>
<START>Moreover, developments in recent months might also be read as suggesting that the risks of a shortfall in economic growth from the staff forecast have increased.<END>
One source of asymmetric risks might be financial markets, where investor skittishness and concerns about credit quality and earnings seem more likely to intensify than to ease, especially if the staff outlook for earnings turns out to be on target.
Indeed, banks have already told us that they intend to firm loan terms and standards in the future.
<START>Growing financial market caution, by making credit less available and more expensive, increase the odds on other downside possibilities identified in the Greenbook--a shortfall in investment spending and problems abroad.<END>
would We may again be in a period in which the standard linear relationships in our models do not capture the likely market developments and their feedback to economic activity.
<START>To the extent weakness already evident in stock and bond markets reflects expectations of lower profitability or perceptions of increased risk for investment projects, the equilibrium real interest rate would be reduced.<END>
That would provide another reason why the current federal funds rate might be more restraining than it appeared to be only a few months ago.
<START>If the actual funds rate is above the equilibrium rate, conditions are in place to contain inflation before long, even if the economy is now producing beyond the level of its potential.<END>
<START>And the case for balanced risks would be 76 stronger if the Committee saw better odds than the staff that an unemployment rate close to recent levels is sustainable, implying a smaller probability of an updrift in inflation than in the staff forecast.<END>
<START>Finally, given the skittishness of financial markets with possible restraining effects on the economy, the Committee might be more comfortable being positioned at balanced risks going forward.<END>
<START>In the event of a major identifiable downward shock, like a bond or equity market collapse, you could ease from any position, including a position of unbalanced risks toward rising inflation, and markets would not feel they had been misled.<END>
<START>But easing from a position of unbalanced risks in response to more incremental changes in the outlook--say, a further firming of credit conditions--could be trickier.<END>
And the issue may not be easing per se, but moving to unbalanced risks toward economic weakness, which also might be more readily accomplished if the Committee already were at balanced risks.
In short, the Committee might see a posture of balanced risks as providing a calming influence on markets and opening up a wider array of possible actions or announcements in December, in the event of further softening in demand or adverse market developments.
Nonetheless, the Committee may still have sufficient doubts about the extent and persistence of the downshift in aggregate demand to justify a judgment that inflation risks continue to be the dominant threat to economic performance.
To date, job growth has slowed only to the pace that would keep labor markets tight, not relieve pressure appreciably.
Strong consumer confidence and continued high long-term returns on business capital investment should support solid growth going forward.
Although the real federal funds rate is elevated, so too is trend productivity growth and the equilibrium real rate.
<START>The staff forecast sees real short-term interest rates now at levels that would tend to cap inflation and return the economy to potential, but this process is gradual, taking several years, suggesting that real rates may be only mildly restrictive.<END>
And, in that forecast, nominal rates need to rise to maintain the level of real rates as inflation itself picks up.
So, as you know, the Greenbook anticipates that your next action--admittedly a long way off--is more likely to be a firming than an easing of policy, just to hold core inflation at a rate somewhat above recent experience.
<START>Moreover, after its uptick of recent years, the rate of core inflation might already be high enough that you would want to continue to put considerably more policy weight on possible increases in inflation than on potential shortfalls in economic growth.<END>
Finally, concerns about the effects on financial markets of moving to balanced risks might also weigh in favor of staying with your current assessment, at least for a while.
Market participants are likely to take a change in this assessment as indicating that the Committee was no longer 77 keeping the door closed to near-term policy easing.
The size of the resulting rally in financial markets is hard to predict.
It might not be large;
<START>the Committee would be announcing balanced risks--not a dominant concern about economic weakness--so the Committee would still be lagging the market’s assessment of its likely behavior going forward.<END>
<START>And an increasing number of observers--albeit still a minority--expect you to announce balanced risks after this meeting.<END>
<START>Nonetheless, there is a chance that the reaction would be strong, and that against the background of the Committee’s shift, the markets would seize on weaker elements in inherently noisy data over the coming intermeeting period to build in considerably higher odds on near-term action than the Committee would find comfortable.<END>
<START>By themselves, such reactions might turn a situation of barely balanced risks into one that returned to an imbalance toward heightened inflation pressures.<END>
<START>And you might worry whether possibly being perceived as getting ready once again to cushion a downdraft in financial markets wouldn’t reduce incentives to reassess credit and earnings risks, truncating an ultimately healthy process before it had run its course and building in future over-confidence. .<END>
<START>Holding the current assessment at this meeting would allow you to get additional evidence to judge whether--after taking account of any market reaction--the growth of demand was likely to be enough below the growth of the economy’s potential over time to relieve pressures on resource markets and counterbalance inflation risks.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Questions for Don?
Governor Meyer.
MR.
MEYER.
Don, I have a question about the analytical framework you used in the earlier part of your discussion.
I may have misunderstood you but it seemed to me that you were saying that maximum sustainable growth is the translation of the objective of maximum employment--sort of identical to that in some sense.
My reaction is that that's not the way I ever thought about it.
It seems to me that maximum employment is a utilization rate concept.
<START>And we have the problem here that this slowdown in growth may in fact be pushing the output level to our target--not away from our target, but to our target.<END>
And that's good.
MR.
KOHN.
Right.
78 MR. MEYER.
<START>But inflation, given that we are perhaps already above where we’d like to be, is clearly pushing it away.<END>
MR.
KOHN.
The sustainable growth is intended, I think, to be consistent with changes in resource utilization.
I agree that we can start, as perhaps we are now, with over-utilized resources.
But suppose you already have in effect a restraining policy to bring resource utilization down.
<START>If you start from a position where you have adjusted to that situation--you have already tightened policy to bring resource utilization back down to its potential level--as resource utilization gets to that potential you'd better be easing that federal funds rate, other things equal, or you will overshoot the potential.<END>
MR.
MEYER.
That’s absolutely fair.
The question is how far along we are and whether that's a situation that would really be useful in 2002 or 2003 or whether it’s relevant in the next several months.
MR.
KOHN.
If you think of the “foreseeable future” as about a year, and you crank this through the staff forecast, I think you will find that inflation is creeping up and so is the unemployment rate.
It depends on the weights you put on those two measures.
But if you put roughly equal weight on them, taking account of the real funds rate, I think you'd find that they approximately offset going forward over the next year.
I was trying to explain the situation where you had already tightened.
Let’s say you were already somewhat restrictive in order to get resource utilization down to where it needs to be--and growth below the rate of growth of potential would be doing that--that slower growth just by itself, ignoring inflation, should be moving you to lowering interest rates.
<START>Now, inflation concerns may get you to raise the funds rate and unemployment to lower inflation, and then you would-- 79 MR. MEYER.<END>
I take it that’s from a framework similar to the Greenbook and maybe that's my problem.
<START>But beginning with an unemployment rate of 3.9 percent, where the long-run NAIRU might be closer to 5-1/2 percent, it just seems a bit premature to be worrying about that.<END>
If we were at a different starting point, then I would agree that that could be relevant.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Don, my question is similar to Governor Meyer’s.
It strikes me that how you view the risk statement depends on how you view monetary policy right now.
And this is what I think you were just saying:
Suppose you view monetary policy right now as tight--that is, the funds rate is above the natural rate, whatever term you want to use--and the economy is slowing.
If we still have the risk of inflation but we have a tight policy, which is addressing that, and now we see a slowing, that means the downside risks are increasing.
<START>We might then want a balanced risk statement because we have a tight policy to address the one concern and the economy is heading in this other direction.<END>
So, how one views the appropriateness of the risk statement depends on how one judges the tightness of current monetary policy.
MR.
KOHN.
Suppose you started from the premise that the Committee had already acted over the past year and a half to tighten monetary policy, consistent with an outlook that the economy is operating beyond its potential and inflation is likely to go up.
If that were the case, you might judge that the Committee had already put monetary policy in a restrictive stance.
If you thought that the Committee had not tightened enough, I agree that easing in response to recent developments might not be appropriate, and you would be more comfortable with further tightening as resource utilization rose.
80 But I was starting from the premise that you probably thought you had done just about enough--maybe you had a little doubt--or you would have done more.
So I was taking your actions as being indicative of a view that you weren't that far from where you thought you wanted to be.
The real rate must be somewhere in the neighborhood of the natural rate, if not a little higher, or we wouldn't have a rising unemployment rate in the staff forecast.
So you might judge that it's already restrictive.
The other point in my briefing was this:
That even if you had the view last time that policy might not be restrictive enough, certainly you would hold that view less strongly today, given what has happened over the intermeeting period--whether you wanted to move to a balanced risk statement or not.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further questions for Don?
Let me start then.
<START>The forces that in my view have been most prominent since the last meeting are the still high level of oil and energy prices and the evident weakening of profit margins.<END>
<START>In combination, those forces have interacted and exerted a significant effect on the capital goods markets where a lot of the recent weakness in the economy is coming from.<END>
I think the way to look at the capital goods markets is, first, to try to get a judgment as to whether in fact expectations of longer-term profitability in those markets have changed in any material way.
The answer apparently is “no.” If we take the I/B/E/S data, which are really the best we have on profit expectations, real or crazy, those numbers have not changed.
Indeed, including the data for October, long-term expected earnings per share in the high-tech sector are still at a very high level.
Even for the so-called “old economy,” the thousand-plus security analysts in the I/B/E/S survey still 81 expect earnings to be quite strong.
<START>Now, as I have said before, one can argue whether these forecasts are realistic and whether they are biased, but the truth of the matter is that they have not deteriorated.<END>
<START>And since they have not, one has to conclude that views with respect to potential productivity increases, not necessarily in terms of the structural numbers that we use but as reflected in underlying views regarding investment opportunities, continue quite strong.<END>
<START>It's one thing, however, to make an argument that we may be, for example, only halfway up the S-curve in a long-term technological expansion and conclude that capital investment is going to continue very strong.<END>
But, if we get, as indeed we are beginning to get, an oversupply in some of the high-tech areas, we are going to see some weakening in the growth of capital goods expenditures.
I think the poster child here is fiber optics.
The rates of return on all types of investments related to fiber optics have been extraordinarily high, and the demand has been going up at an unbelievable pace.
The problem is one of emerging oversupply.
Those who got into the business early on are doing extraordinarily well.
<START>However, as in commercial real estate ventures where developers who are first to get in when vacancy rates are low make out like gangbusters, those who wait to get in may still see low vacancy rates, but if they do not take account of all the new buildings under construction, they may come off very poorly.<END>
That's what has happened in the bandwidth market.
The amount of fiber optic capacity has gone up astronomically.
In one sense, as someone mentioned, demand is tripling but supply is going up sevenfold.
And what that means, of course, is that prospective long-term rates of return must start to fall.
82 We are beginning to see the same thing happen, obviously, with regard to the outlook for short-term profits, and we are beginning to observe a pullback in this particular type of investment.
It’s not that five years from now the levels of both demand and capacity won’t be very significantly higher than they are today.
What we have is a short-term glut, and there's some very considerable evidence that that is indeed the case in a lot of the high-tech areas.
Clearly, that is not a long-term concern, but the markets don't know about long-term concerns.
<START>The stock price levels in a lot of the high-tech industries have been undercut by very weak output prices, and those industries are beginning to experience a squeeze on their profit margins.<END>
Another factor, for which Board staff has provided some numerical estimates, is the question of how large the increase in energy costs has been in the nonfinancial corporate sector.
The staff estimates that total energy costs of nonfinancial, nonenergy corporations have gone up roughly $150 billion since early 1999.
<START>When we think of that in terms of pre-tax profits, it is a very large number, and it's very difficult to get around the conclusion that a significant part of the erosion in overall profitability is the result of the inability of business firms to pass through these increases in energy costs.<END>
Remember, the rise in energy costs involves not only petroleum.
The increase in natural gas prices and its spillover to electric power account for a large portion of the higher energy costs.
Even coal prices are up somewhat.
So we are looking at a very major set of cost increases that are beginning to have an impact on profitability.
Profitability decreases are also a factor moderating the growth of the capital goods market in the high-tech area.
That growth is decelerating from 50 percent to 20 percent, which is not altogether a disaster.
But the high-tech area has constituted such a 83 large proportion of GDP growth that even a little deceleration triggers multiplier effects that are beginning to affect the consumer markets.
We are indeed seeing some softening in consumer expenditures.
The October retail sales figures were consistent with the Greenbook forecast of a 3-1/2 percent annual rate of growth in PCE for the fourth quarter.
But November sales are a little softer.
We obviously don't have very much information about motor vehicle sales this month, but we are getting the same impression you are, President Moskow--namely, that the sales of most of the major auto companies are running under their forecasts, which seasonally adjusted already had been set a shade below October levels.
Now, that is not necessarily meaningful at this point because a very big portion of their forecasts is realized in the last ten days of the month.
We all remember the time when they were providing us ten-day data.
Now they say they don't have ten-day data.
They have daily data, but they don't have a mechanism to add them up.
[Laughter] At any rate, the tone in the motor vehicle markets is a little weaker.
We are beginning to see that softening spill over into auto parts, and that is a fairly big portion of the industry.
It's the reason why business conditions in the Cleveland and Chicago Districts, as I listened to the comments from those Districts, are described as somewhat softer.
The big jump in initial claims a week ago, while largely stemming from the motor vehicle industry, is not something that we can immediately dismiss.
<START>The numbers that are coming out tomorrow on initial claims are down a bit, but they are still well above their recent lows.<END>
Insured unemployment clearly has moved up in contrast to the household survey numbers and the related unemployment rate.
This dichotomy cannot go on for very much longer.
In other words, we'll either get a fairly significant 84 downward spike in initial claims after we've passed through some of these layoffs, which would then return the claims data to consistency with a 4 percent unemployment rate.
<START>Or, in the alternative, we could see weaker household data and an unemployment rate that starts to move up.<END>
The outcome is not yet clear, and I don't think we are going to know what it is for a number of weeks.
Whether the general slowing of the expansion is being reinforced by developments on the credit side is a very important issue.
As Governor Ferguson pointed out, our estimates of overall nonfarm business credit are down quite significantly for the month of October.
The tightening that is being reported anecdotally is really quite impressive, even though it's easy to exaggerate it.
<START>To be sure, this is not 1998, when for a few days it was impossible to get a bid on an investment-grade bond.<END>
Currently, it is just costs that are being affected, but it's fairly obvious that this economy is not about to accelerate rather quickly.
<START>On the inflation front, we have some very funny numbers.<END>
Inflation expectations, even granted the significant rise in energy costs, have not moved.
The TIPS implied inflation rate on 10-year issues is about where it was two or three months ago, and if anything it is lower.
The University of Michigan survey results, after a slight increase last month, have come back down.
The current data are somewhat difficult to read.
<START>For example, leaving aside the issue of the PCE versus the CPI, if we estimate prices for the nonfarm business sector the way BEA calculates them, we find that the inflation rate in the nonfinancial corporate area is really quite benign and that the entire pickup that we are getting ends up in the noncorporate business residual.<END>
<START>It is conceivable that the noncorporate business sector has experienced something close to a 5 percent 85 price increase in the last year, but I doubt it.<END>
I think what we have here is the same problem we have had all along, namely that there are biases in these data and it is very difficult to estimate the trend.
That the core rate of inflation is rising is in my view unambiguous, no matter what price series we deal with.
But estimates of the current level of the core inflation rate are, I think, open to quite serious questions.
The unit labor cost data in the corporate area are slightly negative over the past four quarters.
In the total nonfarm business area, they are up, I believe, 0.2 percent.
The big third-quarter number is merely the noise that that series creates and if we look at it in terms of a moving average, there is very little evidence of any significant acceleration in labor costs.
<START>There is deterioration in the inflation rate stemming from interest costs and energy costs, and those are not trivial sources of deterioration.<END>
At the end of the day it doesn't have to be labor costs that are causing the overall inflation deterioration.
The crucial issue, as Larry Meyer said, is where we put the NAIRU (“neigh-ru”)--of course, he likes to say the NAIRU (“nigh-ru”).
[Laughter] How that is going to end up in the transcript, I don't know!
If you believe the NAIRU is at 5-1/2 percent, then we have a serious problem.
If the number is 4 percent, as David Stockton says the market is presuming, then we don't have a problem.
When this transcript is published five years from now, we will know the answer to that question, but at this point we do not.
<START>All in all, I think that we have, as all of you have said, a combination of the potential persistence of significant inflationary pressures and an unquestioned increase in overall signs of weakness.<END>
<START>In other words, my judgment, and I guess I agree with almost 86 everybody else, is that it would be premature to move to a balanced risk statement.<END>
I say that for a couple of reasons.
As Don Kohn has suggested, even if we believe that the risks are truly balanced as of today, the market doesn't believe that is our view.
As a consequence, were we to go to balance today we would almost surely end up tomorrow with financial conditions that would be too easy in terms of the current outlook.
In other words, we cannot act without affecting the balance of risks itself.
It is necessary for us to incorporate in our judgment of what we should do how the markets are going to behave because a very crucial policy issue is the degree of financial tightness.
<START>If I were asked to identify what has changed the most significantly in the last several months, I would say it was the quite remarkable tightening not only of the junk bond markets but of all the investment-grade markets, and very particularly the banking markets.<END>
We are getting some serious restraint in the latter area, and it seems quite unlikely to me that we can get acceleration in economic activity from the current level.
At the end of the day I would like to stay where we are, including retention of our statement that the balance of risks is toward higher inflation.
At the same time, I would like to try to capture in the language of the announcement our recognition of the presence of weakening forces in the economy.
I would not want to be in the position of adopting a hard asymmetric statement of the balance of risks toward rising inflation and then see the economy weaken from under us.
That would make us look really unimaginative.
<START>[Laughter] Accordingly, I'd like to suggest that we stay with the balance of risks toward inflation statement, but I want to read to you a draft statement that would accompany it.<END>
In present circumstances, I don't think you can readily vote appropriately without having the full statement up front, because I think the statement is really what we 87 are arguing about at this point.
I don't believe there is a really serious difference of opinion about where policy ought to be currently.
But what we say in this case does matter.
Let me read just the operative part of a proposed press release:
<START>The utilization of the pool of available workers remains at an unusually high level, and the increase in energy prices, though having limited effects on core measures of prices to date, still harbors the possibility of raising inflation expectations.<END>
The Committee accordingly continues to see a risk of heightened inflation pressures.
However, softening in business and household demand, and tightening conditions in financial markets over recent months, suggest that the economy could expand for a time at a pace below the productivity-enhanced rate of growth of its potential to produce.
<START>Nonetheless, to date the easing of demand pressures has not been sufficient to warrant a change in the Committee's judgment that against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth, and of the information currently available, the risks continue to be weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the foreseeable future.<END>
Accordingly, I would like to put on the table for your reactions the balance of risks toward inflation language and the associated draft press release that I have just read.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Mr. Chairman, I find myself exactly where you are.
I believe that we have to stay with the balance of risks on the side of inflation but we also have to express our view that the real world has changed somewhat.
The proposed verbiage certainly sounds like something a central bank would produce.
[Laughter] Since we are a central bank, I think it says just the right thing and I believe that the language sets the right tone.
So, I agree fully with your proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
88 MR. POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, first of all I agree that we should hold steady on the federal funds rate.
<START>But I would prefer a balanced risks statement, and let me give you the logic of my argument.<END>
<START>It seems to me that the way monetary policy works today is that we maintain a firm medium-run and long-run commitment to low and stable inflation, so what we do has to be consistent with that.<END>
At the same time, a tremendous amount of short-run stabilization depends on the market changing interest rates in response to short-run developments.
That being the case, it seems to me that we want the market to feel free to move rates in response to current developments in the direction that those developments demand.
What I am concerned about is that we not set up an expectation in the market, which exists today, that there is no near-term easing in prospect.
That's the expectation that's built into the federal funds rate futures.
I would like to see a statement that’s more neutral with respect to that possibility so that the market could move more readily in either direction.
I think we have to be careful about reading too much into the TIPS spread.
In my view the TIPS spread is a measure of our credibility, which is extremely important.
I don't think it necessarily means that we have policy tuned right.
I could cite a contrary case--namely 1982, when policy had changed dramatically but the markets didn't believe that the Fed was going to stay with it.
So inflation expectations were very slow to come down and it took a long time for the expectations to catch up with the reality of where policy was.
And the same thing could happen today.
I don’t think we want to assume that the TIPS spread shows that we've got policy just right.
89 I would prefer that in the statement we make it clear that the risks are now balanced, but not because the inflation risk has gone away.
Indeed I think, if anything, the near-term inflation risk has gone up somewhat, which we could say.
Rather, the risks are now balanced because the outlook on the output and employment side has changed.
I agree that the critical issue is the combination of the statement itself and the balance of risks clause in the statement.
But I would not like to leave the market with the message that we don't see any reasonable prospect of a policy easing in the next few meetings, which I think is going to be the tenor of the way the market will interpret that message.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I too would prefer a balanced risks statement, and my reasons are perhaps similar to Bill Poole’s.
I think we do have upside risks for inflation, which we are addressing.
That's why we have a fed funds rate at the level it is now, which I believe indicates a fairly tight policy.
And I think by holding that position we have introduced new risks that bring the position more in balance in terms of the outlook.
In my view what is happening with your additional statement is that we've come full circle.
We're now finding ways to compromise on the risks statement;
we are neutering its role and putting more emphasis on the rest of the press release.
<START>That may in fact be the option we end up with, which better describes the views of this Committee in terms of the risks that have now been introduced and the policy actions that might be taken in the future.<END>
But by having these two different statements, I think we are introducing a new potential for confusion in the marketplace as well.
So I would go for a balanced statement now in the press release, but we’ll see how this works.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
90 MR. FERGUSON.
I'm sorry you got to me so quickly!
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Do you want to pass?
MR.
FERGUSON.
No, I don’t want to pass.
The reason I said that is that I’m actually very sympathetic to the points that Presidents Hoenig and Poole just made.
I think we've worked too hard to be as honest and transparent with the market as possible.
So if we really think that the risks are balanced, we should say the risks are balanced.
On the other hand, I have to say that I also am sympathetic to the notion that we don't want the markets to build in more of an expectation of a near-term easing than they currently have, and they do have some in there.
So if I can put it this way, on balance [Laughter], in thinking through all of this--which obviously I did a bit before we came to the meeting--the statement that you have introduced strikes me as a very fair description of where we are.
In some sense it's not quite where I am, but I believe it is a fair description of where we are as a Committee and I think it gets the message across without creating some uncertain risks.
So, I'm supportive of the statement even though I understand some of the concerns that others have raised.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
<START>Mr. Chairman, I certainly support your recommendation for an unchanged funds rate, and I also think it's important to retain the statement of prior meetings that the balance of risks is toward higher inflation.<END>
I believe it is important as well to explain this in terms of developments that have occurred since our last meeting.
And in my view the statement that you read to us accomplishes that very well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
91 MR. MCTEER.
<START>I would strongly prefer a statement of balanced risks, not because I think the inflation risk has diminished, but because the risk on the down side has increased substantially.<END>
<START>And as Bill Poole said, that assessment could be communicated in the press release so as not to give the market the wrong idea.<END>
<START>I happen to believe that rapid growth in productivity and output has been holding inflation down in recent years.<END>
If I'm right about that, the unfortunate corollary is that less strength in those supply-side factors could lead to higher inflation even as demand weakens.
A more extreme version of that used to be called stagflation.
We need to be in a position to move in either direction and not be caught leaning in one direction and suddenly have to move in another.
We have an oil price problem, which may be with us longer than we expect.
<START>Given that, along with the decline and volatility in the stock market, the increased strains in financial markets, the decline in profit growth, and the volatility in the Middle East and Florida [Laughter], I think a move to a balanced risk statement would reassure markets that we are living in the real world.<END>
Otherwise, I think we're going to appear to be out of touch with what's going on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I strongly support your recommendation.
I fear that if we went to neutral language, it would be read by the market as the first step in an easing cycle.
Many in the market expect that and I think they would see a change of that sort as confirming their belief.
And I believe that could prove to be very seriously and importantly misleading.
The Greenbook and at least some of us here see a further tightening as the most likely next move.
Obviously that could be wrong.
It could even be wrong quite soon.
But I do not see any need to make a change 92 now.
Maybe we'll want to do that at the next meeting;
maybe we won't.
At any rate, I see no need to be preemptive based on the evidence that’s before us today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Mr. Chairman, I'm comfortable with the proposition you’ve put on the table, subject to whatever editing of the press statement we decide to do.
I’ve scribbled a whole page of notes in support of no change in the bias, thinking that we were going to have that level of discussion.
But I’ll spare myself and everyone else the arguments.
My concluding thought, though, was going to be that I believe the long-term consequences of a further deterioration in inflation would be a far more serious and more damaging economic outcome than any short-term loss of output.
And in response to your comments, I hypothesized that inflation expectations haven’t moved because, according to surveys, people are expecting us and counting on us to cap inflation at the levels we’ve had or even move them lower.
<START>I would like to reserve the right to come back and make my longer arguments if, during the course of the next few minutes, the weight of opinion shifts toward the side of a balanced statement.<END>
I'm very comfortable with where you are and with the proposal you've put on the table.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I'm sorry, did you say you want to make a different-- MR. GUYNN.
If it turns out in the course of the go-around-- CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Oh, I see what you mean.
MR.
GUYNN.
<START>I'd like to come back and give you the rest of my arguments in favor of retaining the bias, if in fact it comes to that.<END>
93 CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
In other words, you want a vote recount?
[Laughter] MR. MCDONOUGH.
I think we just won the argument!
[Laughter] MR. KELLEY.
Machine or hand count?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support your recommendation.
For some time I’ve believed that our policy is positioned about where it should be.
That continues to be my view.
We obviously haven't had to take any action in the last several months, and that's fine.
I would have trouble changing the balance of risk statement because in my view not enough has changed in the past several weeks.
I think we would have a real problem explaining and justifying the basis for such a change.
Some of our discussion has been couched in terms of future growth of the economy below potential.
Putting aside what we really know about potential with any confidence, obviously our ability to forecast the economy reasonably accurately is limited.
One thing we do know is that the economy has tended to the very, very resilient in recent years.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I agree completely with your recommendation both on keeping the balance of risks toward higher inflation and the language that you read.
I agree with President McDonough that it is central bankish type of language, and maybe I've been here too long, but I thought it was very well stated!
[Laughter] Let me make just a couple of comments.
I think your point that we can't act on the tilt without influencing the financial markets at this time is a very important one.
94 Those in the market obviously read our statements carefully;
we’ve all seen how they interpreted our last few statements.
We changed the verb, I think, in one sentence a little, and they read it very, very carefully, and they saw that as a gradual move.
Just a bit of a counter to President Poole’s point, I think the market will read this proposed statement as a move toward easing, although obviously not as much as our removing the tilt entirely.
Also, I want to associate myself with those around the table who earlier expressed concern about further fiscal stimulus from increased government spending as a result of gridlock.
<START>What has happened this fall is a clear indication to me that we could be going down that road, and that would lead to further fiscal stimulus.<END>
And finally, I just want to say that if there is going to be a recount, I would like to speak first because those of us in Chicago know how to handle recounts!
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I’ve heard that if you rig the numbers in the beginning, you won't have to do a recount.
MR.
MOSKOW.
We have many different ways of accomplishing-- CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I don't want to hear any more!
[Laughter] President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
I support the proposed statement.
I, too, came prepared with a long list of arguments on why we should remain where we were in terms of the tilt.
I'll forgo those and forgo any request to come back and discuss them further.
I find myself in complete agreement with both the wording and the logic behind it.
I recognize that we may not have seen any long-term or major changes in inflation expectations, but the Fed must remain vigilant against that possibility and focus the markets on our continued concern over inflation.
Given the tools at the Fed’s 95 disposal, the best way for us to ensure maximum sustainable growth is to stay focused on our goal of price stability.
<START>With due regard given to the current economic vulnerability, it is essential that the Fed maintain its credibility, and I believe the proposed statement does that.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
First Vice President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
I also agree with your recommendation.
Like others, I was prepared to make a longer statement in case the recommendation was to change the tilt.
And my reason for that is that I am concerned about our objective of achieving price stability.
But like others, I will also spare you from the statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I also agree with both the direction of your policy recommendation, i.e., no change in the funds rate, and with the tilt recommendation.
I think Gary Stern summed up my thoughts about these issues quite completely.
<START>We shouldn't overreact to the fact that the expansion is slowing.<END>
We wanted it to slow.
We don’t know where potential is.
The financial markets happen to be the means by which it is slowing.
It's important to recognize that in our statement, but it’s also important to keep our focus on the still remaining inflationary risk and the fact that we need the economy to slow to address that risk.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The last thing I want to do is to inspire a bunch of lectures from the other side of the table, [Laughter] so I will support the statement.
It is indeed a close call for me.
96 At the same time, let me make two points.
<START>I think we are getting very close to the point where the risks are nearly balanced if not perfectly balanced.<END>
And I think there is an Occam’s razor principle with respect to these press statements.
They get so thoroughly parsed by everybody that in my view there is a lot to be said for the simpler the better.
You have come up with a nice approach that I'll call the downside/upside approach, and I think it will work.
But I think we have to be pretty careful about this and at some point I'd like to go back to a strategy that if the risks really are balanced, we ought to say so.
<START>I have four friends in this argument<END>
—Bill (Poole), Tom (Hoenig), Roger (Ferguson), and Bob (McTeer)--and I would join that list, though supporting your statement.
My other point is on the markets.
I'm not sure we understand very well what the market reaction to all this will be.
It is certainly possible that this would spark a rally and I don't think anybody wants to see that.
But as Don said, there are a couple of scenarios that go the other way.
One is that this could all be factored in, in which case a move to a balanced risk statement won't do too much to the markets.
Another possibility is that markets may think that we see something that they don't, and markets could actually go down.
I have no idea which of these scenarios is the most likely.
So I think we have to be a little careful about being locked in irons, if you will, by the market reaction.
At some point we just have to do what we think is the right thing to do and try to explain it, and I think the markets will come around.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, I strongly favor the policy position you’re recommending, the asymmetry.
And I would just underline what Gary Stern said.
<START>I 97 thought he made an interesting observation, namely that it would be very difficult at this point to explain why we would change to a balanced statement.<END>
And I think that would just further encourage markets to expect that we are beginning a cycle of easing, which in my view would increase the upside risk.
Also, I would go back to something that Governor Kelley said in the economic discussion, and I thought he put it quite well.
It’s just too early to get overly concerned about downside risks.
We have had many quarters in which there was a general consensus that aggregate demand was growing more rapidly than potential.
We now have one quarter when it may be growing somewhat more slowly than potential.
Frankly, I think that's healthy.
And if I could follow on Ned Gramlich’s medical analogies, I wouldn't want to do anything at this point to undercut the therapy.
As far as the statement is concerned, I think this one really gets it exactly right.
I believe the nuances are exactly right.
So, I’m a “yes” on both counts.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
MR.
MEYER.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation in all respects.
Specifically, I think we should retain the statement of unbalanced risks.
And I thought the statement that you read was excellent.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Time to vote.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you.
It’s time to vote, indeed.
Would you read the appropriate language?
MR.
BERNARD.
The wording comes from page 12 in the Bluebook.
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
To further its long-run 98 objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 6-1/2 percent.
" As for the balance of risks sentence, you have heard the introductory words, but the rest of it would read as shown here:
<START>“Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth, and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks continue to be weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the foreseeable future.<END>
" CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Call the roll, please.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman McDonough Yes President Broaddus Yes Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Guynn Yes Governor Kelley Yes Governor Meyer Yes President Moskow Yes President Parry Yes MR. KOHN.
Do you want Lynn Fox to pass out the draft statement?
You already have read most of the statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I’ve read the part of the statement relating to our assessment of the risks.
Well, you can pass it around if anyone wants to take a look at it.
Let me just read the first paragraph to you.
“The Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting today decided to maintain the existing stance of monetary policy, keeping its target for the federal funds rate at 6-1/2 percent.” The rest just states what I read earlier.
The next meeting is December 19th.
Shall we go to lunch?
END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 87
