
But I do see less inflation because of continued 66productivity gains and no subsiding of competitive pressures on pricing.
For next year our outlook is for a continuation of growth at a rate comparable to this year’s, but with no acceleration of inflation.
From a policy perspective, the economy is at a delicate stage.
Interest-sensitive sectors are showing signs of a slowing in demand growth.
Given that we’ve recently put additional tightening into the pipeline, there could be considerable benefit to waiting a while to judge the impact of what we’ve done.
Core inflation this year is about where it was prior to the Asian crisis.
And absent the inflation spike that showed up in the numbers for March, the inflation trend thus far in 2000 does not seem alarming.
<START>Given that the inflation threat is neither severe nor immediate, the risk of adopting a wait-and-see posture seems minimal.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It seems to me that this meeting is much more about NAIRU than any of the other meetings we’ve had, at least in the recent past.
Until now the real economy has been rocketing ahead at a seemingly unsustainable rate and there was at least a whiff in the air that underlying inflation was picking up.
<START>Now real growth has slowed, quite quickly in fact, and the signs of acceleration in inflation do not look so strong either.<END>
It is at least possible that the Fed has already done enough tightening and that we can stand back and examine our work.
There are grounds for thinking that we have done enough already.
<START>If the long-run core inflation rate is about 2 percent and the long-run real interest rate is around 4 percent--which can be read from either the TIP market or inflation-corrected nominal interest rates--the nominal federal funds rate should be at least 6 percent for a balanced economy.<END>
Throw in 50 basis points for leaning against the wind or adjusting for the balance of risks and we are at the 67present funds rate.
In forecasting out at this funds rate, the Greenbook estimates that real growth slows to 4.2 percent for next year, arguably close to the staff’s estimate of the growth of aggregate supply.
Hence, the unemployment rate drops only slightly in the flat funds rate scenario of the Greenbook forecast.
<START>Even though the Greenbook as a whole does not point to the wisdom of this particular policy approach, it suggests that there is at least the chance that such an approach to policy will generate stable, noninflationary growth.<END>
But such a monetary policy would be very unwise if the economy’s unemployment rate is still below NAIRU.
According to the Greenbook forecast, and even more the FRB/US econometric model, NAIRU is still above 5 percent--well above in the case of the FRB/US model.
If NAIRU really is that high, we should view the present lull as just a temporary phenomenon and we should still be tightening policy.
While I strongly believe that monetary policy should be preemptive and have been generally on the hawks’ side of the issue when real growth was rocketing ahead, for a while now I have not been convinced that the economy’s 4 percent unemployment rate is much below NAIRU.
In the econometric research you have all heard about, most fixed coefficient estimates give a NAIRU of 5 percent or higher.
The Kalman filter variable coefficient estimate of Brainard and Perry has NAIRU down to 4 percent.
But when the staff tries a similar approach, they still get NAIRU estimates above 5 percent.
Stock and Watson, and I suppose Greenspan, find the whole exercise quite unconvincing and argue that whatever the estimate, it has enormous standard errors.
Much as I like econometrics, I’m afraid that I’m on the skeptical side on this issue.
The unemployment rate first dipped below the Greenbook estimate of NAIRU in late 1996, three and one-half years ago.
And yet the signs of acceleration in either prices or wages are still rather scant.
We have talked about these signs often and I worry about them as 68much as anybody, but I think “scant” is the operative word.
Some temporary factors slowed the core inflation rate in 1998 and 1999 and these factors have now reversed, showing up as somewhat higher core inflation in early 2000.
Abstracting from this reversal, there has been some but not that much of a rise in core inflation.
Unit labor costs have decelerated up until now, though Larry Slifman gave a disquieting forecast of this measure for the future.
At the same time he also gave some quieting information on items in short supply.
<START>Nobody has mentioned long-term inflation expectations, but they have been remarkably stable, remarkably unresponsive to the oil price increases.<END>
<START>In addition, the Treasury nominal/real interest rate spread looked as if it was increasing last month, but it has moved back down to fairly acceptable levels.<END>
Let me make one further comment on the hard landing scenario.
<START>While the risk of recession was the last thing on everybody’s mind last month when the economy was rocketing ahead, the sharp drop in real growth at least raises this issue.<END>
<START>Given the strength of the present investment boom, I am inclined to downplay any risk of recession.<END>
But the Committee should be mindful of the risk of overshooting.
Policy should be preemptive on the down side as well as the up side.
Putting all this together, it is possible that the Fed has already done enough, that the funds rate is already high enough to stabilize the economy.
<START>But I emphasize the word possible because there is still significant risk that the NAIRU could be in excess of 5 percent and then inflation could begin to heat up or, in Bill Poole’s terms, that the Fed won’t be perceived as being tough enough on inflation.<END>
<START>For now at least, I’m fairly comfortable reverting to our previous watchful waiting mode, giving strong signals that we still think the balance of risks is 69on the up side and that we are prepared to take appropriate action if the data become disquieting.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, we’ve been seeking a slowdown in the expansion for a long time and perhaps we have it at last.
Often when the economy moves into what could be a paradigm shift, this Committee must go through a period when it is uncertain about how to read the course of events.
This appears to be such a time when policy decisions have to be made.
Please be patient with a 20 second review of recent history.
<START>In the fall of 1998 we eased policy not because a weakening economy called for it, but rather in response to a looming international crisis that required quick, strong action.<END>
The pre-existing level of the fed funds rate was restored over the second half of 1999, but the easing was no doubt a factor in the strong surge of growth from mid-1999 until now.
So far this year we have taken rates 100 basis points higher, with half of that done only a month ago.
Today the easing of 18 months earlier is going away and the increases of the past five months are kicking in.
If we believe it is certain that further tightening will be required, it might be best to push ahead right now.
Alternatively, if we believe the opposite, we ought to tell that to the market with a symmetric statement and a no change directive.
But it is probably not that simple.
We are in what I would call “maybe” time.
<START>Maybe productivity will continue to be so strong that costs will stay in line and overheating avoided for some time to come.<END>
Maybe the NAIRU in this era is a lot lower than we thought and consequently the danger we perceive from it is a lot less than we believe.
Maybe the consumer, having bought everything in sight and run his and her debt service load back up to the old record levels in the process, will continue to buy but at a more subdued pace and thus will extend the moderating consumption pace of recent weeks.
Of course, all these 70suppositions could flow the other way.
Maybe consumer spending, capital expenditures, and the stock market, joined now by exports, go ballistic again.
will All these maybes plus $3 will buy you a grande size latte at Starbucks!
Maybe, maybe, maybe.
[Laughter] But the good news is that there are some important certainties and near certainties.
In my opinion, near certainty number one is that inflation likely will creep up further but is unlikely to explode in our faces over the forecast period.
Near certainty number two is that sales of housing and autos, two large cyclically sensitive sectors, are both slowing from their peaks and seem likely to stay at lower levels for some time.
Near certainty number three is that the federal surplus is burgeoning and will provide a drag on growth at least through the early months of the next Administration, which is our forecast horizon.
Certainties in my opinion include number one--while we know little about it as yet--that there is a slowdown of unknown magnitude presently under way.
Certainty number two, as we know of course, is that there is a substantial additional impact still in the pipeline from tightening already in place.
And certainty number three is that by our August meeting we will be in possession of a large amount of invaluable additional data.
We will know all about the second quarter, including GDP, ECI, unit costs, and corporate profits.
And we will have June and July employment reports, data on consumer spending, and inflation numbers, among other things.
All of this tells me, Mr. Chairman, that before moving ahead we are in need of more data and some time to assess it.
Fortunately, both economic conditions generally and the calendar seem to be ready to accommodate us.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
71MR. MEYER.
As you know, I love talking about macro modeling and I love talking about NAIRU, and I like talking about the outlook too.
But first things first.
Let me start by responding to President Poole's comments about whether there might be two different models of the causal process of what determines inflation.
I think there is only one model;
I may not convince you of that, but let me try to explain my reasoning.
The Phillips curve is not a model of what determines inflation.
The vertical Phillips curve tells us that inflation is indeterminate in that model.
All the Phillips curve tells us is when inflation is constant, when it is rising, or when it is falling.
It's a model of the dynamics of the inflation process, but it's incomplete as a full model.
What about the causality from money to prices?
Well, that's very important.
That's an equilibrium relationship, which helps to pin down where along that vertical Phillips curve inflation will really be.
<START>But what gets you from one inflation rate to another when money growth changes?<END>
We have to have that dynamic model.
That is what the Phillips curve does.
We need both parts.
So the problem we have is that even with all of the skepticism about NAIRU, we should understand that if we throw that concept away, we don't have another model at this point, as I think President Stern suggested.
That's the problem.
Now we can still question what the value of NAIRU is, but let's think for a minute what would be the situation if we really believed that NAIRU was 4 percent.
Then I would have to be asking myself:
How come inflation is so high?
<START>A core CPI inflation rate of 2.4 percent on a methodologically consistent basis would be the same as it was in 1995.<END>
Now, during that period since 1995, the unemployment rate was above NAIRU.
<START>We had all kinds of relative price shocks that were lowering inflation.<END>
<START>We got a productivity shock that was lowering inflation.<END>
So, how come 72inflation is so high?
One thing to keep in mind if we don't believe this framework is that it’s not clear why we would bother to tighten if we wanted to slow down inflation.
Let’s move on to the outlook.
I think the slowdown that's clear in the second quarter raises two important questions for the Committee.
The first is whether it is a pause or a more sustainable slowdown.
And if it is more sustainable, the question is whether it is sufficient to achieve our objective of containing the risks of higher inflation.
<START>Now, I describe the May employment report as incredible--meaning literally that it is not believable.<END>
It is not believable that private payrolls in effect fell off the cliff in May, a cliff that was elevated by the sharp increases over the previous two months.
<START>That's not to say that there isn't information content in that report, but it makes sense at least to smooth the data to get a better sense of the underlying reality.<END>
<START>Granted, we don't know whether we should smooth it backward or forward.<END>
Usually smoothing it in both directions will be the norm.
I think there is plenty of reason to smooth it going backward because the economy soared in the previous three quarters to a degree that was unanticipated by forecasters and their models.
So part of this slowdown could simply be a smoothing out of growth to an average more in line with fundamentals, in the process taking it below the underlying rate for a while.
Now, as a private sector forecaster, I have to admit that I was frequently confronted by unexpected data, data that contradicted my forecast.
And in each case I had to decide how much to respond by altering my forecast and changing my story.
I developed two rules that I believe served me well.
Now, certainly, one could change the current-quarter forecast.
The question was what to do about the forecast over the next year or two.
Rule number one was that when the data disconfirm your forecast, initially you ignore the new data and defend the old forecast.
This is not simply stubbornness.
Well, it's stubbornness to a degree, [Laughter] but 73it's not only stubbornness.
It also involves the recognition of the volatility in high frequency data, the difficulties associated with seasonal adjustment, and the potential for revisions or reversals in the data.
Rule number two was to know when to say when.
That is, when the data continue to contradict the forecast, it is time to change the forecast.
Otherwise, clients tend to change their forecasters!
And of course, really good forecasters know when to shift from rule one to rule two.
As a forecaster, I'm still operating under rule number one, and I think the staff appears to be following the same strategy.
<START>As was just noted, some slowdown was expected, whether beginning in the second or the third quarter, after the unexpected and indeed inexplicable surge over the previous three quarters.<END>
Now, part of this slowdown could also be the cumulative effect of monetary policy tightening.
But I think Chart 2 in the staff's outlook packet suggests that tighter financial conditions cannot explain much of the second-quarter slowdown.
Presumably, there are good rules of thumb for how policymaking should respond to unexpected economic developments.
In this case, I don't believe rule number one would be to ignore the new data and continue to set policy based on the old forecast.
The new data at the very least raise the degree of uncertainty about the forecast.
And this high order uncertainty may reasonably justify a more cautious policy response to the old forecast.
This difference reflects the fact that the forecast is the mode of the probability distribution associated with the outlook, while policymakers should take into account the full probability distribution associated with the forecast.
Let me turn to a few comments on the inflation outlook.
I was also quite surprised by the very small increase in average hourly earnings in May.
It altered my story, and I hate that!
74And it interrupted what appeared to be a definitive change in the trend in the series, based on the fact that average hourly earnings had increased at a 4-1/2 percent annual rate over the first four months of the year, following a 3-1/2 percent rate over 1999.
With the May data we have a 3.8 percent rate over the first five months, so the case for a change in the underlying trend is less definitive.
It seemed to me that this stable pattern in average hourly earnings contradicted the anecdotal reports, which have been suggesting that pressures for wage change are building.
This contradiction was driven home in this room not too long ago when I had a meeting with state bankers as part of one of the state banking association meetings.
It was a day after I had given my last outlook talk.
The head of the bankers group took out a newspaper article about my talk, which began by identifying me as an inflation hawk.
It then went on to report that I had said the data did not yet indicate a clear pattern of rising wage gains.
He wanted to have a little fun with me, obviously, so he said:
What kind of a hawk is it who can't see the clear change in wage pressures in the real world?
I'm going to help you out, he continued.
We’re going to go around this table and we're going to let everybody straighten you out.
So, everybody at the table gave his or her story about how much wages were going up, how many workers they were losing, what percentage wage gain those workers were getting when they moved to their next job, and what it meant for recruitment and training costs to business firms.
To be sure, their view was that what had happened to date was raising wage pressures and compressing profit margins, not increasing prices.
So, I think it's interesting that on the wage side the anecdotal stories seem to have become clearer but the data remain mixed.
On the price side it's just the reverse;
the anecdotal stories about pricing leverage still suggest that price performance remains fairly good.
<START>But it seems to me that the data on prices are clear and that inflation is rising.<END>
It is rising whether one looks at overall inflation or at the core 75inflation measures.
<START>I think President Parry made a very good point that the increase in inflation to date, in core measures as well as the overall rate, be pretty well attributed to the primary and now the secondary effects of higher energy prices.<END>
can So the impact of these rising wage pressures has not been definitively felt yet on inflation.
But in the staff forecast it will be, and that is my judgment as well.
Therefore, in the context of tomorrow's policy decision, the tentative signs suggest some slowing in the economy of yet uncertain persistence and dimension, but still with very tight labor markets and already rising trends in inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I suppose I'm fortunate that I have never tried to make a living as a forecaster because it's easier for me to look at the incoming data as opposed to trying to throw it out.<END>
And based on what I've seen, my view is similar to what others have said in that I believe there are some early signs of slowing out there.
They have appeared in the interest-sensitive sectors of housing and motor vehicles.
Also, and I think importantly, the most recent incoming data suggest that consumer confidence is starting to wane a bit.
To me one of the major questions about the second quarter has come up a couple of times in this discussion.
And that is whether what we are seeing is simply the slowdown that was to be expected after very rapid growth in the first quarter, whether it reflects some residual seasonality, or whether something else is going on.
One of the things I did during the recent intermeeting period was to ask the staff to give me at least a sense of any evidence of residual seasonality.
They've done that.
And in what they've shown to me, at least looking at this over longer periods, there doesn't seem to be any systematic trend for the second quarter to be much slower than any of the other quarters during the course of a year.
So I think we can probably 76rule out any systematic seasonality here.
I think it is still possible that what we saw in the second quarter may have been a bit the result of weather-related changes and some other special factors that we can't pick up econometrically.
But having said that, I'd still put a little weight, and perhaps others have as well, on the fact that we see some early signs of a slowing.
The other place I would look for evidence of slowing is in the yield curve from the private sector where--again using a normal mode of interpretation--those in the private sector seem to be telling us by their behavior that they are seeing some slowing as well.
The final thing one might look to for evidence of a slowing is the interaction between these very high gas prices and what one might expect from consumer behavior.
<START>Again, working with the FRB/US model, it seems as though the increases we've seen in oil prices amount to somewhere between $40 and $50 billion less money available for consumers to spend going forward.<END>
And the effects of that might start to show up as soon as in the next quarter.
So I think there are two or three reasons to feel that perhaps the beginning of some slowing is actually in sight here.
Having said that, as others have indicated, there also are clearly some signs that the slowing is not as certain as one might like.
Obviously the most recent signals that we've seen with respect to the housing data suggest some uncertainty about this.
<START>Another factor that might give rise to some uncertainty is that financial market conditions between this and our previous meeting have become, if anything, a little more accommodative.<END>
Net corporate borrowings, driven by bond issuance, seem to have picked up again during the intermeeting period.
Finally, as others have noted, there doesn't seem to be much let-up in resource utilization, particularly with respect to the labor market.
So we have signs on both sides that I think we need to be mindful of as we deliberate.
77I have two other points to make here.
<START>One is that it does seem, as Governor Gramlich said, that there is a bit of good news in that most of the indicators of long-term inflation expectations haven't moved up very much during this period.<END>
So I think that gives us some sign that we have a little time on our side.
And finally, as the staff presentation pointed out and as Governor Meyer also noted, it is unlikely that what we've seen thus far reflects the full impact of the tightening that has been undertaken.
So there is, I believe, a certain amount of tightening impact still left in the pipeline.
In sum, there is a sense that some slowing is in train.
It might well continue if one believes some of the market indicators.
While it does appear, as Governor Meyer indicated, that there is some pickup in inflation, it doesn't seem as though a break out is imminent or that inflation expectations have gone against us.
Nevertheless, since we have worked so hard over the last year with respect to interest rates, we may have to do some more tightening.
But at this stage I think we could comfortably take a bit of a pause, look at the incoming data a bit more closely, and judge whether or not the slowing is one with which we are comfortable.
In doing that we should be careful not to signal that we're done, because in fact we don't know for sure if we're done.
Nevertheless, I think we can take a bit more cautious attitude toward possible further tightening at this stage.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Mr. Chairman, economic growth in the Second District is minusculy slower than it was the last time we were together, but the slowing is almost imperceptible.
As I interpreted the comments of other Reserve Bank Presidents, I think the slowdown in the Second District is not as much as that in other Districts, 78On the energy question, I had the good fortune to spend about an hour and a half today with the energy minister of and I think his insights are worth sharing.
<START>He feels that there is inadequate emphasis placed on the effects from the period of very low prices in two respects.<END>
<START>First, the high-cost marginal suppliers were put out of business and will stay out of business, so a part of the available supply simply has shut down and will stay shut down.<END>
Secondly, the normal level of investment in new supply was reduced considerably.
<START>Therefore, until about two years from now, when the current investment in new supply of petroleum and other energy sources comes on stream, he believes we will continue to have a fairly high price, unless the Gulf producers decide just to increase their output.<END>
In his estimate they would have to increase production by about 1-1/2 million barrels a day, which does not seem particularly likely.
<START>I note that the gentleman represents a point of view which would prefer that the energy price be in the $20 to $25 per barrel area, and he is not very optimistic about seeing that for another 18 to 24 months.<END>
As for the national economy, some slowing appears to be evident, but I think we have to be a bit careful because the data gave false signals of a slowing in the second quarter in both 1998 and 1999.
That’s not unrelated to the fact that we haven't had a serious winter in this country since 1997 and, therefore, the seasonals tend to give off some funny signals.
However, I think we can assume that the likelihood of some slowing is there.
All of the research we've done, going back to the early 1980s, on how long tightening takes to be effective would lead one to believe that very little effect of the tightening we've done so far is in play.
<START>That’s especially true if one agrees with the view that the first 75 basis points involved a correction or undoing of the easing that we implemented, for understandable reasons, in the fall of 1998.<END>
So, if we see some slowing already, with very little of the tightening having taken hold yet, then I 79think it would be reasonable to believe that the economy will continue to slow over the future.
However, in my view, the main point is that we should conclude that we have time to watch and reflect as developments unfold.
It seems to me that over the last several years our best judgment has been that we have been willing to be reflective when we have been uncertain.
Yet at the same time, because of our firming action in 1994 and 1995 and our firming action in the present cycle, including the most recent increase of 50 basis points, it seems to me that the Federal Reserve has maximum credibility.
And that gives us an opportunity to watch and wait when we think that that is the right thing to do.
On the NAIRU, having become an arch skeptic about its usefulness, I went back and reminded myself of what I had said in our discussions in 1994 when I certainly sounded like a very true believer in the NAIRU.
So if I have turned agnostic, it is a recent change and the question, therefore, is whether it is enduring or whether I think the NAIRU is on vacation for a while.
I think it's probably the latter and that in fact the NAIRU is a useful tool, which we will find more useful in the future when we are a bit more certain about how it is functioning and where it really is.
<START>I bring this up largely because I think we have to be very careful in our statements about the NAIRU and about an ideal level of unemployment.<END>
If one listens to the discussion today, everybody here, whether skeptical or believing in the NAIRU, views it as a tool and not as a policy goal.
Yet I think many observers, especially journalists, make that distinction.
<START>cannot When we discuss the NAIRU in our public remarks, either in speeches or interviews, in some cases at least we are coming across as if we believe that we need to have an unemployment rate of “x”--which is considerably higher than what we have now--and if we 80don’t, there is something wrong.<END>
<START>The Congress of the United States never put us in the business of having a certain unemployment rate as our goal.<END>
So if we want to use NAIRU as a tool, as I think we certainly did in the past--some still wish to, and probably most of us will in the future--we ought to be very careful that we're talking about it as a tool and not as a goal.
Very clearly, and I think unwisely, we will lose the support of the American people if they think that what we are trying to do is to increase the number of unemployed people by 1-1/2 percent of the workforce.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you very much, everybody.
Just as a reminder, the dinner at the British Embassy is at 8:00 p.m.
tonight.
There will be Board vans at the Watergate at about 7:30 p.m.
to pick you up.
Is there more than one set of cars?
Does anybody know whether or not those who are late and miss the 7:30 p.m.
scheduled departure have to walk?
[Laughter] MR. KELLEY.
Several vehicles will be there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
There will be several vehicles.
We will see you all at dinner and then again tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m.
[Meeting recessed] 81June 28, 2000--Morning Session CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Good morning, everyone.
We have arrived at the agenda topic relating to the long-term ranges for the monetary aggregates.
As you know, this topic stems from the Humphrey-Hawkins legislation--a term we no longer use except in an historical context.
Don proposed putting the long-run ranges for the monetary aggregates on the agenda as a placeholder.
But it is my intention, if it is all right with everyone, to forgo both a discussion and vote on these ranges.
We are no longer legally required to do that.
The Committee, as you know, has not been using the ranges for the aggregates to guide policy for many years.
<START>Indeed, in recent years the ranges have become even more questionable benchmarks for money growth at price stability because of the uncertainties about long-run productivity growth and about what exactly we mean by price stability.<END>
The ranges were a reporting and accountability mechanism in a part of the Federal Reserve Act that has now expired.
And it now seems that the most likely outcome of a proposal to renew such legislation will require that we provide semi-annual reports on monetary policy to the Congress but will not include a requirement for annual ranges.
<START>So, unless I hear objections, I propose that we take advantage of this opportunity to stop doing something that I sense all of us have become uncomfortable with over the years--establishing money ranges of questionable usefulness that no one takes very seriously, or at least recently has taken very seriously.<END>
It is quite conceivable that such ranges may at some point be useful again.
But I personally feel uncomfortable engaging in an activity of this nature when we do not actually employ the ranges for the specific purpose of formulating our monetary policy.
I think we have to monitor the various monetary aggregates because, indeed, there is information in them.
And it is conceivable that at some point they will emerge again 82with some very useful relationships with respect to opportunity costs and income velocity.
At that point, obviously, we will make more use of them.
This is not to say that money is not relevant for the economy.
For a central bank to say money is irrelevant is the deepest form of sin that such an institution can commit.
The problem is that we cannot extract from our statistical database what is true money conceptually, either in the transactions mode or the store-of-value mode.
One of the reasons, obviously, is that the proliferation of products has been so extraordinary that the true underlying mix of money in our money and near money data is continuously changing.
As a consequence, while of necessity it must be the case at the end of the day that inflation has to be a monetary phenomenon, a decision to base policy on measures of money presupposes that we can locate money.
And that has become an increasingly dubious proposition.
So, unless somebody has comments or objections, this is the way I believe we ought to proceed, but that clearly is at the Committee's discretion.
I am merely putting the issue on the table for discussion.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, could I make a quick comment?
I don't disagree with your proposal.
It is certainly true that in these meetings the operational importance and significance of the money targets has diminished steadily over the years.
And it is tempting to think of dropping them as a sort of non-event.
But I think it is important to keep in mind the role that these targets played in a longer-term historical context.
<START>Given the degree of long-term correlation between money growth and inflation, one can look on the adoption of these targets initially in the 1970s as a sort of implicit agreement between the Congress and the Fed that the Fed was ultimately responsible for containing inflation.<END>
In a sense one can think of these targets--as I do--as the closest thing we have to a formal mandate for low inflation.
And even 83though we have not used them in any significant operational way recently, they have provided an occasion for us to take a longer-term, more strategic view of our policy objectives at least twice a year at these meetings.
And they have provided at least a whiff of quantitative institutional accountability.
We lose this, I think, with the lapsing of the requirement that we set these targets.
In a formal sense it puts us in an almost totally discretionary operating mode.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Actually, I agree with that.
But I think we can resolve that issue without going through the formal process that has been required under statute.
I don't see any reason why we can't have something on the agenda, which essentially involves a discussion of the long-term inflation imbalances or whatever we want to call it.
Don, let me ask you a question on this.
We formally went to two-day FOMC meetings for those meetings preceding the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony.
Is it contemplated that for the future we will still have two-day meetings?
Do we still need two days?
What will we be doing in the additional time at these meetings?
Is there any reason, for example, why we can't put on the agenda instead of the long-term monetary aggregates something that covers this area in a more generic way so that we could have a presentation by the staff and a Committee discussion?
MR.
KOHN.
No, there is no reason we couldn't do that.
I actually thought we wouldn’t change the format of these meetings significantly since the Committee has been spending at most a half-hour or so on the monetary aggregates.
Just in terms of preparation for your Congressional testimony twice a year, I thought the Committee might want to take a bit longer view--as Dave, Karen, and Larry helped to do yesterday--and look a little more deeply below the forecast.
I thought the Committee would want to continue to do that.
84CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
So there is no reason why we can't utilize the half-hour we used for arguing about the numbers and how they are perceived and instead talk about the real substance of inflation.
MR.
KOHN.
Yes, there’s absolutely no reason.
MR.
BROADDUS.
That would certainly help me a lot.
I think that would be very desirable for the Committee to do.
I would go one step further.
Just speaking for myself, I would rather see a formal institutional substitute for the topic of the money targets rather than just a discussion, although I certainly think the latter would help.
I know we can’t agree on that this morning.
We have talked about inflation targeting before.
That is now a procedure that a number of other industrial countries have used with at least some success.
There is a pretty broad consensus, I think, in the profession that it is an idea worth looking into.
We have now had a sustained period of the coexistence of low inflation and rapid growth.
That experience may have begun to erode the popular attention that for so long has been given to the Phillips curve.
<START>So, I think this would be a good time for us to revisit that issue and consider as a Committee recommending the adoption of an inflation target at some point.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
You mean a recommendation to the Congress?
MR.
BROADDUS.
Yes, after due deliberation and consideration here.
Even if it doesn't fly, it would still provide you with an opportunity, Mr. Chairman, to restate and reinforce a view that I believe is a widely held consensus in the economics profession.
<START>That view is that putting inflation first gives us not only the best inflation outcome, but also the best output and employment outcome as well.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I agree with that last statement.
But it is still too soon to make a judgment as to whether official inflation targeting actually works.
<START>And we won't be 85able to make that judgment unless such targeting is tried by a diverse group of countries and we can determine that those with official inflation targeting did better than others.<END>
At the moment, one cannot make such a distinction because inflation has been down everywhere and the results are not sufficiently dispersed statistically for us to say that official inflation targeting actually matters.
That is a distinct issue from that of endorsing a general overall philosophy, largely based on the last statement that you made, rather than a formalized process.
<START>But, clearly, if we get into a period where inflation rates start to differ among countries and it is evident that those with official targeting are doing better than other countries, I think we will all grab onto inflation targeting as an obvious solution.<END>
It is very difficult at this stage to make that case up on the Hill.
<START>Making that effort can't do any harm, but what will happen then is that those who are really not all that enamored with keeping inflation under control will argue against it.<END>
They worry that we can trade off inflation against employment, and there is still a lot of that kind of thinking up on the Hill.
So at this stage I don't think we could successfully move toward a statutory inflation target with the evidence that currently exists.
<START>I suspect that if we eventually get diverging inflation outcomes across a range of countries, with those on official inflation targeting regimes experiencing significantly more favorable inflation results, then it would be an easy sell.<END>
I don't think it is now.
MR.
BROADDUS.
I certainly respect your point of view, Mr. Chairman.
I would simply hope that we would keep some inflation targeting proposal at least in our back pocket, or maybe even in our front pocket.
I’d look for an opportunity to advance that view because for me at least it is an uncomfortable situation not to have some kind of institutional anchor like that.
I think such an anchor is highly desirable and we do not have one now.
86CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I fully agree.
I think the way the statute is written is essentially the result of a Congress that over the years has had considerably divergent views that they could not square.
And what we got was a statute that was designed to do all things for all people so long as it was good.
I would be the first to go up to the Hill and try to get something done if I thought it was even remotely feasible.
Right now a bill which specifically and exclusively restricted us to an inflation target would not get through the Senate Banking Committee and probably would not even get to the House Banking Committee for discussion.
That’s my view of the state of play.
We are going to need more evidence before we move forward on that.
MR.
BROADDUS.
We have to build a case.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, I was going to make a comment very similar to the one that Al Broaddus made.
I think the discussion of monetary targets has been a highly imperfect way of nevertheless getting at an important point on which we ought to have some agreement around this table--namely, what the inflation target is that the Committee itself has in mind.
I believe there are divergent views around the table as to what the inflation target ought to be.
I would rather see our discussion focused on the inflation target itself.
Whatever the attitude in the Congress, we need to have some working assumption.
At the present time we have different working assumptions around the table as to where we would like to go, say, in the medium term, or in what direction we would like to work.
There are some people around the table who would like the inflation rate to be lower than it has been and is likely to be.
I would count myself in that camp.
I think there are others who are quite satisfied with the current rate or would be willing to see it go somewhat higher before we come down very hard, in policy terms, 87to try to do something about it.
So, although highly imperfect, I think the discussion of the monetary aggregates has had implicitly in the background a focus on the Committee's long-run objectives for inflation, which I think it would be desirable to clarify.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Actually, I’d characterize the nuances that are involved in a slightly different way.
If we took a vote on whether, all other things equal, we around this table would like to see the inflation rate lower than it is today, I bet we would get unanimity.
Where the differences will show up is at what cost or tradeoffs.
That’s where the differences will arise.
I don't think the issue is a lack of commitment on the part of any of us to getting as close to stable prices as possible.
I would presume we are all pretty much in agreement that at stable prices, other things equal, we get maximum long-term sustainable growth.
The issue, however, is that there are differing views in this Committee regarding the actual mechanism that is involved and what the tradeoffs are with respect to various aspects of the economy, at different rates of inflation, employment, interest rates, and the like.
I agree with you that there are doubtless differences around the table on what the cost/benefit tradeoff is under certain conditions.
And until there is a squaring of a conceptual framework to which we all adhere, there will be differences.
For example, take the discussion we had yesterday about the model.
Suppose we all agreed that that abstraction of reality was a wholly valid view, in a reduced form, of the way the world actually works.
In that case, we would all by definition have exactly the same view as to where prices should be, what the tradeoffs are, and the exact mechanism that enables us to get there.
My view is that we all have different ideas about how to alter that model;
and that exactly replicates the differences around this table on the question of the role of inflation in our complex economy.
I see no way to resolve this in any sensible manner other than by imposing 88some artificial number.
But everyone around the table will be qualifying that number in the back of their minds in one form or another.
And I’m not sure that helps.
<START>I do think the basic view among Committee members is that inflation is fundamentally a destructive force in an economy and a society, that inflation destroys jobs, and all other things equal that a stable price level, however defined, contributes to maximum sustainable growth.<END>
What I’m saying in effect is that on a whole series of generalized propositions the philosophy of the members of this Committee is remarkably uniform.
The differences we have are far less than those in some earlier FOMCs on which I and some of you have served.
So in that regard we are closer together than any earlier FOMC I have been associated with.
But any effort to enforce a sharp, single, reduced form focus on a specific price level, irrespective of what is required to get there, will create marginal differences among the members of this group.
I don't think we can work with that sort of focus because it won't stick.
<START>Unless we can reach agreement on a very explicit, reduced form model of the way the economy works--and we all sign off on it and say our monetary policy votes will be determined exactly by that particular model--the best I think we can do is to reiterate our basic concerns about inflation, argue with each other at the margins, and hopefully get closer to agreement.<END>
I do believe that the discussions we have had around this table have affected all of us, in the sense of bringing us closer together.
<START>But I would be very hesitant to try literally to reach agreement on a formal inflation range of, say, 0 to 2 percent, or 0 to 1 percent, or zero, or what have you, largely because I don’t think it is going to add to the effectiveness of the Committee.<END>
At least that is my view.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Mr. Chairman, I agree 100 percent with the substance of what you said.
Let me suggest a procedure.
I think there is great benefit to our practice of discussing the goals and strategy of monetary policy in detail twice each year.
I say 89that because at most of the other meetings, even though we wander in and out of discussions of strategy, mainly what we are doing is talking about tactics.
I would suggest that we not indicate in the minutes of this meeting that we are planning to discuss a formal inflation target.
First of all, I have a very strong view that that is the purview of the Congress, not of the FOMC.
<START>And if it were made public that we were going to establish an inflation target, I believe many people in the Congress--and I would be one if I were in Congress--would say, ”Well, if you’re going to talk about that, please come up here and discuss it with us.” I think that would be highly counterproductive.<END>
I also agree very much that trying to pinpoint a number that we all agree on would be a specious exercise in precision.
Even though some of us come at it from different directions, I really do believe that the degree of unanimity on this Committee is quite extraordinary.
And in my view arguing about a number would be counterproductive, not productive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
MR.
MEYER.
I always look forward to these opportunities to have broader discussions on long-term goals and strategies, and I agree with the Vice Chair that it would be good to do this on a regular basis at each of these two-day meetings.
Let me give you a few thoughts on both the monetary aggregates and inflation targeting.
I agree with Presidents Broaddus and Poole that one of the desirable features of our discussions of the monetary aggregate ranges was that there really was in that process an implicit inflation targeting.
So, while we are not prepared to have an explicit discussion and pin that target down, we did it implicitly when we set the ranges.
Secondly, I am one who still believes that there is information content in monetary aggregates and that they are very much worthwhile monitoring.
I quite agree with the Chairman's proposal:
If we no longer have to set 90ranges for the monetary aggregates for Congress as part of the Humphrey-Hawkins process, it would be reasonable not to set ranges because we don't pay enough attention to them as a Committee to justify that.
As for myself, I do pay attention to the monetary aggregates.
I get a briefing on them before each FOMC meeting.
And I'm going to ask the staff now to prepare a packet as part of that briefing with ranges that I feel are more reasonable and from which the information content can be extracted visually.
So I think that is still useful to do.
In terms of inflation targeting, I make a big distinction between inflation targeting as strategy, particularly when it means going to a single objective for monetary policy, and setting an explicit target for inflation as part of our present dual mandate.
I think it is a very big distinction.
There are also distinctions about inflation targeting today as a methodology;
it is an approach to hitting inflation as well as a procedure that has a numerical target for inflation.
I am very much committed to a dual mandate.
I think that is the right way to go.
<START>But, as you know, if we think about that dual mandate and how to achieve it from the perspective, say, of the Taylor Rule, we are forced to put some number in there for our inflation target.<END>
I am always amused to get the “rules packet” because when I open it up I see 2 percent in there.
Where did that come from?
Well, that was John Taylor's target.
<START>So we sit around the table and we look at simulations from the rules packet based on John Taylor's thoughts on what is the appropriate inflation target.<END>
<START>I think it might be reasonable for us to tell the staff what our inflation target is and have the packet done that way.<END>
Would it really matter?
In other words, are we fighting over something that is not that important?
Well, I agree that there is a good deal of consensus among us, but there is a range of views.
<START>I have a view--I call it price stability plus a cushion--that may be a little higher than some others would have, but I think it is useful for us to have coherent internal discussions 91and appropriate transparency regarding what we're trying to do.<END>
I believe we should try to agree among ourselves and communicate to the public where we are trying to go because the public could say they are not really sure where we are going.
Is 2 percent for the CPI just about right?
Do we understand what that means and if we achieve that rate for the CPI is everything fine?
Or are we really heading for zero?
Well, that is a big difference.
Do we know?
So, I think at least some further discussion of this issue is worthwhile.
And while I don't see us moving any time soon, I think having an opportunity to voice such issues around the table when we have these two-day meetings and to make some incremental progress toward a consensus is really valuable.
I have enjoyed this discussion this morning.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
I have enjoyed the discussion, too.
Let me cut it a slightly different way.
On the inflation targeting issue I think there are three levels on which we can confront this.
One is internally in our own heads.
<START>At that level I actually find inflation targeting quite useful.<END>
I have often thought in terms of that and in my statements have described what we ought to do in those terms, and I will probably continue to do that.
There is a second level that I would call internally within the Committee.
I agree with others that twice a year it would be a very good idea for Don to put on the agenda a topic that involves our talking about long-run strategies for monetary policy.
<START>Maybe the designation of that agenda item could be something a bit less pejorative--for example, “anchors of monetary policy” or something on that order.<END>
But I do think it is a good idea for us to have these issues on the agenda for discussion twice a year at a specified time.
Maybe as we do that we will converge on what our targeting strategy could be and what kinds of specific targets we might have.
Perhaps we won't converge, but I think the exercise would be good for us and we will learn as we talk whether we can converge.
92There is a third or external level, which is the Congress.
That includes whether Congress ought to be giving us inflation targets and that sort of thing.
Frankly, I have always thought that these issues are awfully subtle and not easily adapted to Congressional decision- making.
<START>If Congress gives us an inflation target, it is going to be pretty rigid;<END>
there are going to be times when that target is valuable and there will be other times when we find it very rigid and very confining.
So I would get off the train at that point.
But on the first two levels, internally in our own heads and internally within the Committee, I would welcome our thinking about monetary policy in these terms;
I think that is a good idea.
But externally I don't think it's a good idea.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to express agreement with what I take to be the main message of Governor Gramlich’s remarks and also the Vice Chair’s statement.
Also, I agree with your proposal to move away from voting on ranges for the monetary aggregates since we haven't really been following them very closely.
But obviously, as you suggest, I don't believe we would be credible central bankers if we didn't all in our own individual ways look at the aggregates at every meeting.
And, in fact, I certainly did look at them coming into this meeting.
So, I think continuing to keep track of them is part of what we are expected to do.
With respect to inflation targeting, I think we should not undercut ourselves.
<START>Members have expressed very clearly their support of a qualitative inflation target, which is that we want inflation to be so low and stable that it is actually no more a point of discussion in decisionmaking among businesses and unions, et cetera.<END>
And through a combination of good policy and some other factors I believe we have managed to achieve that objective and we are 93fighting now to hold onto it.
But I want to make sure we are clear that we do actually have a qualitative target;
we are not completely without anchor.
I agree that it would be useful to have a strategy discussion, as Governor Gramlich indicates, twice a year.
That seems to make sense.
I will say on the quantitative target, having spent some time traveling around and talking to other central bankers, that as you suggest there doesn't seem to be much evidence yet that it leads to better policy.
I recently read a speech by Lars Heikensten, the first deputy governor of the Bank of Sweden which has a formal inflation target, that suggests that the Bank is dealing with a couple of problems.
One concern is the risk of losing credibility when they miss that target--either explaining why it was that they chose to miss the target or alternatively could not bring the economy to hit the target.
<START>The second concern they seem to have is that the public believes there is a bit of bias--that the central bank will be more willing to let inflation creep up rather than creep down.<END>
So they are struggling with a sense of an asymmetrical inflation target.
I am entirely in agreement with you that as we think about this issue we have to be mindful that perhaps inflation targets have built up credibility where there wasn't any.
At this stage we have pretty good credibility.
And the other industrial economies that have adopted inflation targeting have discovered that while on balance they may like it, it also creates some problems that weren't expected.
So I think we should be very, very careful about going down that path at this stage.
<START>And those problems are in addition to what Governor Gramlich had to say about a nuance here, which is that if we go too far down this path, we may discover ourselves handcuffed in a way that undercuts our credibility and reduces our effectiveness rather than the opposite.<END>
So with that, let me stop.
94CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Any further comments?
<START>Well, assuming that legislation proceeds in the form we expect, why don’t we endeavor to have such a discussion at the next appropriate meeting.<END>
Presumably, we will continuously alter the focus and get closer to the Committee's general view of the type of discussion we want to have.
Let’s move on then and go to current monetary policy.
Don, you have the floor.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As background for your discussion today, you received a paper by Flint Brayton and Dave Reifschneider that used the FRB/US model to examine the economic performance of the U.S.
economy in recent years.
Not surprisingly, their work suggested that a continuing pickup in productivity provided the major impetus to the extraordinary run of noninflationary growth.
But it was not the only influence.
The model results also emphasized the role of growing federal surpluses and an appreciating dollar in holding down interest rates and inflation, even as the labor markets tightened.
The study was undertaken in large part because we wanted to see whether the model could shed some light on imbalances in the U.S.
economy that have become such a prominent element in discussions of the outlook and policy, particularly internationally.
<START>In fact, the performance of recent years has left the economy with some potentially troublesome imbalances--most notably, from the perspective of the staff model, the imbalance between the levels of aggregate demand and sustainable supply.<END>
<START>But it has also produced other, subsidiary, imbalances between elements of spending and income, including a large current account deficit with its resulting buildup in net foreign indebtedness, and a low rate of private saving that has been associated with a sizable accumulation of debt by households and businesses.<END>
The latter two imbalances have been stoked by a rise in the dollar on foreign exchange markets and a rise in equity prices to levels well in excess of those likely to be sustainable over time.
In the Brayton-Reifschneider study these asset price and balance sheet imbalances are the natural consequence of the forces that have shaped the economy.
<START>Under reasonable assumptions on how those forces will evolve, the imbalances tend to work themselves out, or at least to stop getting worse, without major dislocations when you, the FOMC, concentrate on the 95overall macroeconomic task of setting aggregate demand equal to potential aggregate supply.<END>
But in real life, the adjustment is not likely to be so smooth.
<START>The risk is that the balance sheet overhangs and elevated asset values leave the economy more susceptible to sharp corrections that could produce considerable economic instability.<END>
Concern about this possibility has led some observers to advocate that U.S.
monetary policy not look solely at overall macroeconomic balance but also pay special attention to asset prices or to savings-investment flows perceived to be in serious and potentially destabilizing disequilibrium.
In concept, shaping policy in part to address these issues directly, while incurring a bit of extra economic cost in the form of different unemployment and inflation rates than would otherwise prevail over the short run, avert larger costs and more difficult situations later.
might With respect to asset prices, central banks have usually argued that they should not take account of such prices beyond factoring them into their assessment of the overall balance of aggregate supply and demand.
<START>Central banks are not confident they can identify dangerous asset price disequilibriums, or that they could calibrate policy actions to forestall further problems without adding unduly to economic instabilities.<END>
<START>Many of the same sorts of arguments about the difficulties of identification and gauging the appropriate response could be applied to policies to address saving imbalances and debt buildups.<END>
Moreover, in the case of some of these imbalances, it’s not obvious what role monetary policy could play, even if it wanted to.
In particular, raising interest rates is likely to have little effect on the current account deficit.
Although tighter policy would reduce imports by damping domestic demand, it also would tend to appreciate the dollar, raising the cost of U.S.
goods and services and shifting demand away from U.S.
producers.
<START>So, while the sanguine outcomes of Brayton-Reifschneider might seem implausible, there may be little the Committee can do in advance about potential problems.<END>
<START>Instead, your best posture might be to concentrate on fostering overall macroeconomic balance, and to stand ready to react to sharp movements in asset prices or other spillovers from balance sheet corrections when they occur.<END>
Nonetheless, the Committee’s policy choices cannot be divorced entirely from consideration of the possible effects of asset price and balance sheet disequilibriums.
Assumptions about how they will evolve are an inescapable aspect of projecting the economy and can be an important influence on the outlook.
With 96respect to both equity prices and the dollar, the staff has adopted a middle ground in the Greenbook and its extension in the Bluebook.
We have built in declines in wealth-to-income ratios and the foreign exchange value of the dollar, but we have not made the full adjustments to what might look like more sustainable levels.
<START>The fall in wealth relative to income helps to raise private saving, but the declining dollar is a significant source of demand and inflation pressure over the forecast horizon.<END>
The baseline simulation traces out the implications of the Greenbook forecast.
Several key judgments about the supply side of the economy are important in that forecast.
<START>One is that the unemployment rate is now substantially below its sustainable level.<END>
Second, that productivity growth is picking up further this year, but that thereafter growth will level out at this higher rate.
<START>The labor market imbalance, which persists under the impetus from strong aggregate demand, together with the depreciation of the dollar and the catch-up of real wages to previous increases in productivity, produces an upward trend in inflation in the baseline unless the Committee tightens policy substantially.<END>
Moreover, several of the alternative simulations built off the baseline suggest that even more optimistic views of the level and growth rate of potential supply may not remove the risk that inflation will head higher under the Greenbook policy assumption.
<START>A lower NAIRU than the staff’s estimate of 5-1/4 or 5-1/2 percent and additional pickups in structural productivity growth do help to contain inflation over the next few years at current low unemployment rates, but pressures still build.<END>
The staff forecast does not embody the tightening of fiscal policy and appreciating dollar that Brayton and Reifschneider identified as so important to holding down demand and price pressures from 1995 on.
The low NAIRU does not cancel the need for real wages to rise enough to capture the full effects of the previous increases in productivity.
The cost-raising implications of this catch-up will be postponed if productivity growth is headed still higher quickly enough, but ultimately will show through as productivity growth levels out.
<START>Moreover, higher productivity growth implies even higher equilibrium real interest rates and the need for policy to tighten by more than in the baseline to keep the resulting increase in demand from outrunning the pace of potential supply and adding to inflation pressures.<END>
<START>Even with a more favorable path for potential supply, then, the Committee might be concerned that it will need to tighten further to stop inflation from rising--and before very long 97if it is intent on keeping inflation near current levels rather than having it drift higher.<END>
<START>Skepticism about either the lower NAIRU or additional upward speed in trend productivity would tend to add to perceptions of inflation risks, strengthening the case for action at this meeting, as in alternative C. In circumstances in which labor resource utilization was already unusually high and inflation by some measures had already picked up, the Committee might not want to take the risk that aggregate demand could rebound.<END>
You might desire greater assurance that financial conditions had firmed enough to keep the economy on a slower growth track, especially in light of the easing of financial conditions in many market sectors since your last meeting.
Markets would be surprised by a tightening at this meeting.
<START>Such a strong signal that you did not share their optimism on inflation would not only raise interest rates immediately, but would set the stage for more sober reactions to incoming information than were in evidence over the recent intermeeting period.<END>
If the Committee were sufficiently worried about inflation to raise rates at this meeting, it likely would view the resulting path of asset prices as more consistent with a sustainable expansion of aggregate demand.
<START>However, as noted, the staff forecast rests on a view of continuing strength in aggregate demand, supply side constraints, and dollar depreciation.<END>
You may see the incoming data as at least creating added uncertainty about these assessments.
<START>If you are not very confident of oncoming inflation risks, there are reasons to pause in your tightening, at least at this meeting.<END>
In many of your internal discussions and public speeches you have signaled that you would like to follow something akin to a two-stage strategy to determine how much tightening you may need to undertake.
Stage one is damping aggregate demand growth enough to bring it into line with the growth of potential supply so as to ensure that pressures on labor resources do not intensify.
<START>When the clear and present inflationary danger of worsening resource pressures seems less worrisome, in stage two the Committee would then assess whether the resulting level of resource utilization was too high to be sustainable.<END>
Given uncertainties about NAIRU, you may not be willing to enforce a specific view of the appropriate level of resource utilization without supporting evidence in hand.
The evidence of slowing in the economy, along with the likelihood that a portion of the financial restraint put in place since year-end has yet to be fully felt, raises the possibility that 98you may be close to accomplishing stage one.
At a minimum, the incoming data have increased uncertainty about the path of the economy and its response to policy actions.
<START>An appropriate reaction to such an increase in uncertainty is to move policy more gradually;<END>
in these circumstances, getting a better handle on how the economy is evolving should reduce the odds on overdoing policy restraint.
Especially in light of the size of your action in May, that might suggest a pause at this meeting.
<START>To be sure, such a pause probably would not be appropriate if there were reasonably clear evidence that current levels of resource utilization were unsustainable, or that inflation expectations were rising.<END>
Recent data have tended to show core prices rising faster than they did a year ago.
But, a good deal of the pickup in core inflation may be attributable to the secondary effects of the rise in energy prices, rather than to excessive tightness in labor markets;
at least the verdict is still very ambiguous.
The only new data on labor compensation over the intermeeting period--average hourly earnings--did not suggest a rising trend that might confirm a sizable output gap.
And, longer-term inflation expectations have not responded to short-term swings in published inflation, suggesting that even if incoming data on prices were to be adverse, the economy likely would not incur an especially high cost if the Committee decided not to act at this meeting.
You will have an unusually full slate of new information by the time of your next meeting to make judgments on the strength of the economy and price pressures--essentially two months of new data, including an update on the ECI.
<START>Whether the Committee raises rates or leaves them unchanged at this meeting, it might still want to indicate that the risks to good economic performance remained unbalanced toward higher inflation over the foreseeable future.<END>
As noted, a wide variety of simulations have suggested that this is indeed the case.
More practically, the unusually high level of labor utilization, along with the increase in core inflation and rise in energy prices that could feed through to inflation expectations, would seem to reinforce the notion that tendencies toward higher inflation still are most likely to be your major problem going forward.
<START>If, for some reason, policy inaction nonetheless were taken inappropriately by the markets as a sign that you believed the risk of inflation pressures had subsided, the Chairman has an opportunity in his semi-annual testimony on monetary policy in three weeks to align market expectations better with your sense of the balance of risks.<END>
99CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Questions for Don?
MR.
JORDAN.
Don, in reading the Bluebook and listening to you now, it seems that a critical part of the analysis involves a wage-lag hypothesis.
<START>At a micro level the idea--this is not your language but the way I interpret it--is that the value of the marginal product of labor as individuals has risen but there may be some lag in the perception of this.<END>
And as reality dawns on the worker that he is more valuable, he’d want to be compensated in the paycheck for this.
So, what we would expect to observe if that is going on is that for a while returns to capital rise relative to returns to labor.
That is an imbalance;
it needs to be adjusted.
<START>Over time, returns to capital will fall relatively while returns to labor rise and balance will be restored somehow.<END>
If the owners of the capital and the labor are one and the same, though, that is not an issue.
So there is some notion that these are different participants in this economy and that those who are the owners of capital gain for a while relative to those who are the workers.
Maybe.
At the same time, in some of our analysis of what is going on in the economy we have something called wealth effects.
There the idea is that people in this long sustained prosperity have reduced their concerns about layoffs, have seen various aspects of their current/future consumption tradeoff altered, and perceive that their permanent income has risen.
In a lifecycle sense they say, “We are richer:
Our 401(k)s are doing better, our company's pensions are better, and our probability of being laid off is lower.” Somehow they perceive that they are richer and can afford to consume more in the present as well as in the future.
<START>And thus being richer, even if they perceive that their wages currently have lagged behind the increase in the value on the margin of their labor, if they have a wealth effect in a sense there is no wage lag.<END>
There is no catch-up and rebalancing of returns to capital and returns to labor implied.
There is no adjustment to be made.
100MR. KOHN.
I agree with the first part of what you said in terms of describing what is going on here.
Basically the initial returns from the innovation in productivity accrue to the owners of capital, to the businesses who wake up one morning and realize that there are efficiency-generating capital investments and changes in production processes they can make.
The first thing that happens is that they enhance their profits by making those innovations, by buying that capital investment and trying to expand their operations.
And as they compete with each other, prices initially are held down.
Over time, their efforts to expand their operations increase the demand for labor, but that occurs with a bit of a lag.
<START>So we can depend on the labor demand catching up slowly with the increasing profitability of businesses, as businesses compete against each other first in the goods markets and later in the labor markets.<END>
Prices in the goods market are less sticky than prices in the labor market.
So initially the added demand doesn't drive up the price of labor as much as it otherwise would.
But ultimately that demand feeds through.
Workers realize that they’re more productive, and both the supply and demand of labor will adjust to the higher productivity.
You are right in concluding that that type of lagged process, a staged process, is what is built into the models.
<START>And it’s what we think helps to explain why the productivity surge first seems to have damped inflation and why we then expect rising real wages to catch up over time.<END>
As for the second part of your comment, I’m not sure that the effects would be what you suggested.
It is true that it is workers who ultimately own capital in one form or another, but the distribution of human capital and the ownership of physical capital are very, very different.
So very different people are benefiting from the increasing profits.
That’s one thing.
Secondly, I think economic efficiency--in terms of the appropriate use of labor and capital--would suggest that over time their prices better adjust to the productivity of capital and the 101productivity of labor if we are going to have the optimum combination of utilization of labor and capital.
So despite the distribution of human capital and of physical capital--even if owned by exactly the same people--I think their prices would have to change still in order to give the appropriate signals to businesses and to labor on the proper mix.
They need to know how much labor to supply to the markets and how to mix capital and labor in the production process in order to end up on the production possibility frontier.
So I think those prices still have to adjust to enhance economic efficiency.
MR.
JORDAN.
Can I follow up, Mr. Chairman?
I have two points on that.
<START>The more we believe that the distribution is quite different between the owners of capital and workers--and that certainly is true to some extent--the more trouble we have with wealth effect arguments as the catalyst stimulating consumption.<END>
<START>If the workforce and this other group that owns the capital are totally different, driving consumption spending off the so-called wealth effects coming from technological innovation and rising productivity is a difficult case to make.<END>
<START>The other point, though, is that innovation per se involves creative destruction, reducing the value of something old.<END>
And it doesn't matter whether it is technological innovation, managerial innovation, or whatever.
<START>That reduction in the value of something old--this is partial analysis--especially if it involves labor substitution kinds of innovations, does not increase the value of the marginal product of at least some workers.<END>
And the idea of worker insecurity as an hypothesis drives in the other direction in terms of whether or not these people perceive that there is a wage lag that needs to be rebalanced.
MR.
KOHN.
<START>I think we perceived that worker insecurity, at least initially in this productivity pickup, was another reason why wages tended to lag, aside from the stickiness of wages relative to prices.<END>
But one would think that that insecurity has been overcome, in light of 102an extraordinarily low unemployment rate and very tight labor markets, and has dissipated mostly if not entirely.
And that should begin to show through;
we should begin to see the process of the catch-up of real wages to productivity.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
Don, I think the long-run simulations were interesting and useful and helped us to consider some of the strategic issues we face.
The longer-run simulations assume that the value of the dollar falls rather sharply after 2001--by approximately 5 percent per year, I think.
That boosts the path of the fed funds rate that is necessary to contain inflation.
<START>We know that projections about the value of the dollar are rather uncertain, and I was just curious about how crucial the size and timing of the dollar’s decline is to the outcome of these simulations.<END>
It looks as if it is a very significant factor.
MR.
KOHN.
It is a significant factor and I tried to indicate that in my briefing.
I don't have a simulation that has everything else the same and holds the dollar constant.
<START>But as I mentioned to the Committee yesterday, I had asked our modelers to run what they call the “rosy scenario” simulation, which had both a lower NAIRU and faster productivity growth with a constant dollar.<END>
<START>Interestingly, the lower NAIRU/faster productivity growth simulation does not obviate the rise in nominal and real federal funds rates in order to hold inflation to, say, around 2 to 2-1/2 percent.<END>
It does lessen the amount of the increase.
And if we add the constant dollar to that, having all three of those things meant that the nominal funds rate could stay around the current level over the next two years and we would still get inflation coming in at about 2 percent.
So it does make a big difference.
In our judgment, a difference of about a percentage point on the nominal funds rate after a couple of years would be needed to accomplish the same inflation objective.
I think Karen Johnson would like to speak to this.
103MS. JOHNSON.
I would, in the sense that the 5 percent number gets one's attention shall we say.
It is not that we have a view that a 5 percent decline is necessarily going to happen or that we have even a clue as to when the decline would start or how fast it would proceed.
The problem is that in order to do a simulation with relationships that define exports and imports we have to have in the model their effective relative prices and the accumulating net investment position of the United States, and so forth.
Those relationships are built on historical experience at this point.
<START>We have no alternative that we trust that would lead us to go in and adjust those arbitrarily because of something we think is going to happen for which there is no precedent in history.<END>
Those relationships tell us that any depreciation of the dollar that is less rapid than 5 percent causes the net investment position to explode at some point in the future.
And that is just not something an econometric model can handle.
It can't provide us with a useful long-run simulation with something like the net investment position extrapolating ever faster to larger and larger positions.
So, in order to make the model have other features that are not disturbed by this exploding net investment position, we have to put in a value of the dollar that keeps that investment position behaving.
Consequently, one reasons back and back and back and one ends up with that 5 percent.
Does that mean the dollar will start falling by 5 percent in 2002 or 2004 or 2005?
Not necessarily.
But there is a germ of truth in this analysis unless we start seeing in the data something that says the historical relationships and elasticities no longer apply.
<START>Were the dollar to remain strong and were that to give us a more favorable outcome on the federal funds rate, it would be creating another problem--one that is growing insidiously--which is this net investment position.<END>
MR.
PARRY.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
104MR. GRAMLICH.
I actually wanted to get in on the previous discussion between Jerry Jordan and Don Kohn.
<START>As I interpret Jerry’s argument, it is that we could get a productivity shock and, perhaps because of the wealth effect, wages will not catch up.<END>
Frankly, I would like to believe that.
I think we would all like to believe that.
But in addition to the answer that Don gave, a problem I would have with that analysis is this:
If the worker is not in possession of physical capital, the way the wealth effect would work is through some sort of expectations regarding future earnings.
And those future earnings are the wage rates themselves.
So I don't see where the wealth effect on human capital comes from if wages don't catch up.
While I would like to share Jerry’s optimism about this matter, I guess I am with Don in believing that eventually wages do have to catch up even to make the wealth effect work.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further questions for Don?
MR.
JORDAN.
May I respond on that?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Please.
MR.
JORDAN.
That is not clear to me if part of the manifestation of the wealth effect on the part of the work force is in their rights to future consumption that is contained in their pension plans, their 401(k) profits, or whatever.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
If they have savings.
MR.
JORDAN.
Their claims on future streams of consumption rise and that does not have to pass necessarily through a paycheck.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Anything else?
If not, let me begin.
I think the evidence that the expansion is slowing to a certain extent is pretty much unambiguous.
Usually, a useful clue to watch is the relationship between short-term forecasts of statistics that get published against the actual outcome to see whether the outcomes are 105higher or lower.
We have had a fairly significant run of outcomes that have fallen below the forecasts, and that usually is an indication that something significant is occurring.
In the home building area--I think with the exclusion of the home mortgage application numbers released by the Mortgage Bankers Association, which belie everything else we are observing in the housing sector--there is a fairly uniform characterization of the housing market as clearly negative and continuing to erode except in California.
The rise in mortgage interest rates is beginning to exert an effect in large part because of the flat yield curve.
<START>In the past, ARMs captured a lot of homebuyers who were ready to accept lower short-term interest rates and take the risks involved in that.<END>
<START>But the option of lower rates is no longer available because the current rates on ARMs do not differ significantly from those on fixed rate mortgages.<END>
Demand for motor vehicles clearly is easing, especially after adjustments for incentives.
Part of the explanation doubtless stems from the gasoline price increases, but I think there is more to it than that.
There has been a general view that motor vehicles are proliferating to the point where the number of vehicles per household is exceeding the number of people in the household.
I'm sure that is false, but it sounds right!
Another way of putting it is that we are inadvertently converting a goodly part of our highway system into parking lots, and once complete gridlock occurs no one is going to be able to find a way to unwind it.
That leads me to the household inventory issue.
It has been raised in the Greenbook on successive occasions, and it may very well be starting to exert an effect in the sense that the buildup of inventories of durable assets held by households is beginning to have a feedback effect on consumption.
This would be consistent, obviously, with a flattening out of the wealth effect.
The data for a slowdown in consumption outlays are fairly conclusive in that not only are sales of motor vehicles going down, but the weekly chain store figures have been flat since the second or third 106week of May.
If anything, the chain store numbers display a slight downward tilt, and they imply that the consumer inventory problem may be affecting the market for consumer appliances as well as that for motor vehicles.
What we tend to get as a consequence of the household inventory adjustment process is that as final demand for consumer durables softens, we expect to see the effect filter down to the underlying industries of the old economy.
And to be sure, steel production is down.
The incipient evidence of appreciation in steel prices has turned around.
Notions held by a number of old economy producers that they were gaining pricing power seemingly have stalled.
We are getting the type of economy which, were it not for the underlying high-tech momentum, would correspond to the early stages of what we would usually begin to worry about as a recession.
As an aside, I ought to point out that in the old days we used to worry about more recessions than actually occurred.
The National Bureau of Economic Research identified numerous peaks during cyclical expansions that never turned into recessions so they are not official peaks.
In other words, if we look at the NBER charts and are not given, say, 12 to 15 months of hindsight, we will identify about three times as many “cyclical peaks” as recessions that actually emerged.
We clearly are experiencing one of those phenomena now.
In any event, I think the evidence of an actual recession at this point is belied by the fact that there is no evidence of which I am aware that suggests any significant deterioration in productivity growth.
<START>Indeed, even the evidence that there is a decline in the second derivative--we will get to the third derivative very promptly [Laughter]--is not conclusive by any means.<END>
Long-term earnings expectations of the security analysts, which we presume reflect the views of corporate management, have not diminished.
Indeed, they continue to move up for both the high-tech and the old economy firms.
Actually, there has been a slight downward tick in long- 107term earnings expectations for high-tech firms, but it is very small considering the fact that the stock prices for that sector have come down so markedly.
Presumably, that market decline did damp some views of future earnings, but there's very little evidence of that in the data.
The orders coming into the capital goods companies--high-tech, intermediate-tech, whatever--have remained very strong, and backlogs continue to build.
Incidentally, in a certain sense there is no low-tech equipment anymore.
One would be hard pressed to find any old type of equipment that is not infiltrated with various kinds of microprocessors and other high-tech components.
Even the old weaving loom in use today, which goes back to the beginnings of the Industrial Revolution, be unimaginable to textile workers of 50 years ago.
would Their work is all automated.
It is a wholly different piece of equipment.
In fact, there are no sizable numbers of textile workers anymore.
What we have are software writers and computer operators, and the whole production process just basically runs.
But as I said, what we find is that the backlogs are still building up in the capital goods industries.
<START>What that essentially says is that the prospective rate of return on new facilities must still be high ex ante, if not rising, or else people are just making investments with no reasonable judgment as to their basis.<END>
These high earnings expectations are held not only by domestic producers but by foreign investors as well.
The reason is that if the rate of return were not holding up in the United States, the dollar would surely be under very significant downward pressure, given the signs of the growing current account deficit.
So in a sense, the strength of the dollar is an indirect piece of evidence that prospective rates of return are holding up and are in fact fairly substantial and solid.
This leads to a very interesting set of possible outcomes.
<START>What we have in the Greenbook in this context is not only slow economic growth but also slowed multifactor 108productivity and as a consequence slowed labor productivity.<END>
<START>The latter effectively keeps the unemployment rate down in the context of a slowing rate of GDP growth.<END>
This scenario is consistent with the beginning of a rise in both unit labor costs and the NAIRU, which we discussed yesterday, and that is what is creating an upward set of pressures on prices.
The alternate scenario is that we are indeed seeing some slowing in the expansion of demand largely because of the wealth and the consumer stock adjustment effects.
But it is also perfectly conceivable that after the fact we are going to find that multifactor productivity did not go down, that labor productivity growth did not slow down, and that indeed the unemployment rate went up--not a great deal, but some.
But that behavior would be consistent, depending on how one views the NAIRU effect, with a different price forecast.
At this particular point I would say that I know of no evidence that conclusively would suggest which of those two scenarios is true.
<START>Successive Greenbooks have been continuously forecasting a decline in multifactor productivity growth.<END>
<START>And accordingly, since the capital investment has been pretty clear-cut and therefore capital deepening has been very easy to forecast, we end up with a forecast of slowed productivity growth, a slowed rate of economic expansion, and accelerated inflation.<END>
That slowdown hasn't happened.
Multifactor productivity has been running at a fairly strong pace and, if anything, has been rising.
As a consequence, we have two potential scenarios here.
And while the structure of the model that we employ for the Greenbook necessitates only one outcome, I submit that it is quite possible to reconfigure the structure of the model, depending on one’s view of how the real world actually works, and come up with the second alternative.
In fact, I know we can do that, but I don't think we can realistically make a judgment about which of the two scenarios is accurate.
I suspect we may not be able to until after the fact.
<START>109Given that uncertainty, and echoing some of Don Kohn’s remarks, I think we have a fairly substantial amount of monetary tightening still in the pipeline, at least if we believe what we say about the lags and if a goodly part of the softening that has occurred in the economy to date is only modestly related to our monetary policy tightening.<END>
There is no question that the increase in fixed rate mortgages has been a crucial element in housing.
It is not clear that it has been a big deal in motor vehicles, although there is some anecdotal evidence, which suggests that buyers are backing away in part because of financing costs.
But I am suspicious of that as being the crucial issue in the market for motor vehicles.
<START>Gasoline prices obviously are something we haven't focused on, but the implicit reduction in effective disposable income associated with the rise in gasoline prices is just too large to be disregarded.<END>
So a number of forces can be identified that are slowing this expansion prior to advertence to monetary policy considerations.
<START>And if monetary policy still has a backlog of tightening effects that could be quite significant, it strikes me that, owing to the uncertainty surrounding the potential outcome we have in front of us, the wise move at this stage is basically to do nothing today.<END>
No matter what we do, I believe it is utterly essential that we retain a statement in our press release expressing our view that the risks remain unbalanced toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation.
Given how we all weigh the prospects for various outcomes, the probability that we are through tightening in this cyclical expansion has to be less than 50-50.
To be sure, that probability is higher than it has been.
It certainly is higher than it was at the time of the last meeting or the meeting before, but we are nowhere, as far as I can judge, up to even money on this.
And until we get there I think we should be very careful about suggesting in any way that we might be at the edge or even contemplating that our move at the last meeting was our last in this cycle.
Vice Chair.
110VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
The futures market has built in another 1/4 point at our August meeting.
I believe that is a reasonable bet at this time, but I think the data over the coming weeks will decide that issue and the market will move rates in the appropriate direction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
<START>I think we have done a great deal of work thus far and it is not unreasonable to take a pause, given the degree of uncertainty and the other factors to which you have alluded.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
Mr. Chairman, I support the recommendation.
But I would like to add that I hope the statement we release to the public will be quite strongly worded.
<START>I think this recommended action is exactly what the market consensus expects and I would hate to see an overly euphoric reaction to it, which I believe is quite possible.<END>
We may need to tighten indeed more--perhaps quite soon and perhaps by a considerable amount.
And I hope we put the market very clearly on notice to that effect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>We can do that in one of two ways--either in a statement, which presumably would be merely a reiteration of our previous remarks, or in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, where we can surely fine-tune it.<END>
111MR. KELLEY.
However, I would like to see a statement today that is a little stronger than the words we have used in the past.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>I’m not sure I would agree with that for lots of reasons, but let's hold that and see what the rest of the Committee members say.<END>
MR.
KELLEY.
Fine.
I just want to put it on the table.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Okay.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
I don't see any reason to deviate from the pattern!
[Laughter] I support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
MR.
MEYER.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation, too.
I should note that this was the position I felt comfortable with as I went home for the weekend.
<START>And when the Bluebook came and I opened it, I found that it was sort of arguing with me and questioning whether I should feel comfortable with that decision, given my views.<END>
It noted, for example, that this position would be appropriate if I wasn't sure that inflation would intensify going forward.
I guess that depends on what we mean by “sure.” That is a word that forecasters are loathe to use under any circumstances.
But I do think that inflation is more likely to rise.
The next thing the Bluebook said was that this position would be appropriate if I was less convinced than the staff that output is beyond potential.
Well, I am at least as convinced as the staff that output is beyond potential.
So I am certainly struggling with this.
112Then, as if that wasn’t enough, the Bluebook went on to say that if you want to take the view that interest rates should go up you should hold the following views:
First, that indications of slower expansion are still tentative.
Okay, I believe that.
Second, that resource utilization is still quite high.
Well, I believe that, too.
Third, that some of the earlier financial restraint has been unwound by the recent rally in bond and equity markets.
That is factually true.
And fourth, I should be in favor of tightening especially if I believe that growth may have to slow to below trend to unwind the prevailing excess in the labor market.
Well, I believe all those things, so I did have to struggle more than most with this decision.
I don't put extraordinary weight on what goes on at one meeting.
I think getting the direction and the overall response right is what is really important.
So, I can feel comfortable with holding pat today because we have moved so decisively since last June and also because I believe that the data are likely to show the wisdom of moving further perhaps as early as by the next meeting.
And given what we have done in the past, I am confident that we will do what needs to be done at that time and get it done in a timely fashion to insure a favorable outcome.
<START>So, I support your recommendation with the confidence that we have taken steps to mitigate the risks of higher inflation, but also with the belief that our work is not yet done.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
<START>I agree with your recommendation, Mr. Chairman, particularly the part that keeps the Committee on record both in the press statement and in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony that the risks are still on the up side.<END>
I agree with Governor Kelley's point on this, although I would be a little concerned about changing the wording of our statement much because the market seems to overreact and overanalyze every word we put in there.
<START>So, I 113think it is probably better to stay with a stable set of words and allow you to fine-tune the message in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony.<END>
I happen to believe that the recent data with regard to the slowing of the economy are perhaps a little less definitive than some around the table may believe.
I also have some level of concern about the employment data.
<START>And I agree with you totally that it is impossible to discern which of your two models accurately reflects what is going on now because I don't think we know conclusively whether the unemployment rate is going up or down.<END>
Everything we see in the markets based on real-life experience would suggest that the labor markets are just as tight as they have been and that the unemployment rate, if anything, is going down, not up.
<START>In any event, I was concerned coming into this meeting that if we thought inflation was likely to rise in the future, we would be better off acting sooner rather than later because appropriate early action tends to ameliorate the longer-run effects.<END>
But I don't see any difference between moving now or moving at our August meeting, and by August we will have a lot more data.
So, I agree with your proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, if I could take a bit of time here, I would like to look more closely at the Bluebook's baseline forecast.
I found it very helpful in trying to think through the longer-run implications of what we do today.
I think it's important that we do that.
The baseline is not the only scenario, but it is a plausible scenario and it has implications that I think are important and not terribly comforting.
The baseline takes as a starting point that the economy is currently operating above its potential and it assumes a NAIRU over 5 percent.
Obviously, that is questionable.
You questioned it yesterday, and that is perfectly reasonable.
But there is certainly a good chance that there is a NAIRU that we should be thinking about 114analytically in making our decisions and that it is, in fact, above 5 percent.
So I believe we need to consider carefully what the economic outcome of that assumption might be.
And we also need to consider the cost of that outcome, even if the likelihood of it is now lower than it may have been before.
So if we just accept that provisionally and follow the baseline, the idea is that we have been able to operate below the NAIRU up to now because rising productivity growth has made it possible for firms to increase wages without pushing up unit labor costs.
Now, productivity growth could, of course, keep rising and that would tend to bail us out, if I could put it that way.
But in a mature economy like this, I think it would clearly be unwise to make that assumption.
The baseline scenario does not make that assumption.
It assumes that trend productivity growth continues at its current rate for the rest of the decade, which would mean at some point fairly soon an increase in wages and presumably in unit labor costs would emerge.
In the baseline case then, this implies that the unemployment rate has to move up toward the assumed 5-1/4 percent NAIRU just to keep the core PCE from rising above 3 percent.
And for that to happen, in turn the real funds rate has to go up a percentage point.
To summarize:
<START>That baseline, which again I think is a plausible scenario, has us raising the nominal funds rate almost 2 percentage points at a time when the unemployment rate is rising sharply.<END>
<START>And even that doesn't really hold the line on inflation because inflation moves up close to 3 percent and obviously could go higher.<END>
<START>So this baseline scenario, a carefully worked out analysis, with a certainly plausible and possible outcome, is not very comforting.<END>
And it will be difficult to pull it off, I think, because it requires us to raise the funds rate significantly at a time when unemployment is rising.
The bad news in my view is that if we are dealing with the situation assumed in that scenario, then we really do run the risk of finding ourselves behind the curve both with respect to actual inflation and with respect to inflation 115expectations.
That could at some point force us to take strong action, which could put an end to this expansion.
So there is a lot at stake.
Quickly, what are the options?
One is we could wait maybe not only at this meeting but even longer and hope to get rescued, and that is certainly possible.
Productivity growth could continue to rise.
Also, we have higher credibility now and the NAIRU may well be below 5 percent.
All of those things are possible and also plausible.
But my own view is that if we accept that hypothesis and follow that option, perhaps we ought to supplement it with a word of prayer from time to time!
[Laughter] Our other option, as I see it, is to be more preemptive and raise the funds rate more aggressively before unemployment begins to rise.
Markets now appear to expect a funds rate approaching 7 percent at the end of the year.
Early next year we could move it up closer to, say, 7-1/2 percent, and to some degree begin that process now.
<START>In that way we might shore up our credibility, keep inflation expectations from rising, and limit the amount by which we would have to increase actually the nominal funds rate over the course of the whole cycle.<END>
Obviously, this is not without risk.
This approach could cause the economy to be weaker than it really has to be if the assumptions in that scenario are not accurate.
But with the labor markets as tight as they are, that seems to me to be a risk worth taking.
<START>That’s because--and this is really the key point for me--if we do fall behind the curve and inflation breaks out, then we are very likely at some point to be in a situation where we have to create a recession in order to restore price stability and our credibility.<END>
That means that we will go back to the stop/go monetary policy of years past, and I think that is the worst possible outcome.
So, I guess that’s a long way of saying that I think a solid case could be made for a further move today.
I can certainly accept your proposal and I understand the reasons for it.
116But I would say that the primary support for that proposal has to do with the evidence of a slowdown.
We do have a lot of data suggesting a slowdown, but I think the evidence is still quite preliminary so we have to be careful about how much weight we give it.
I certainly think we need an asymmetric directive.
I would make this point too:
There’s a long period of time before our next scheduled meeting, and in the month of July we will be getting a lot of additional information on the behavior of the economy in June, which will either confirm the earlier data or not.
If some question arises, I think it would be particularly appropriate in this intermeeting period to have a call, maybe at the end of July or early August to take another look at the situation.
I would hate to wait until late in August, a couple of months before an election, and find ourselves in a real bind.
So I make that suggestion.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I support your proposal.
I don't know if we have moved as far as we need to, but I suspect that right now there are still a lot of monetary policy effects in the pipeline from the actions we have taken here recently that are not yet fully in play.
We ought to let them work and observe where that is taking us.
And as others have said, a lot of data will be coming in over the next several weeks that I think will provide us useful information from which to make a further judgment on the effects of our earlier tightening moves.
<START>One of the side benefits is that our press statement last time indicated that the balance of risks was on the up side and today we are not acting on it, and I believe that is a healthy thing to do as well.<END>
So, I think your recommendation is a very good one.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me just note very briefly--I should have added this yesterday, perhaps--that in our discussion of different models and various ways 117of looking at how the economy is working at this time, I would have joined those yesterday who expressed some uneasiness about the NAIRU construct.
<START>Like our colleagues in Minneapolis, and I believe some from other Reserve Banks, we have been using a VAR model to try to gauge different inflation paths given different fed funds assumptions.<END>
<START>Our modeling work suggests that the restraint we have already put in place is going to deliver an inflation path that is close to 100 basis points lower than we would have had without that tightening.<END>
We also ran an experiment last week after getting the Greenbook and we used the same amount of substantial additional tightening as assumed in the Greenbook.
Our VAR model suggested that such an aggressive degree of further tightening would involve considerable risks to the real economy.
So there are risks on that side as well, it seems to me.
I would join those who have underscored the importance of maintaining the bias in our balance of risks statement this time.
As we have heard each other say, we are seeing not only the direct effects of the higher rates but maybe even more importantly a sense of caution and prudence among the people we talk to, as a result of the tightening we have put in place.
And I think it is absolutely essential that we keep that in place and not lose it at this point.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
First Vice President Stone.
MR.
STONE.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
<START>Particularly in light of the action taken at the last meeting and also because the forecast of long-run expected inflation has remained stable, I think we have time to take a look at whether the economy is truly slowing at this point.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.
118MR. JORDAN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
For this meeting I support the recommendation for no action.
<START>And in line with the Vice Chairman's remarks yesterday, if a recommendation to raise the federal funds rate--whether at this meeting or a subsequent meeting--had an underlying objective of raising the unemployment rate or opening up a gap between potential output and actual output, I would oppose that.<END>
I think it is too easy for these kinds of exercises and scenarios derived from models to become objectives, if not of the Committee at least in the minds of some observers.
I cannot imagine Chart 3 of the Bluebook appearing in the monetary policy report to Congress.
I simply cannot picture the reaction if that chart were to be included in such a document.
Like Governor Meyer, in reading the Bluebook I tried to find out what it was telling me regarding what position I should take.
<START>With regard to inflation objectives, the Bluebook tells me that at this meeting I should support a 50 basis point increase in the funds rate with an announcement--in line with President Poole’s remarks at previous meetings that it is not nice to surprise the markets--that we will increase the funds rate by another 50 basis points at each of the subsequent four meetings this year because we plan to raise the funds rate to 9 percent by December.<END>
Now, the reaction to that would be chaos in the financial markets.
We would not produce the results indicated if we did that, of course.
No model would tell us what results we would get because we can’t forecast what would happen if we were to announce to the market 250 basis points of additional tightening between now and December.
So, I don't know what use the exercise is in guiding me as to what position I ought to be taking to support a price stability objective.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
I agree with your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Would the Secretary read the appropriate language?
119MR. BERNARD.
The language comes from page 19 in the Bluebook:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 6-1/2 percent.” And the sentence going into the press release would read:
<START>“Against the background of its long run-goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the foreseeable future.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Call the roll.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman McDonough Yes President Broaddus Yes Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Guynn Yes President Jordan Yes Governor Kelley Yes Governor Meyer Yes President Parry Yes CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Don, would you read the proposed statement?
MR.
KOHN.
I think Lynn Fox has the statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Do you want to circulate it?
MR.
KOHN.
Yes, we're going to circulate it.
Why don't we just let people read it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Pause] Any comments?
MR.
POOLE.
<START>Mr. Chairman, it would seem to me logical to take the third paragraph, which refers to the signs of slowing as being tentative, and put that right after the first sentence 120of the second paragraph, which refers to real activity, and move the comment about core inflation down.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
What is the view of the Committee on this?
SPEAKER(?).
I like it the way it is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Is there any support for President Poole's recommendation?
Is this draft generally acceptable as it stands?
SEVERAL.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you very much.
It is a little early to go to lunch!
MR.
BERNARD.
Coffee is out there.
Lunch will be served at noon.
[Laughter] END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 131
