Federal Open Market CommitteeConference CallJanuary 21, 1983Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and RoosAlternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectivelyPRESENT:Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Callof January 21, 1983[Secretary's note: There is no transcript record of thebeginning of this conference call. However, Committee records make itclear that the staff reviewed the latest data pertaining to theextraordinary growth of the monetary aggregates and that Committeemembers discussed the implications for monetary policy. An additionto the policy record for the meeting held on December 20-21, 1982indicates that subsequent to that meeting the Committee discussedthese issues on several occasions; it includes a summary of thestaff's review and the Committee members' conclusions.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't hear any other comment aboutchanging what we're doing operationally. If anybody has a comment,say so. I have a small question about whether it fits the directive,or whether we ought to recognize [the situation] in the directive ormake some note of this call, or have another call next week and seewhether we want to make a note of it, or any one of those variants.MR. PARTEE. I think there's a real problem as to whether weshouldn't indicate that in the present instance, with all thisuncertainty, we're temporarily running on borrowings or on netborrowed reserves; it doesn't make any difference. We are doing thatin fact and there's nothing else we can do as I see it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm reading from the directive: "TheCommittee indicated that greater growth would be acceptable ifanalysis of incoming data..." etc. We weren't exactly expecting M2growth of 32 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. We didn't say "somewhat"!MR. GUFFEY. We could indicate that we don't believe that 32percent if the discount rate were lowered.MR. GRAMLEY. They're real gunslingers out in the Midwest,I'll tell you that!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm inclined to think we ought to make anote of this meeting or have another one. I don't know quite what wewould say other than that we reviewed the situation and decided toawait further evidence while maintaining the reserve path. Actually,because there are no reserve requirements on M2, we're not changingthe reserve path.MR. AXILROD. Well, we are changing it every week toaccommodate what happens in light of the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To accommodate what happens to Ml.MR. AXILROD. That's right, and also the drop in requiredreserves on M2. We're not letting that ease, for sure.MR. PARTEE. "To maintain reserve conditions aboutunchanged."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just haven't thought about this, but if1/21/83we don't want to make any real change now, I would suggest that we letit go until the middle of next week and maybe have another conferencecall. People may get a bright idea or maybe we can just send youaround some language to approve, disapprove, or comment on. I thinkit might be useful in the record to show that we have had somediscussion of the situation in the light of these wildly changing anddivergent figures. Does that sound reasonable?MS. TEETERS. Do you want to include last week's meetingalso?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that we have to be specificin terms of dates but just say something about "after a Committeediscussion." We'll have the date of whatever I send around. I don'tthink we have to indicate every time we discussed it. Is that broadlyokay?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I think it's okay, but I'd beinterested in hearing why Steve feels it's a good idea for us to comeup with six ranges--three fourth quarter-over-fourth quarter rangesand three year-over-year ranges--when we're probably going to be wrongon all six.MR. AXILROD. I certainly didn't intend that. I intended itin a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He put that in there because I wouldprefer to have an average range instead of a fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter range. The explanation is as simple as that.MR. AXILROD. If I may, Mr. Chairman, I also thought that bythe time the year's over--and this is the difficult thing--if itturned out that the fourth quarter were high and we happened to beover on that basis but year-over-year it looked very reasonable,that's the better way to look at it. And almost vice versa.MR. PARTEE. He wanted more options.MR. AXILROD. I wasn't intending to suggest that theCommittee would set 6 different ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As always, our ranges are mutuallyconsistent, in at least the analysis beforehand.MR. BALLES. Paul, did I understand you to say you did notcontemplate another call next week? I wasn't sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I might. Let's see how things look.What I'd like to do, if I have a sense that nothing drastic hashappened, is incorporate what I sense people want to do at the momentand use it as a vehicle for informing the world at some future datethat we've looked at these wild numbers as they were developing and1/21/83kept close touch on them and describe what we did in reaction. Thatwould come out about the time the public got the numbers. I justdon't know the operational language I want to use.MR. PARTEE. That's fine with me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And if it looks more complicated or ifsomething changes, we'll talk about it. Hearing no other comment, wewill proceed on the present basis. I don't think there's anythinghere that calls for any easing of the reserve path.MR. AXILROD. We set the path on the assumption of borrowingof $200 million, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that is the way we will proceed in thenext week. Let's see whether we can condense something into aparagraph. Thank you.END OF SESSION